
Marion, NC Code of Ordinances


CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF
MARION, NORTH CAROLINA



Current through 6-20-17
Supplement No. 15



________



Published by Order of the City Council



________



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



PREFACE



   This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of
the City of Marion, North Carolina of a general and permanent nature.



   Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982
Code, as supplemented through September 7, 1982, and ordinances subsequently
adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the
history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such
a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time
with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in
the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as
supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.



   The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in
alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been
catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code
together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table
listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the
Code is included at the back of this Code.



   Numbering System



   The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two
component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to
the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of
the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is
numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system,
each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections
or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using
the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material
consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and
3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New
chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be
included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5.
Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is
maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be
included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the
end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may
be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next
successive number being assigned to the article or division.



   Indices



   The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each
particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings
being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still
others in language generally used by local government officials and
employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves
which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which
the user is interested.



   Looseleaf Supplements



   A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the
user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and
supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication
will be kept up-to-date periodically. Subsequent amendatory legislation will
be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be
reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the
publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and
deleting the obsolete pages.



   Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will
depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are
received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly
recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately
upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted
pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.



   Acknowledgments



   This publication was originally under the direct supervision of Jan
Shekitka and Palmer Carr, Supervising Editors, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other
members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able
assistance throughout the project.



   The publisher is most grateful to J. Earl Daniels, City Manager, and
Robert N. Parker, Personnel Director, for their cooperation and assistance
during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their
efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances
which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens
and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the
city's affairs.



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. O-91-1-8-1



   An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Marion,
North Carolina; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included
Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the
Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance
Shall Become Effective.



   Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Marion, North
Carolina:



   Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Marion" published
by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 20, each
inclusive, is adopted.



   Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on
or before February 21, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein, are repealed; provided, however,
that the following items are not repealed and shall continue in full force
and effect pending the adoption of superceding ordinances on the subjects to
which they pertain:



   1.   Part 8, Chapter 3 entitled "Abandoned Vehicles" of the Code of
1982 including sections 8-3001 through 8-3008.



   2.   Part 5, Chapter 1 entitled "Water Supply and Distribution,"
Chapter 2 entitled "Sewerage Collection and Disposal," and Chapter 3 "Water
and Sewer Extensions" of the Code of 1982 including sections 5-1001 through
5-3006.



   Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.



   Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule
or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding
thirty (30) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty
provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall
apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is
reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed
above, the City Council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of
nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.



   Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form
as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of
the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to
the Code includes the additions and amendments.



   Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 21, 1989, that amend or
refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed
as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.



   Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 8, 1991.



   Passed and adopted by the City Council this 8th day of January, 1991.



   A. Everette Clark



____________________



   Mayor



   J. Earl Daniels



____________________



   Clerk



   Certificate of Adoption



   I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance
passed at the regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Marion held
on the 8th day of January, 1991.



   J. Earl Daniels



____________________



   Clerk



PART I
THE CHARTER*



__________



*   Editors Note: herein is the Charter of the City of Marion, being
chapter 101 of the Acts of 1977, adopted by legislature on March 21, 1977.
Amendments to the original Charter are indicated by parenthetical history
notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates
that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. A uniform
system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings
have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been
added for clarity.



__________



   Art    I. Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries, §§ 1--1.10



   Art.    II. Mayor and Council, §§ 2.1--2.15



   Art.    III. Elections, §§ 3.1--3.10



   Art.    IV. Organization and Administration, §§ 4.1--4.15



   Art.    V. Special Provisions, §§ 5.1--5.9



ARTICLE I.
INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES



Sec. 1. 



   The Charter of the City of Marion is hereby revised and consolidated to
read as follows:



Sec. 1.1. Incorporation.



   The City of Marion, North Carolina, in the County of McDowell, and the
inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name and style of the "City of Marion," hereinafter at
times referred to as the "city."



Sec. 1.2. Powers.



   The City of Marion shall have and may exercise all of the powers,
duties, rights, privileges and immunities, which are now, or hereafter may
be, conferred, either expressly or by implication, upon the City of Marion,
specifically, or upon municipal corporations, generally, by this Charter, by
the State Constitution, or by general or local law.



Sec. 1.3. Corporate limits.



   The corporate limits of the City of Marion shall be those existing at
the time of ratification of this Charter, as the same are set forth on the
official map of the city, and as the same may be altered from time to time in
accordance with law. An official map of the city, showing the current city
boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the office of the city clerk,
and shall be available for public inspection. Immediately upon alteration of
the corporate limits made pursuant to law, the appropriate changes to the
official map of the city shall be made.



Secs. 1.4.--1.10. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Sec. 2.1. Governing body.



   The mayor and city council, elected and constituted as herein set
forth, shall be the governing body of the city. On behalf of the city, and in
conformity with applicable laws, the mayor and council may provide for the
exercise of all municipal powers, and shall be charged with the general
government of the city.



Sec. 2.2. City Council; composition; terms of office.



   The city council shall be composed of five (5) members, each of whom
shall be elected for terms of four (4) years in the manner provided by
article III of this Charter, provided they shall serve until their successors
are elected and qualified.



Sec. 2.3. Mayor, term of office; duties.



   The mayor shall be elected in the manner provided by article III of
this Charter to serve for a term of four (4) years, or until his or her
successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be the official head of
the city government and shall preside at all meetings of the city council.
The mayor shall have the right to vote only when there are an equal number of
votes in the affirmative and the negative on any motion before the council.
The mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as presently are
or hereafter may be conferred by the General Statutes of North Carolina, by
this Charter, and by the ordinances of the city.



Sec. 2.4. Mayor pro tempore.



   In accordance with applicable state laws, the council shall appoint one
(1) of its members to act as mayor pro tempore to perform the duties of the
mayor in the mayor's absence or disability. The mayor pro tempore as such
shall have no fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the
pleasure of the remaining members of the council.



Sec. 2.5. Meetings of the council.



   In accordance with the general statutes, the council shall establish a
suitable time and place for its regular meetings. Special meetings may be
held according to the applicable provisions of the general statutes.



Sec. 2.6. Ordinances and resolutions.



   The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or proving of city
ordinances and resolutions shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the general laws of North Carolina not inconsistent with this
Charter. The ayes and noes shall be taken upon all ordinances and resolutions
and entered upon the minutes of the council. The enacting clause of all city
ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Marion."



Sec. 2.7. Voting requirements; quorum.



   Official action of the council shall in every instance be by majority
vote, provided that a quorum, consisting of a majority of the actual
membership of the council, is present. Vacant seats are to be subtracted from
the normal council membership to determine the actual membership.



Sec. 2.8. Qualifications for office; vacancies; compensation.



   The compensation of council members, the filling of vacancies on the
council, and the qualifications of council members shall be in accordance
with applicable provisions of the general statutes.



Secs. 2.8.--2.15. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
ELECTIONS



Sec. 3.1. Regular municipal elections; conduct and method of election.



   Regular municipal elections shall be held in the city every two (2)
years in odd-numbered years and shall be conducted in accordance with the
uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina. The mayor and members of
the council shall be elected according to the nonpartisan plurality method of
election.



Sec. 3.2. Election of the mayor.



   At the regular municipal election in 1977, and every four years
thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor to serve a term of four years. The
mayor shall be elected by the voters of the city voting at large.



Sec. 3.3. Election of the council members.



   At the regular municipal elections in 1977 and every four years
thereafter, there shall be elected three council members to fill the seats of
those officers whose terms are then expiring. At the regular municipal
elections in 1979 and every four years thereafter, there shall be elected two
council members to fill the seats of those officers whose terms are then
expiring.



Secs. 3.4.--3.10. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION



Sec. 4.1. Form of government.



   The city shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in
accordance with part 2 of article 7 of chapter 160A of the general statutes.



Sec. 4.2. City manager.



   The council shall appoint a city manager who shall serve at the
pleasure of the council, who shall be the head of the administrative branch
of city government, and who shall be responsible to the council for the
proper administration of the affairs of the city. In exercising the duties of
chief administrator, the manager shall:



   (a)    Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, appoint and
suspend or remove all city employees whose appointment or removal is not
otherwise provided for by law, in accordance with such general personnel
rules, regulations, policies, or ordinances as the council may adopt.



   (b)    Recommend to the council for their approval appointments to
the position of city clerk.



   (c)    Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the city, subject to the general direction and
control of the council except as otherwise provided by law.



   (d)    Attend all meetings of the council and recommend any measures
deemed expedient.



   (e)    See that all laws of the state, the City Charter and the
ordinances, resolutions and regulations adopted by the council are faithfully
executed within the city.



   (f)    Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the council.



   (g)    Annually submit to the council and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
city as of the end of the fiscal year.



   (h)    Make any other reports that the council may require
concerning the operations of the city departments, offices, and agencies
subject to the manager's direction and control.



   (i)    Perform any other duties that may be required and authorized
by the council.



   No. O-04-03-16-2, § 2, 3-16-04)



Sec. 4.3. City attorney.



   The council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be licensed to
engage in the practice of law in the State of North Carolina. It shall be the
duty of the city attorney to prosecute and defend suits against the city; to
advise the mayor, council and other city officials with respect to the
affairs of the city; to draft all legal documents relating to the affairs of
the city; to inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts, franchises and
other instruments with which the city may be concerned; to attend meetings of
the council and to perform other duties required by law or as the council may
direct.



Sec. 4.4. City clerk.



   The council shall appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the council, to maintain in a safe place all records and
documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, and to perform such other
duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct.



Sec. 4.5. City finance officer.



   The city manager shall appoint a city finance officer to perform the
duties of the finance officer as required by the Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act.



   No. O-04-03-16-2, § 3, 3-16-04)



Sec. 4.6. City tax collector.



   The city manager shall appoint a city tax collector to collect all
taxes, licenses, fees and other revenues accruing to the city, subject to the
general statutes, the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the
city. The city tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all the
laws of North Carolina relating to the collection of taxes and other revenues
by municipalities.



   No. O-04-03-16-2, § 4, 3-16-04)



Sec. 4.7. Consolidation of functions.



   The city manager may consolidate any two or more positions of city
manager, city clerk, city tax collector and city finance officer, or may
assign the functions of any one or more of these positions to the holder or
holders of any other of these positions, subject to the Local Government
Budget and Fiscal Control Act.



   No. O-04-03-16-2, § 5, 3-16-04)



Sec. 4.8. Other administrative officers and employees.



   Consistent with applicable state laws, the council may establish other
positions, provide for the appointment of other administrative officers and
employees, and generally organize the city government in order to promote the
orderly and efficient administration of the affairs of the city.



Secs. 4.9.--4.15. Reserved.



ARTICLE V.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 5.1. Assessments for street and sidewalk improvements; petition
unnecessary.



   (a)    In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be
granted by general law to the city for making street improvements, the
council is hereby authorized to make street improvements and to assess the
cost thereof against abutting property owners in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



   (b)    The council may order street improvements and assess the cost
thereof against the abutting property owners, exclusive of the costs incurred
at street intersections, according to one or more of the assessment bases set
forth in article 10 of chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes
without the necessity of a petition, upon the finding by the board as a fact:



   (1)   That the street improvement project does not exceed 1,200
linear feet; and



   (2)   That such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular
traffic, and it is in the public interest to make such improvement; or



   (3)   That it is in the public interest to connect two streets, or
portions of a street already improved, or



   (4)   That it is in the public interest to widen a street, or part
thereof, which is already improved, provided that assessments for widening
any street or portion of street without a petition shall be limited to the
cost of widening and otherwise improving such street in accordance with the
street classification and improvement standards established by the city's
thoroughfare or major street plan for the particular street or part thereof
to be widened and improved under the authority granted by this section.



   (c)    For the purposes of this section, the term "street
improvement" shall include grading, regrading, surfacing, resurfacing,
widening, paving, repaving, the acquisition of right-of-way, and the
construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters and street drainage
facilities.



   (d)    In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be
granted by general law to the city for making sidewalk improvements, the
council is hereby authorized, without the necessity of obtaining a petition,
to make or to order to be made sidewalk improvements or repairs according to
standards and specifications of the city, and to assess the total cost
thereof against abutting property owners, according to one or more of the
assessment bases set forth in article 10 of chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes; provided, however, that regardless of the
assessment basis or bases employed, the council may order the cost of
sidewalk improvements made only on one side of a street to be assessed
against the property owners abutting both sides of such street.



   (e)    In ordering street and sidewalk improvements without a
petition and assessing the cost thereof under authority of this section, the
council shall comply with the procedure provided by article 10, chapter 160A
of the general statutes, except those provisions relating to the petition of
property owners and the sufficiency thereof.



   (f)    The effect of the act of levying assessments under the
authority of this section shall for all purposes be the same as if the
assessments were levied under authority of article 10 of chapter 160A of the
general statutes.



Sec. 5.2. 



   The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter of the City of Marion
and to consolidate herein certain acts concerning the property, affairs, and
government of the city. It is intended to continue without interruption those
provisions of prior acts which are consolidated into this act, so that all
rights and liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced.



Sec. 5.3. 



   This act shall not be deemed to repeal, modify, or in any manner affect
any of the following acts, portions of acts, or amendments thereto, whether
or not such acts, portions of acts, or amendments are expressly set forth
herein:



   (a)    Any acts concerning the property, affairs, or government of
public schools in the City of Marion.



   (b)    Any acts validating, confirming, approving, or legalizing
official proceedings, actions, contracts, or obligations of any kind.



Sec. 5.4. 



   The following acts or portions of acts, having served the purposes for
which they were enacted, or having been consolidated into this act are hereby
repealed:



   Ch. 49 Priv. L. 1844



   Ch. 194 Priv. L. 1847



   Ch. 120 Priv. L. 1857



   Ch. 16 Priv. L. 1862



   Ch. 18 Priv. L. 1869



   Ch. 109 Priv. L. 1869



   Ch. 59 Priv. L. 1869



   Ch. 77 Pub. L. 1871



   Ch. 85 Pub. L. 1881



   Ch. 183 Priv. L. 1899



   Ch. 114 Priv. L. 1891



   Ch. 310 Pub. L. 1895



   Ch. 286 Priv. L. 1895



   Ch. 73 Priv. L. 1901



   Ch. 149 Priv. L. 1901



   Ch. 428 Priv. L. 1901



   Ch. 247 Priv. L. 1903



   Ch. 369 Priv. L. 1907



   Ch. 73 Priv. L. 1909



   Ch. 291 Priv. L. 1909



   Ch. 105 Priv. L. 1911



   Ch. 121 Priv. L. 1915



   Ch. 317 Priv. L. 1915



   Ch. 19 Priv. L. 1917



   Ch. 54 Priv. L. 1917



   Ch. 103 Priv. L. 1917



   Ch. 8 Priv. L. 1919



   Ch. 42 Priv. L. 1919



   Ch. 31 Priv. Ex. 1920



   Ch. 161 Priv. L. 1921



   Ch. 9 Priv. L. Ex. 1921



   Ch. 162 Priv. L. 1923



   Ch. 44 Priv. L. Ex. 1924



   Ch. 128 Priv. L. 1925



   Ch. 103 Priv. L. 1929



   Ch. 106 Priv. L. 1931



   Ch. 163 Priv. L. 1931



   Ch. 792 S.L. 1947



   Ch. 793 S.L. 1947



   Ch. 1159 S.L. 1951



   Ch. 309 S.L. 1953



   Ch. 388 S.L. 1953



   Ch. 417 S.L. 1955



   Ch. 881 S.L. 1959



   Ch. 665 S.L. 1967



Sec. 5.5. 



   No provision of this act is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect
in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private):



   (a)    Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of
which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law
repealed by this act.



   (b)    Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in
reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any
provision of law repealed by this act.



Sec. 5.6. 



   No law heretofore repealed expressly or by implication, and no law
granting authority which has been exhausted, shall be revived by:



   (a)    The repeal herein of any act repealing such law; or



   (b)    Any provision of this act that disclaims an intention to
repeal or affect enumerated or designated laws.



Sec. 5.7. 



   All existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Marion and all
existing rules or regulations of departments or agencies of the City of
Marion not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, shall continue in
full force and effect until repealed, modified or amended.



   No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal,
judicial or administrative, or otherwise) pending at the effective date of
this act by or against the City of Marion or any of its departments or
agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this act.



Sec. 5.8. 



   If any of this act or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act
are declared to be severable.



Sec. 5.9. 



   Whenever a reference is made in this act to a particular provision of
the general statutes, and such provision is later amended, repealed or
superseded, the reference shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
general statute, or to the general statute which most clearly corresponds to
the statutory provision which is repealed or superseded. 



PART II
SPECIAL ACTS*



__________



*   Editors Note: II consists of special acts relating to the city, but
not enacted as specific amendments or additions to the Charter. This is not a
complete compilation of all such acts, but only of those which were deemed to
be of such general interest and importance as to warrant inclusion herein.
Sections of the acts containing formal provisions have been omitted.



__________



CHAPTER 668



   HOUSE BILL 698



   Section 1. Notwithstanding any provision of the General Statutes, or
any rule or regulation of a state agency, plans for water or sewer line
replacement or extensions prepared by the City of Marion shall not be
required to bear the seal of a registered professional engineer if no federal
or state funds will be used to finance the project, the project will be
constructed by regular employees of the city, the project will not exceed
1,000 feet in the length of the water or sewer line, the project does not
include any pumping or lift station or sewer force main, and provided that no
extension on an extension be made within one (1) year. This section shall
apply only to water lines of six (6) inches or less and/or sewer lines of
eight (8) inches or less.



(Sess. Laws 1981, § 1, 6-24-81)



CHAPTER 224



   HOUSE BILL 449



   Section 1. Article 12 of G.S. Chapter 160A is amended by adding a new
section, to read as follows:



"Upon finding that such a limitation is in the public interest, the council,
when disposing of property pursuant to this Article, may impose limitations
upon the future use of the property. The council may do so by including in
the conveyance appropriate covenants or other restrictions or by conveying an
estate in fee simple determinable or fee simple subject to a condition
subsequent. If property is to be conveyed subject to limitations on future
use, the notice or advertisement of the sale required by Article 12 shall
specify the limitations and the method by which they will be imposed."



Sec. 1.1. This act applies to McDowell County, only.



(Sess. Laws 1983, § 1.1, 4-26-83) 



CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE



   ACTS



   This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and
any amendments thereto as included in Part I herein.



 

Year
 
Chapter
 
Section
 
Disposition


1977
 
101
 
1--5.9
 
Arts. I--V



 

Ordinance Number
 
Adoption Date
 
Section
 
Section this Charter


O-04-03-16-2
 
3-16-04
 
2
 
4.2(b)


 
 
3
 
4.5


 
 
4
 
4.6


 
 
5
 
4.7



 



PART III
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.



   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Marion, North
Carolina," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Marion City
Code."



   State Law References: Codification of ordinances, G.S.  160A-77;
pleading and proving city ordinances, G.S.  160A-79.



Sec. 1-2. City Code published by order of the council.



   In accordance with G.S. section 160A-79, "Pleading and proving city
ordinances," this city Code, "The Code of the City of Marion," has been
adopted and issued in compliance with G.S. section 160A-77, "Code of
Ordinances," and this Code, "The Code of the City of Marion," is published by
order of the city council of the City of Marion.



Sec. 1-3. Definitions and rules of construction.



   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires
otherwise:



   Approved screening includes, but is not limited to, opaque enclosures,
buildings, natural objects, plantings, fencings, walls or other appropriate
means to visually conceal the view of junked or inoperable motor vehicles (or
other uses that are required to be screened) from adjoining property or the
public roadway at any season of the year. In determining whether screening is
adequate, the following factors, along with others, should be considered:
topographical features of the property and naturally occurring visual
obstructions, such as but not limited to vegetation.



   Approved screening plan means a site specific plan approved by the
person or board issuing the permit and that includes but is not limited to
natural objects, plantings, fencings, walls or other appropriate means to
visually conceal the view of junked or inoperable motor vehicles (or other
use that is required to be screened) from the public roadway at any season of
the year. In determining whether to approve a screening plan, the following
factors, along with others, should be considered; topographical features of
the property and naturally occurring visual obstructions, such as but not
limited to vegetation.



   Automobile graveyard means any establishment or place of business which
is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts. Any establishment or place of business upon which six or more
unlicensed, used motor vehicles which cannot be operated under their own
power are kept or stored for a period of fifteen (15) days or more shall be
deemed to be an "automobile graveyard."



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  136-143(1).



   Automobile repair shop means any establishment or place of business
which is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of making mechanical
and/or body repairs to motor vehicles. Factors to be considered in
determining the primary purpose of the shop include but are not limited to
the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to repair service
broken down into the following categories: new parts, labor for service, used
auto parts;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile repair shop,
but rather an automobile graveyard and/or junkyard);



   (3)   Whether business has initiated proceeding to declare vehicles
abandoned under state law so the vehicle can be disposed of;



   (4)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof;
and



   (5)   The number and configuration of grease bays or repair work
areas.



   For the purposes of this definition, automobile sales businesses where
the service department generates fifty (50) percent or more of the gross
receipts of the business are considered to be automobile repair shops and
subject to all regulations governing automobile repair shops. For purposes of
this article, automobile tire sales and service shops, as defined herein,
shall be considered automobile repair shops. An automobile repair shop that
operates a combination of towing, tire and sales shall comply with all the
regulations governing each use.



   Automobile sales (also referred to as "car sales" or "motor vehicle
sales") businesses means any establishment or place of business which is
maintained or operated for the primary purpose of selling motor vehicles. For
purposes of this definition, factors to be considered in determining the
primary purpose of the business include but are not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to vehicle sales
or service broken down into the following categories: vehicle sales, new
parts, labor for service, and used auto parts;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than twelve
(12) months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile sales
business, but rather an automobile graveyard and/or junkyard);



   (3)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof;
and



   (4)   The number and configuration of grease bays or repair work
areas.



   For the purposes of this definition, automobile sales businesses where
the service department generates fifty (50) percent or more of the gross
receipts of the business are considered to be automobile repair shops and
subject to all regulations governing automobile repair shops.



   Automobile tire sales and service shops means any establishment or
place of business which is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of
selling tires and/or tire repair. For purposes of this definition, factors to
be considered in determining the primary purpose of the shop include but are
not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to tire service.



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile tire shop, but
rather an automobile graveyard and/or junkyard).



   (3)   The length of time that used tires are stored on the property.



   (4)   Used tires stored on the property longer than thirty (30) days
should be evidence that the business is not an automobile tire shop, but
rather a junkyard.



   (5)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof.
For the purpose of this chapter tire, tire sales and services shall be
considered an automobile repair shop.



   Automobile towing and wrecker service businesses means any
establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the
primary purpose of towing motor vehicles. For purposes of this definition,
factors to be considered in determining the primary purpose of the shop
include but are not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to towing service.



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile towing service,
but rather a automobile graveyard and/or junkyard).



   (3)   The length of time and number of junked vehicles that are
stored on the property.



   (4)   Whether business has initiated proceeding to declare vehicles
abandoned under state law so the vehicle can be disposed of.



   (5)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof.
For the purpose of this chapter tire, towing and wrecking services shall be
considered an automobile repair shop.



   Charter means the Charter of the City of Marion, North Carolina as
printed in Part I of this volume.



   Citation assessing civil penalty (hereinafter "civil citation") is a
written document which finds the person(s) therein named in violation of the
Code and provides the violator with the following information concerning the
violation:



   1.   Name and signature of the enforcement officer witnessing the
violation;



   2.   Date violation witnessed and date of issuance;



   3.   Description of the violation witnessed;



   4.   Reference to the provision of the Code that has been or is
being violated;



   5.   Description of the action that must be taken to correct the
violation;



   6.   Description of the penalty imposed for the violation and direct
that must be paid within ten (10) days of issuance of citation;



   7.   Outline of the process whereby the violator can appeal the
citation;



   8.   Warning that increasingly severe penalties may be assessed for
violations that continue without being corrected or for multiple violations
by the same violator.



   City means the City of Marion, in the County of McDowell in the State
of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.



   City council means and refers to the governing body of the City of
Marion, North Carolina.



   City limits means the legal boundary of the City of Marion, North
Carolina.



   Code means the Code of Ordinances, City of Marion, North Carolina as
designated in section 1-1.



   Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by this Code or by order of court, the day of the act, event, default
or publication after which the designated period of time begins to run is not
to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included,
unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period
runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or a
legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than
seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be
excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall be considered as other days
and not as a holiday. Eastern standard time shall be the official time except
during that period when what is commonly known as "daylight saving time" is
in effect, through adoption by the city council or otherwise.



   State Law References: Computation of time, G.S.  1-593.



   County means the County of McDowell in the State of North Carolina,
except as otherwise provided.



   Criminal citation is a written document which is a directive issued by
a law enforcement officer that a person(s) appear in court and answer a
misdemeanor or infraction charge(s). A criminal citation may be issued by a
law enforcement officer when he has probable cause to believe that there has
been a violation of this Code that would be a misdemeanor or infraction. A
criminal citation shall state the following:



   1.   Name and signature of the law enforcement officer issuing the
citation;



   2.   Date of issuance of the citation;



   3.   Name and address of the person cited, or other identification
if that cannot be ascertained;



   4.   Identification of the crime charged, including the date, and
where material, identify the property and other persons involved;



   5.   Direct the person cited to appear in a designated court at a
designated time and date.



   Daytime, nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and
sunset, and "nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.



   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections,
it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the
required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate
otherwise.



   Enforcement officer means any officer, employee or contracted agent of
the City of Marion charged with the enforcement of some or all of the
provisions of the Code. Enforcement officers shall have the power and
authority to conduct investigations and enter upon premises (properties,
buildings and/or dwellings) for the purpose of such investigations.
Enforcement officers shall also have the power and authority to administer
oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. Enforcement
officer may secure administrative search warrants in order to aid them in the
performance of their duties



   Gasoline service or filling stations means any establishment or place
of business which is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of
selling gasoline or motor fuel or which contains fuel pumps and other such
fuel dispensing appliances. For purposes of this definition, factors to be
considered in determining the primary purpose of the business include but are
not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to gasoline or
motor fuel sales or service broken down into the following categories:
gasoline or motor fuel sales, labor for service, and parts.



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not a gasoline service or filling
station, but rather an automobile graveyard and/or junkyard).



   (3)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof,
and



   (4)   The number of gasoline pumps or fuel distribution devices.



   (5)   The number and configuration of grease bays or repair work
areas.



   For the purposes of this definition, gasoline service or filling
stations where the service or repair work constitutes fifty (50) percent or
more of the gross receipts of the business are considered to be automobile
repair shops and subject to all regulations governing automobile repair shops.



   Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.



   Governor means the Governor of North Carolina.



   Inoperable motor vehicle. See "Junked and/or Inoperable Motor Vehicle".



   In view or visible means that it is capable of being seen without
visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity.



   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.



   Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material.



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  136-143(3).



   Junked and/or inoperable motor vehicle means a vehicle that does not
display a current license plate and that:



   (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked, or



   (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move, or



   (3)   Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  160A-303.2(a).



   Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is
maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk,
or for maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the terms
shall include garbage dumps and sanitary fills. An establishment or place of
business which stores or keeps for a period of fifteen (15) days or more
materials within the meaning of "junk" as defined herein which had been
derived or created as a result of industrial activity shall be deemed to be a
junkyard.



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  136-143(4).



   Keeper and proprietor mean and include persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a
servant, agent or employee.



   Major automobile repair work means work on a vehicle that is necessary
to ensure the correct operation of the vehicle which cannot be completed in
less than one (1) hour.



   Mayor means the mayor of the City of Marion.



   Minor automobile repair work means work on a vehicle that is necessary
to ensure the correct operation of the vehicle which can be completed in less
than one (1) hour.



   Month means a calendar month.



   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.



   Notice of violation with opportunity to correct (hereinafter "notice of
violation") is a written document which finds the person(s) therein named in
violation of the Code and provides the violator with the following
information concerning the violation:



   1.   Name and signature of the city enforcement officer witnessing
the violation;



   2.   Date violation witnessed and date of issuance;



   3.   Description of the violation witnessed;



   4.   Reference to the provision of the code that has been or is
being violated;



   5.   Description of the action that must be taken to correct the
violation;



   6.   Time period within which the violation must be corrected in
order to avoid civil penalty and/or other enforcement action;



   7.   Outline of the process whereby the violator can appeal the
citation;



   8.   Warning that failure to correct within the time period
prescribed may subject the violator to civil penalties and/or other
enforcement action.



   Nuisance vehicle means a vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



   (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, or other insects,
rats, or pests; or



   (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation
over eight (8) inches in height; or



   (3)   A point of collection of pools or pounds of water; or



   (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline oil or
other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or



   (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated
from the inside, such as trunk, hoods, etc.; or



   (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over; or



   (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste,
animal waste or any rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or



   (8)   One which has sharp points thereon which are jagged or contain
sharp edges of metal or glass; or



   (9)   Located within a public right-of-way and which is creating a
traffic hazard or impeding ingress or egress into a residential dwelling or
place of business.



   (10)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety
hazard and a public nuisance by the city council.



   Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural
includes the singular number.



   Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in
which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such
cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words,
"swear" and "sworn."



   Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense requires it.



   Officials, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to
"officials," "boards" and "commissions" by title only, they shall be deemed
to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the City of Marion.



   Owner, when applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or part of such building or land.



   Person includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.



   Personal property includes every species of property except real
property as defined in this section.



   Preceding, following mean next before and next after respectively.



   Property includes real and personal property.



   Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   Residence means the place adopted by a person as his place of
habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of
returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place
where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.



   Right-of-way means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally
established for public use.



   Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.



   Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory; "may" is permissive.



   Sidewalk means that portion of the street right-of-way which is
improved and designated for the use of pedestrians.



   Signature or subscription shall include a mark where a person cannot
write.



   State means the State of North Carolina.



   Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to G.S.
section 160A-272, it shall be construed to refer to General Statutes of North
Carolina, section 160A-272, as amended, or to whatever section is cited.



   Street means and includes any public way, road, highway, street,
avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or any other name a
street is commonly known by, or any public place and the approaches thereto
within the city when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and
established for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   Tenant, occupant applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.



   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and the present.



   Title of office. The title of any office shall be construed to include
the words, "of the City of Marion, North Carolina."



   Violator is any person or entity whom the enforcement officer
reasonably believes has violated any provision of the code. A violator may be
an occupant, owner, lessee, lessor, or any person or entity having beneficial
use of the affected property, or any or all of the above.



   Violation or violation of this Code means any of the following:



   1.   Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful,
an offense, a violation, an infraction, a civil infraction or a misdemeanor
by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.



   2.   Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.



   3.   Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is
made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a civil
infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized
by ordinance.



   "Violation" or "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of
an enforcement officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it
is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be
punished as provided in this Code.



   Writing, written includes printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters.



   Year means calendar year.



(Ord. No. O-03-10-21-02,  1, 10-21-03; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(1),
1-15-08)



   State Law References: Definitions and rules of construction for
statutes, G.S.  12-3.



Sec. 1-4. Ordinances effective upon passage.



   Every ordinance of the city shall be in force immediately upon its
passage, except as otherwise provided in this Code.



(Code 1982,  2-1031)



Sec. 1-5. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.



   The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as
ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.



(Code 1982,  1-1002)



Sec. 1-6. Ordinances to be in writing.



   Every ordinance which amends or repeals any other ordinance, and every
new ordinance, shall be in writing.



(Code 1982,  2-1032)



Sec. 1-7. Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.



   (a)    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed
in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of
the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections
nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they
be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.



   (b)    The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section
and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for
the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.



Sec. 1-8. Ordinances not affected by Code.



   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:



   (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the effective date of this Code;



   (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness;



   (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;



   (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or
employee;



   (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the city;



   (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the
city;



   (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;



   (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a
stated or limited term;



   (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing
taxes therefor;



   (10)   Any zoning ordinance;



   (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;



   (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the
city;



   (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not
in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code;



   (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;



   (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in
the city;



nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof
that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this
chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.



Sec. 1-9. Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances.



   (a)    The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of
any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any
offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred on any proceeding
commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.



   (b)    When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be
repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words
to that effect.



(Code 1982,  1-1004)



   State Law References: Effect of repeal, G.S.  12-2.



Sec. 1-10. Code enforcement.



   Unless specifically provided otherwise the provisions of sections
1-10.1 through 1-10.17 contain the enforcement provisions for this Code.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



   Editors Note: Section 1(2) of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted Jan. 15,
2008, amended  1-10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former  1-10
pertained to general penalty; additional remedies; continuing violations and
derived from  1-1005 of the 1982 Code.



   State Law References: State law making violation of an ordinance a
misdemeanor and stating punishment, G.S.  14-4; municipal enforcement of an
ordinance and penalties, G.S.  160A-175.



Sec. 1-10.1. Applicability.



   Every provision of the code has the full force and effect of a law
within the municipal boundaries of the City of Marion, any extraterritorial
jurisdiction were the code is applicable, and any properties owned by the
City of Marion which are located outside the municipal boundaries and/or
extraterritorial jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.2. Violations--General.



   Unless specifically provided otherwise, violation of any provision of
this Code or any other city ordinance shall subject the violator to the
remedies provided in section 1-10 and all subparts thereof, except that where
the General Statutes of North Carolina provide specific civil remedies for
violations of provisions of this Code adopted pursuant to such statutes, such
remedies available to the city for enforcement of this Code shall be in
addition to the remedies stated in section 1-10 and its subparts.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.3. Same--Corporations and unincorporated associations.



   (a)    Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other
person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated
association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or
employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such
corporation, association or organization.



   (b)    Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by
any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be
subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or
unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any
section of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the
result of the act, omission or order, of any such person.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.4. Same--Liability of owners, occupants and others.



   (a)    Any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or person in charge of a
property or premises on which a violation has been found who has violated or
procured, aided or abetted any violation of any of the provisions of the
code, shall be subject to the same penalties as if he himself had committed
such violation. Owners of property on which a violation has been found are
liable for said violation.



   (b)    The owner or occupant of any land, building, structure, sign,
use of land, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
or other person who participates or acts in concert, assists, directs,
creates or maintains any condition that is in violation of the Code may be
held responsible for the violation and subject to the civil penalties and
remedies provided herein.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.5. Same--Continuing violations.



   (a)    Any individual who shall continue to violate any provision of
the code after issuance of a citation shall be deemed to have committed a
separate and distinct offense from the original violation, regardless of the
frequency of the occurrence, if an individual acting with reasonable
diligence could cease the action or undertake the action, as appropriate,
which is the underlying cause of the offense, or correct the condition so
that no violation continues to exist.



   (b)    Each day's continuing violation of any provision of the code
shall be a separate and distinct offense, unless otherwise specifically
delineated in the code.



   (c)    Violations of the following code provisions which continue
beyond a period of one (1) hour from the time that the civil citation or
notice of violation is issued will constitute a separate violation of the
code for each hour, or fraction thereof, during which the violation continues:



   Sections 3-4, 3-5 and 3-8 of Ch. 3, Animals



   Sections 9-4, 9-101, 9-102 and 9-104 of Ch. 10, Health and Sanitation



   Section 10-61 of Article III of Ch. 10, Licenses, Permits and Business
Regulations



   Sections 10-112 and 10-127 of Article V, Ch. 10, Licenses, Permits and
Business Regulations



   Sections 11-1 through 11-19 of Ch. 11, Offenses



   Section 12-3 of Ch. 12, Parks and Recreation



   Sections 12-26.1, 12-27, 12-28, 12-51 and 12-52 of Ch. 12, Parks and
Recreation



   Sections 15-1, 15-133, 15-134, 15-135, 15-138, 15-139, 15-161 and
15-162 of Ch. 15, Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places



   Sections 18-1 through 18-261 of Ch. 18, Traffic



   Sections 20-83, 20-84 and 20-85 of Ch. 20, Water and Sewer



   Subsections 21-7.6(11) and 21-7.6(12) of Ch. 21, Zoning



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-09-02-2,  1, 8-2-08)



Sec. 1-10.6. Authority to issue citation assessing a civil penalty or notice
of violation with opportunity to correct.



   (a)   Upon identifying a violation the enforcement officer is
authorized to either:



   (1)   Issue a citation assessing a civil penalty for the violation
or,



   (2)   In the sole discretion of the enforcement officer, issue a
notice of violation with opportunity to correct violation.



   (b)    In determining whether to issue a citation assessing a civil
penalty or a notice of violation with opportunity to correct violation, the
enforcement officer shall consider the following:



   (1)   Whether the notice of violation with opportunity to correct
will likely result in voluntary compliance with this ordinance [Ord. No.
O-08-01-15-3];



   (2)   Whether it is reasonable under the circumstances to afford the
violator the opportunity to correct the violation before issuing a citation
assessing a civil penalty;



   (3)   Whether there are public safety and welfare reasons to issue a
citation assessing a civil penalty; and



   (4)   Such other circumstances and conditions as are reasonable and
appropriate.



   (c)   When a violation is not corrected within the time period
established by a notice of violation with opportunity to correct, then the
enforcement officer may immediately issue a civil citation.



   (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) a violator
for good cause shown may request an extension of the period of time in which
the correction may be made. Requesting an extension of the period of time
shall be deemed an admission of the violations by the violator.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(2), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-12-06-19-5, § 2,
6-19-12)



Sec. 1-10.7. Service of civil citation and notice of violation with
opportunity to correct.



   Enforcement officers shall serve any civil citation or notice of
violation with opportunity to correct issued pursuant to section 1-10.6 on
the violator and, where appropriate, the record owner of the property on
which the violation occurred or is occurring. Such service may be made
directly on the violator or his duly designated agent, or registered agent if
a corporation, in person or posted in the United States mail service by first
class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as contained
in the records of the county, or obtained from the violator at the time of
issuance of the civil citation or notice of violation. If the violation is
due to use of a vehicle, the civil citation may be served by posting it on
the windshield of the offending vehicle. The violator shall be deemed to have
been served upon the mailing of such citation. In addition service may be
made by any means allowed by Rule 4(j) of the North Carolina Rules of Civil
Procedure and/or by posting the property on which a violation has occurred or
is occurring.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.8. Enforcement remedies.



   A violation of any provision of the code may be enforced by any remedy
provided in G.S. 160A-175. In addition, where the General Statutes of North
Carolina provide specific civil remedies for violations of provisions of this
Code adopted pursuant to such statutes, such remedies shall be available to
the city for enforcement of this Code. The provisions of the code may be
enforced by any one (1), all or a combination of the remedies authorized and
prescribed herein. Nothing provided herein shall limit the city's ability to
secure injunctions and abatement orders to further insure compliance with the
code as provided by this section.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.9. Fines and civil penalties.



   (a)    Unless otherwise specifically provided in the code and
authorized by state law, a violation of any provision of the code may subject
the violator to a civil penalty in the amount of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per violation, unless some other amount shall be
specifically delineated. Unless otherwise specifically provided in the code
or a duly adopted City of Marion Fee Schedule, fines or civil penalties, if
imposed, are established as follows:



   (1)   For parking violations not involving parking in a handicapped
space, the civil penalty shall be ten dollars ($10.00). For handicapped
parking violations, the civil penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).



   (2)   For all other violations of the code, unless otherwise
specifically provided, the civil penalty shall be:



   (i)   The penalty for the first violation of any code provision
within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months preceding the date of
violation shall be punishable by a fine or civil penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00).



   (ii)   The penalty for the second violation of any code provision
within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months preceding the date of
violation shall be punishable by a fine or civil penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each violation.



   (iii)   The penalty for the third through fourth violation of any
code provision within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months preceding
the date of violation shall be punishable by a fine or civil penalty of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each violation.



   (iv)   The penalty for the fifth through tenth violation of any code
provision within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months preceding the
date of violation shall be punishable by a fine or civil penalty of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation.



   (v)   The penalty for a violation of any code provision beyond the
tenth violation within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months preceding
the date of violation shall be punishable by a fine or civil penalty of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.



   (vi)   If any person shall violate a code provision regulating the
operation or parking of vehicles, such person shall be responsible for an
infraction and shall be required to pay a civil penalty of not more than
fifty dollars ($50.00), or such other maximum amount as shall be authorized
by North Carolina General Statutes or specifically established herein or by a
duly adopted City of Marion Fee Schedule, whichever is less.



   The maximum civil penalty for a particular violation within a period of
twelve (12) consecutive months is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).



   (b)    A violator shall pay any civil penalty within ten (10) days
of issuance of the civil citation to the appropriate city official or if such
city official is not known to Marion City Hall.



   (c)    Civil penalties shall be recovered by the city in a civil
action in the nature of a debt if the violator does not pay the penalty
within a period of ten (10) days after the issuance of the civil citation.
Any action to recover a civil penalty may be joined in an action for
appropriate equitable relief, including injunctions and orders of abatement
and including an action to recover damages owing to the city by reason of
expenses incurred by the city in abating, correcting, limiting and otherwise
dealing with the harmful effects of the offending action. The City of Marion
may use any available avenue of collection for delinquent civil penalties,
including but not limited to the North Carolina Debt Setoff program.



((Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(2), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-14-06-17-6, § 2,
6-17-14)



Sec. 1-10.10. Fine for late payment of civil penalties.



   (a)    The following fines apply for late payment of civil penalties
for parking violations, including handicapped and non-handicapped violations:



   (1)   When the $10.00 civil penalty for a parking violation is not
paid within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the citation a $25.00 late
payment fine shall be assessed.



   (2)   When the $10.00 civil penalty for a parking violation is not
paid within thirty (30) days for the issuance of the citation a $15.00 late
payment fine shall be assessed.



   (b)    The following fines apply for late payment of civil penalties
for violations of the code not otherwise specifically delineated herein:



[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]



(Ord. No. O-11-06-07-5, § 2, 6-7-11; Ord. No. O-14-06-17-6, § 3, 6-17-14)



Sec. 1-10.13. Application of payments.



   Any payment made on a civil penalty shall first be applied to any
outstanding late payment fines related to such civil penalty and then to the
civil penalty itself.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.12. Criminal penalties.



   Except as otherwise specifically set forth in the code, any person who
shall violate a provision of the code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as
provided in G.S. 14-4(a), unless it is an infraction as provided by G.S.
14-4(b), and may be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or
such other maximum amount as shall be authorized by North Carolina General
Statutes or specifically established in the code, whichever is less. For each
such violation, a criminal citation or citations may be issued by the
enforcement officer which shall be processed through the criminal courts of
the State of North Carolina. The following violations of the Marion City Code
shall not be subject to criminal penalties:



   Parking violations.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.13. Summary abatement.



   The city shall have the authority to summarily remove, abate or remedy
everything in the city limits, or within one (1) mile thereof, that is
dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public safety and the
expense of the action taken by the city shall be paid by the person in
violation. If the expense is not paid, it is a lien on the property where the
nuisance occurred, and certain other property owned by the violator, and
shall have the same priority and be collected as unpaid ad valorem property
taxes.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.14. Equitable relief sanctioned by court.



   (a)    Any provision of the code may be enforced by an appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such
case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such
orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the
application of the city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy
at law.



   (b)    The equitable relief that may be sought for violation of the
code includes but is not limited to the following:



   (1)   Injunctions. Any provision of the code that makes unlawful a
condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by
injunction and/or order or abatement, and the general court of justice shall
have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a provision
occurs, the city may apply to the appropriate division of the general court
of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the
unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by
the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil
Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.



   (2)   Order of abatement. The court may enter an order of abatement
as a part of the judgment in the case. An order of abatement may direct that
buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or
removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from
buildings on the property; that grass or weeds be cut; that improvements or
repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring
the property into compliance with this Code or such ordinance. If the
violator/defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an
order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, violator/defendant
may be cited for contempt and the city may execute the order of abatement.
The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order
of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The
violator/defendant may secure cancellation of the order of abatement by
paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with
the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of
superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is
heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the
terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge.
Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an
injunction issued in conjunction therewith.



   (3)   Contempt. If the violator/defendant fails or refuses to comply
with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by
the court, violator/defendant may be cited for contempt and held in contempt
in accordance with the contempt procedures set forth in the N.C. General
Statutes.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.15. Denial or withholding of permits.



   The city may deny or withhold all permits, certificates, or other forms
of approval or authorization provided in the code until a violation is
corrected and associated penalty is paid. This provision shall apply whether
or not the current owner or applicant for the permit or other approval is
responsible for the violation.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.16. Revocation of permits or licenses.



   (a)    Any permit, certificate or other form of approval or
authorization required under the code may be revoked by the issuing authority
if:



   (1)   A civil citation has been issued and the violation has not
been corrected within a reasonable period of time; or



   (2)   A notice of violation with an opportunity to correct has been
issued and the violation has not been corrected within the period of time
prescribed.



   (b)    When a permit, certificate or other form of approval or
authorization is revoked pursuant to subsection (a), written notice of such
revocation shall be served upon the property owner, agent, applicant or other
person to whom the permit was issued, or such notice may be posted in a
prominent location at the place of violation. The activity that was
originally permitted must immediately cease after service of the revocation
notice.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(2), 1-15-08)



Sec. 1-10.17. Appeal rights.



   (a)   Unless otherwise specified in the code, or applicable North
Carolina law, all appeals, except for parking violations, shall be to the
Marion City Council and must be filed in writing within thirty (30) days of
service of the civil citation, notice of violation with opportunity to
correct, or other enforcement action. Such appeal must include the grounds
upon which the appeal is made.



   (b)   All appeals of parking violations shall be to the City Manager
and must be filed in writing within fourteen (14) days of service of the
civil citation. Such appeal must include the grounds upon which the appeal is
made.  Appeals from an adverse ruling by the City Manager on a parking
violation appeal can be made to the Marion City Council by filing a written
appeal, which states the grounds upon which the appeal is made, within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the City Manager's decision.



(Ord. No. O-16-08-16-4, § 2, 8-16-16)



Sec. 1-11. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  1-11, which pertained to penalties and derived from
the original codification of this Code.



Sec. 1-12. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  1-12, which pertained to liability for violations
and derived from the original codification of this Code.



Sec. 1-13. Supplementation of Code.



   (a)    By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code
shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include
all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city
council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they
will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages
which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be
so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current
through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.



   (b)    In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the
Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (c)    When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:



   (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;



   (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;



   (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions
to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material,
change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



   (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be,
or to "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the Code); and



   (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.



Sec. 1-14. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.



   (a)    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof,
such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city
council.



   (b)    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be
made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number
of this Code in the following language: "That section ________ of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Marion, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as
follows:  . . . ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.



   (c)    If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be
added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances,
City of Marion, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered ________, which such section reads as follows:  . . . ." The new
section shall then be set out in full as desired.



   (d)    All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number,
as the case may be.



Sec. 1-15. Severability of parts of Code.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are
severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code since the
same would have been enacted by the Council without the incorporation in this
Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.



(Code 1982,  1-1006)



Secs. 1-16--1-21. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  1-16--1-21, which pertained to civil citations and
derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 7, 1997; Ord. No. O-02-11-19-3,
adopted Nov. 19, 2002; and Ord. No. O-04-03-02-1, adopted Mar. 3, 2004. 



Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*



__________



*   Charter References: body, § 2.1; city to operate under
council-manager form of government, § 4.1.



   Cross References: emergencies, Ch. 6; flood hazard management, Ch. 8;
licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; planning, Ch. 13;
planning and zoning board, § 13-26 et seq.; downtown advisory board, §
13-46 et seq.; police, Ch. 14.



   State Law References: of council-manager cities, G.S. § 160A-147 et
seq.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 2-1--2-25



   Art. II. City Council, §§ 2-26--2-50



   Art. III. Officers and Employees, §§ 2-51--2-170



   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-51--2-65



   Div. 2. Mayor, §§ 2-66--2-80



   Div. 3. City Manager, §§ 2-81--2-100



   Div. 4. City Attorney, §§ 2-101--2-115



   Div. 5. City Clerk, §§ 2-116--2-130



   Div. 6. City Finance Officer, §§ 2-131--2-150



   Div. 7. City Tax Collector, §§ 2-151--2-170



   Art. IV. Personnel (Reserved)



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Secs. 2-1--2-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
CITY COUNCIL*



__________



*   Charter References: council; composition; terms of office, § 2.2.



__________



Sec. 2-26. Council meetings.



   (a)   Regular meetings. There shall be regular meetings of the city
council members at city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on
the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise
specified in which case each member of the council shall be so notified. No
regular meetings of city council shall be held on the first Tuesday of July
or the third Tuesday in December.



   (b)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be held according to
the applicable provisions of the general statutes.



   (c)   Adjourned meetings. If a quorum shall fail to attend any
regular or special meeting of the council or if for any reason such meeting
shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, such
meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed
upon by a majority of the members present.



(Code 1982, §§ 2-1011, 2-1012, 2-1013; Ord. No. O-02-10-22-1, § 2,
10-22-02; Ord. No. O-14-11-18-3, § 2, 11-18-14)



   Charter References: of the council, § 2.5.



   State Law References: and special meetings, recessed and adjourned
meetings; procedure, G.S. § 160A-71.



Sec. 2-27. Mayor presides over meetings.



   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council. In case of the
absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside.



(Code 1982, § 2-1014)



   Charter References: shall preside at all meetings of the city council,
§ 2.3.



   State Law References: to preside over council, G.S. § 160A-69; mayor
pro tempore, disability of mayor, G.S. § 160A-70.



Sec. 2-28. Rules of procedure.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Code, the procedure of the council
shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order.



(Code 1982, § 2-1016)



Sec. 2-29. Voting requirements; quorum.



   Official action of the council shall in every instance be by majority
vote, provided that a quorum, consisting of a majority of the actual
membership of the council is present. Vacant seats are to be subtracted from
the normal council membership to determine the actual membership.



(Code 1982, § 2-1017)



   Charter References: requirements; quorum, § 2.7.



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-74; voting, G.S. § 160A-75.



Sec. 2-30. Committees appointed by mayor.



   All committees shall unless otherwise ordered be appointed by the mayor.



(Code 1982, § 2-1021)



Sec. 2-31. Council appointments to be by secret ballot.



   All appointments by the council shall be by secret ballot if required
by any two (2) members present.



(Code 1982, § 2-1022)



Sec. 2-32. Resignations of members.



   Resignation of any member of the council shall be in writing and such
resignation shall lie on the table until the next regular meeting, unless
considered by unanimous consent.



(Code 1982, § 2-1023)



Sec. 2-33. Vote of mayor.



   When there is an equal division in the votes of the members of the
council upon any question, or in the election of officers, the mayor may vote
to break the tie, but he shall have no vote under any other circumstances.



(Code 1982, § 2-1024)



   Charter References: right to vote, § 2.3.



   State Law References: right to vote, G.S. § 160A-69.



Sec. 2-34. Vacancies.



   Any vacancy caused by the death, resignation or disqualification of a
member of the council shall be filled by a majority vote of the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-1026)



   Charter References: §2.8.



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-63.



Sec. 2-35. Disqualification.



   If any member of the council shall move his residence from the city,
his office shall at once be declared vacant and shall be filled as provided
by section 2-34.



(Code 1982, § 2-1027)



   State Law References: for elective office, G.S. § 160A-59.



Secs. 2-36--2-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*



__________



*   Cross References: of the fire department, § 7-2; assistant chief, §
7-3.



__________



DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY



Sec. 2-51. Conflicts of interest.



   It shall be unlawful for any officers or employees of the city,
elective or appointive, directly or indirectly, to become a contractor for
work done for the city, or to become directly personally interested in or
receive profit from any purchase of supplies for any department of the city.
Any such person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
removed from office.



(Code 1982, § 2-1006)



   State Law References: of public trust contracting for his own benefit;
participation in business transaction involving public funds; exemptions,
G.S. § 14-234.



Sec. 2-52. Employees hold office at pleasure of the council.



   All employees appointed by the council hold their offices at the
pleasure of the council and may be removed at any time by them for good cause.



(Code 1982, § 2-1004)



Sec. 2-53. Vacancies.



   All vacancies occurring either from death, disability, resignation or
otherwise in any appointive office shall be filled by the council at the next
regular meeting, or as soon thereafter as possible.



(Code 1982, § 2-1005)



Sec. 2-54. Criminal history checks.



   In order to protect the citizens of Marion and their properties, the
procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal
history checks on all final applicants for regular and volunteer full and
part time positions in the Marion City Government. Subject to subsection (c)
of this section, employment with the City of Marion may be denied for those
persons convicted of any crime against a person, or crimes against property
where intent is an element, or any drug or gambling related offense.



   (a)   The city manager, or designee, shall conduct an investigation
of any final candidate for a regular or volunteer full or part time position
with the City of Marion government and it shall be a precondition of
employment that an applicant for such a position shall upon request, provide
fingerprints and all other necessary personal identification including a
birth certificate, social security number and driver's license, if available,
so that the city's city manager, or designee, may cause a thorough search to
be made of local and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has
a history of criminal convictions or the crimes enumerated above by the use
of the Police Information Network (PIN).



   (b)   The Marion Police Department shall provide the findings from
the use of the PIN to the city manager or designee, provided that all
necessary agreements with the state Bureau of Investigations Division of
Criminal Information have been executed.



   (c)   An evaluation of any crime for purposes of employment will
take into account the nature and the circumstances of the offense and the
time frame of the offense as it relates to the essential job functions for
the position applied.



   (d)   No action to deny employment will be taken until the police
department confirms the identity of the applicant by a match of the
applicant's fingerprints to the state Bureau of Investigation and a certified
true copy of the public document is retrieved.



   No. O-01-10-23-1, § 1, 10-23-01; Ord. No. O-04-12-07-1, § 1, 12-7-04)



Secs. 2-55--2-65. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.
MAYOR*



__________



*   Charter References: and council, art. II.



   Cross References: powers during civil emergencies, § 6-26.



__________



Sec. 2-66. Office of mayor.



   The mayor shall be the official head of the city government and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as are conferred upon him by the
general statutes, the Charter and by the ordinances of the city.



(Code 1982, § 2-1001)



   Charter References: shall be official head of city government, § 2.3.



   State Law References: powers of mayor and council, G.S. § 160A-67.



Sec. 2-67. Duties of the mayor.



   It shall be the duty of the mayor to:



   (1)   Keep himself informed as to the city's business;



   (2)   Preside over the meetings of the council;



   (3)   Sign all contracts, franchises or paperwritings authorized by
the council;



   (4)   Appoint such committees, and outline their powers and duties,
as he deems necessary to properly care for the affairs of the city; and



   (5)   Make such recommendations as he deems necessary, or expedient,
to the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-1002)



Sec. 2-68. Compensation.



   The mayor shall receive as compensation such sum as may be fixed by the
council.



(Code 1982, § 2-1003)



   State Law References: of mayor and council, G.S. § 160A-64.



Sec. 2-69. Mayor pro tempore; disability of mayor.



   At the organizational meeting, the council shall elect from among its
members a mayor pro tempore to serve at the pleasure of the council. A
councilman serving as mayor pro tempore shall be entitled to vote on all
matters and shall be considered a councilman for all purposes, including the
determination of whether a quorum is present. During the absence of the
mayor, the council may confer upon the mayor pro tempore any of the powers
and duties of the mayor. If the mayor should become physically or mentally
incapable of performing the duties of his office, the council may by
unanimous vote declare that he is incapacitated and confer any of his powers
and duties on the mayor pro tempore. Upon the mayor's declaration that he is
no longer incapacitated, and with the concurrence of a majority of the
council, the mayor shall resume the exercise of his powers and duties. In the
event both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore are absent from a meeting, the
council may elect from its members a temporary chairman to preside in such
absence.



(Code 1982, § 2-1025)



   Charter References: pro tempore, § 2.4.



   State Law References: pro tempore; disability of mayor, G.S. § 160A-70.



Secs. 2-70--2-80. Reserved.



DIVISION 3.
CITY MANAGER*



__________



*   Charter References: manager, § 4.2.



__________



Sec. 2-81. Appointment.



   Pursuant to the authority of G.S. section 160A-147 requiring the
council to appoint a city manager, and pursuant to section 8 of Chapter 291
of the Private Laws of 1909, an act amending and consolidating the Charter of
the town, the council shall appoint an officer whose title shall be city
manager and who shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city
government, except as otherwise provided by the Charter. The city manager
shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience
or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office
as outlined in this division. At the time of his appointment he need not be a
resident of the city or state, but during his tenure of office he shall
reside within the city. No person elected to membership on the council shall,
subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager
until one (1) year has elapsed following the expiration of the term for which
he was elected.



(Code 1982, § 2-2001)



Sec. 2-82. Term; removal.



   The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term but may be
removed by a majority vote of the members of the council. The city manager
may within four (4) days demand written charges, or a written statement of
the reasons for removal, which the council shall furnish to the manager
within seven (7) days after the filing of such request. During this period,
the city manager may be suspended from office with pay. The action of the
council in removing the city manager shall be final.



(Code 1982, § 2-2002)



   State Law References: manager to serve at pleasure of city council,
G.S. § 160A-147.



Sec. 2-83. Responsibility of manager; powers of appointment and removal.



   The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city placed in his charge, and to that
end, except as otherwise provided in this division, he shall have the power
to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the service of the city,
except however, the city manager may authorize the head of the department or
office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates in such
department or office. Appointments made by or under the authority of the city
manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative ability and on
the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to
perform. All such appointments shall be without definite term unless
provisional, temporary, or emergency service.



(Code 1982, § 2-2003; Ord. of 8-18-92, § 1; Ord. No. O-04-03-16-3, § 2,
3-16-04)



   State Law References: and duties of manager, G.S. § 160A-148.



Sec. 2-84. Removal of officers and employees.



   Any officer or employee to whom the city manager, or head of a
department or office, may appoint a successor, may be removed by the city
manager or other appointing officer at any time; provided, however, that the
city manager shall promptly inform the mayor and the council of any action
taken under this section and his reasons therefor.



(Code 1982, § 2-2004)



Sec. 2-85. Council not to interfere in appointments or removals.



   Neither the council nor any of its committees or members shall direct
the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the city
manager of any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the
appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative
service of the city. Except for purpose of inquiry, the council and its
members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city
manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to
any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or privately.



(Code 1982, § 2-2005)



Sec. 2-86. Duties.



   The city manager shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as
presently are or hereafter may be conferred by the general statutes, by the
Charter and by this Code.



   Charter References: manager, § 4.2.



   State Law References: and duties of manager, G.S. § 160A-148.



Sec. 2-87. Compensation.



   The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall
fix from time to time by ordinance.



(Code 1982, § 2-2007)



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-162.



Sec. 2-88. Supervision of employees during vacancy.



   If the city manager's position becomes vacant, the mayor shall have
general supervision of all employees and departments of the city until such
time as the city council appoints an interim city manager or a new city
manager.



Secs. 2-89--2-100. Reserved.



DIVISION 4.
CITY ATTORNEY*



__________



*   Charter References: attorney, § 4.3.



   State Law References: attorney; appointment and duties, G.S. §
160A-173.



__________



Sec. 2-101. Election.



   At the first meeting of the council after their election and
qualification or as soon thereafter as possible, they shall proceed to name a
city attorney.



(Code 1982, § 2-2031)



Sec. 2-102. Oath of office.



   Before entering upon his duties the city attorney shall take and
subscribe the same oath as required for the members of the council and other
officers of public trust.



(Code 1982, § 2-2032)



Sec. 2-103. Duties.



   It shall be the duty of the city attorney to:



   (1)   Prosecute and defend suits for and against the city;



   (2)   Advise the mayor, council or any other officer of the city in
regard to matters connected with the city's legal affairs;



   (3)   Attend meetings of the council upon request;



   (4)   Draw such deeds, contracts, bonds, notes and other legal
papers as may be required for the proper conduct of the city's business;



   (5)   Approve all ordinances, as to form, before their introduction;



   (6)   Inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts, franchises
and other instruments with which the city may be concerned; and



   (7)   Perform other duties required by law or as the council may
direct.



Sec. 2-104. Compensation.



   The city attorney shall receive as compensation such sum as may be
fixed by the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-2034)



Secs. 2-105--2-115. Reserved.



DIVISION 5.
CITY CLERK*



__________



*   Charter References: clerk, § 4.4.



   State Law References: clerk, G.S. § 160A-171.



__________



Sec. 2-116. Appointment.



   At the first meeting of the council after their election and
qualification, or as soon thereafter as possible, they shall proceed to
appoint a city clerk, upon recommendation of the city manager.



(Code 1982, § 2-2011)



Sec. 2-117. Oath of office.



   Before entering upon his duties, the city clerk shall take and
subscribe the same oath as required for the members of the council and other
officers of public trust.



(Code 1982, § 2-2012)



Sec. 2-118. Duties.



   It shall be the duty of the city clerk to:



   (1)   Keep a journal of the proceedings of the council;



   (2)   Maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining
to the affairs of the city; and



   (3)   Perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the
council may direct.



(Code 1982, § 2-2013)



Sec. 2-119. Compensation.



   The city clerk shall receive as compensation such sum as may be fixed
by the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-2014)



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-162.



Sec. 2-120. Bond.



   The city clerk, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
execute a bond payable to the city in such sum and with such sureties as
shall be required and approved by the council conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his office and the proper accounting for all
funds that may come into his possession by virtue of his office.



(Code 1982, § 2-2015)



Secs. 2-121--2-130. Reserved.



DIVISION 6.
CITY FINANCE OFFICER*



__________



*   Charter References: finance officer, § 4.5.



   State Law References: officer, G.S. § 159-24.



__________



Sec. 2-131. Appointment.



   The city manager shall appoint a city finance officer, to perform the
duties prescribed in section 2-133 below.



(Code 1982, § 2-2021; Ord. No. O-04-03-16-3, § 3, 3-16-04)



Sec. 2-132. Oath of office.



   Before entering upon his duties, the city finance officer shall take
and subscribe the same oath as required for the members of the council and
other officers of public trust.



(Code 1982, § 2-2022)



Sec. 2-133. Duties.



   The city finance officer shall have the following powers and duties:



   (1)   He shall keep the accounts of the city in accordance with
generally accepted principles of governmental accounting and the rules and
regulations of the Local Government Commission.



   (2)   He shall disburse all funds of the city in strict compliance
with The Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, G.S. section 159-7
et seq., the budget ordinance, and each project ordinance and shall preaudit
obligations and disbursements as required by The Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act, G.S. section 159-7 et seq.



   (3)   As often as may be requested by the council or the city
manager, he shall prepare and file with the council a statement of the
financial condition of the city.



   (4)   He shall receive and deposit all moneys accruing to the city,
or supervise the receipt and deposit of money by other duly authorized
officers or employees.



   (5)   He shall maintain all records concerning the bonded debt and
other obligations of the city, determine the amount of money that will be
required for debt service or the payment of other obligations during each
fiscal year, and maintain all sinking funds.



   (6)   He shall supervise the investment of idle funds of the city.



   (7)   He shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him
by law, by the city manager, or council, or by rules and regulations of the
Local Government Commission.



(Code 1982, § 2-2023)



   State Law References: of finance officer, G.S. § 159-25.



Sec. 2-134. City manager may consolidate offices.



   The city manager may in his discretion combine the duties of the city
finance officer with those of the city clerk.



(Code 1982, § 2-2024; Ord. No. O-04-03-16-3, § 4, 3-16-04)



Sec. 2-135. Bond.



   The city finance officer before entering upon the duties of his office
shall execute a bond payable to the city in such sum and with such sureties
as shall be required and approved by the council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of his office and the proper accounting
for all funds that may come into his possession by virtue of his office,
provided that if the duties of the office of city finance officer are
combined with those of city clerk, it shall not be necessary for the city
finance officer to execute a second bond.



(Code 1982, § 2-2025)



Sec. 2-136. Compensation.



   The city finance officer shall receive as compensation such sum as may
be fixed by the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-2026)



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-162.



Sec. 2-137. Dual signatures required for checks or drafts.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, all checks or drafts on an
official depository for more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
signed by the city finance officer or a properly designated deputy finance
officer and countersigned by another official of the city designated for this
purpose by the council. If the council makes no other designation, the mayor
shall countersign these checks and drafts. The council may waive the
requirements of this subsection if the council determines that the internal
control procedures of the city will be satisfactory in the absence of dual
signatures.



(Code 1982, § 2-4001)



   State Law References: control procedures, G.S. § 159-25.



Secs. 2-138--2-150. Reserved.



DIVISION 7.
CITY TAX COLLECTOR*



__________



*   Charter References: tax collector, § 4.6.



   Cross References: permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



__________



Sec. 2-151. Appointment.



   The city manager shall appoint a city tax collector.



(Code 1982, § 2-2041; Ord. No. O-04-03-16-3, § 5, 3-16-04)



Sec. 2-152. Oath of office.



   Before entering upon his duties the city tax collector shall take and
subscribe the same oath as required herein for the members of the council and
other officers of public trust.



(Code 1982, § 2-2042)



Sec. 2-153. Duties.



   It shall be the duty of the city tax collector to collect all taxes,
licenses, fees and other revenues accruing to the city.



(Code 1982, § 2-2043)



Sec. 2-154. Compensation.



   The city tax collector shall receive such compensation as may be fixed
by the council.



(Code 1982, § 2-2044)



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-162.



Secs. 2-155--2-170. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
PERSONNEL*



__________



*   Editors Note: regulations, including the employee grievance committee,
are in the form of a resolution available through the city manager's office.



   Cross References: personnel, § 14-26 et seq.



__________   



Chapter 3
ANIMALS*



__________



*   Editors Note: No. O-08-02-05-12, adopted Feb. 5, 2008, amended chapter
3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3 pertained to the
same subject matter and dervied from an ordinance adopted Feb. 4, 1986; Ord.
No. O-07-03-06-02, adopted Mar. 6, 2007; and Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008.



   Cross References: and animal waste, § 9-4; location of animal pens, §
9-7; removal of dead animals, § 9-42; animals and chicken fights prohibited,
§ 11-10.



__________



Sec. 3-1. Definitions.



   The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Animal shelter means any premises designated by action of the city for
the purposes of impounding and caring for any animal found running at large
in violation of this chapter.



   At large means any dog or cat when it is off the property of its owner
and not under physical control of a competent person.



   City animal control officer means the person designated by the city as
its enforcement officer.



   County animal warden means the person designated by the county as its
enforcement officer.



   Dangerous dog means a dog that:



   (1)   Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a
person; or



   (2)   Is determined by the person or board designated by the county
or municipal authority responsible for animal control to be potentially
dangerous because the dog has engaged in one (1) or more of the behaviors
listed under the definition of "potentially dangerous dog"; or



   (3)   Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or



   (4)   Has inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones
or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization.



   Kennel means any person engaged in the commercial business of breeding,
buying, selling or boarding five (5) or more dogs or cats.



   Owner means any person that owns, keeps or harbors a dog or cat.



   Owner's real property means any real property owned or leased by the
owner of the animal, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common
area of a condominium, apartment complex or townhouse development.



   Potentially dangerous dog means a dog that the person or board
designated by the county or municipal authority responsible for animal
control determines to have:



   (1)   Inflicted an unprovoked bite on a person that resulted in
medical attention; or



   (2)   Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when
not on the owner's real property; or



   (3)   Approached a person when not on the owner's property in a
vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack.



   Restraint means a dog or cat that is:



   (1)   Controlled by a leash;



   (2)   Within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street and
unable to bite or scratch persons outside the vehicle; or



   (3)   Within the property limits of its owner or keeper.



   Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery, hospitalization or
medical attention.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   Cross References: and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.



   State Law References: dogs, G.S. § 67-4.1 et seq.



Sec. 3-2. Rabies vaccination required.



   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat over the age of six
(6) months within the city limits unless it has been vaccinated for rabies
and the rabies vaccination is current, meaning that the animal has received
its first rabies vaccination within the preceding twelve (12) months or its
second or subsequent rabies vaccination within the previous thirty-six (36)
months.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: G.S. § 130A-184 et seq.



Sec. 3-3. Enforcement.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the designated city
animal control officer or the police department or both, under the
organizational arrangement deemed appropriate by the city manager; provided
that the city shall at all times maintain a person designated as animal
control officer.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-4. Restraint.



   The owner shall keep his dog or cat under restraint at all times and
shall not permit the dog or cat to be at large.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: running at large at night, G.S. § 67-12.



Sec. 3-4.1. Tethering of animals.



   (a)    At no time shall a dog or cat deemed dangerous or potentially
dangerous be fastened, chained or tied on any property within the city limits
of the City of Marion.



   (b)    All dogs, cats, horses or other domesticated animals, except
for those described in subsection (a) above, may be housed, fenced or
tethered. All dogs, cats, horses or other domesticated animals that are
tethered shall be tethered in such a manner as to prevent said animal from
being within ten (10) feet of any public or private street, sidewalk or
pedestrian walkway. All dogs, cats, horses or other domesticated animals
shall be tethered at least five (5) feet from any property line not adjacent
to a public or private street, sidewalk or pedestrian walkway. Said animals
shall be tethered with a metal chain or cable of a size appropriate to the
size of the animal and not harmful to the animal.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-4.2. City council to serve as dangerous animals appeals board.



   In accordance with G.S. 67-4.1(c), the Marion City Council shall
constitute the dangerous animals appeals board.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: dogs, G.S. § 67-4.1 et seq.



Sec. 3-4.3. Determination of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or cat;
appeal.



   (a)    Upon receipt of a complaint or observation that a dog or cat
may have exhibited one (1) or more behaviors listed under the definition for
"dangerous dog" or "potentially dangerous dog", as found in section 3-1 of
this chapter, sufficient to designate such dog or cat as dangerous or
potentially dangerous, the animal control officer shall investigate the
specific charges. If the animal control officer determines that the dog or
cat is dangerous or potentially dangerous, the owner of the dog or cat shall
be notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service. The notice shall include a civil citation in accordance
with the provisions of sections 1-10 through 1-10.17 of the City Code and
state that the owner's dog or cat has been determined by the city to be
dangerous or potentially dangerous, list the reasons for the determination
and list the steps that must be taken under this chapter, including
confinement requirements listed under section 3-5, for the animal to remain
in the city. Upon receipt of the notice of determination, the owner may
appeal the determination by filing a written appeal stating his or her
objections to the determination with the city manager within three (3) days.
Upon receipt of the appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing with
the dangerous animal appeals board within a reasonable time at a regular city
council meeting. The city council shall render a decision upholding or
overturning the determination of the animal control officer within sixty (60)
days after receiving said appeal. Any appeal from the city council shall be
taken to superior court, in accordance with G.S. 67-4.1(c).



   (b)    Upon receipt of a complaint or observation that a dog or cat
previously determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous may have again
exhibited one (1) or more behaviors listed under the definition for
"dangerous dog" or "potentially dangerous dog" as found in section 3-1 of
this chapter, or has been found at large in violation of section 3-4 of this
chapter, the animal control officer shall investigate the charges. If the
animal control officer determines that a dog or cat previously determined to
be dangerous or potentially dangerous has again exhibited one (1) or more
behaviors listed under the definition for "dangerous dog" or "potentially
dangerous dog" as found in section 3-1 of this chapter, or has been found at
large in violation of section 3-4 of this chapter, the animal control officer
shall issue a civil citation in accordance with the provisions of sections
1-10 through 1-10.17 of the City Code and transfer and impound the animal at
the shelter designated as the McDowell County Animal Shelter. The police
department will notify the owner of any animal transferred to the animal
shelter, if the animal has a collar on which is written the name, address and
phone number of the owner. The owner will not be permitted to keep the animal
within the city limits of the City of Marion at any point in the future.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08; Ord. No. O-08-09-16-1, § 2, 9-16-08)



   State Law References: dogs, G.S. § 67-4.1 et seq.



Sec. 3-5. Confinement of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or cat;
muzzles.



   The owner of every dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or cat shall
confine the animal within a secure building or secure enclosure and not take
it out of the secure building or secure enclosure into a public domain unless
it is securely muzzled with a wire or cage muzzle. Such secure building or
secure enclosure must be locked with a childproof locking device, must be of
a height appropriate for the size of the animal to keep the animal confined
inside and must be constructed of a material sufficient to keep the animal
restrained (screen doors, windows, porches and other screen materials are not
deemed sufficient for purposes of this subsection). In addition, the owner
must prominently display in public view on the property a sign stating
"Beware of Dog".



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: or leashing of vicious animals, G.S. § 130A-200;
dangerous dogs, G.S. § 67-4.1 et seq.



Sec. 3-6. Complaint procedures and impoundment.



   When the police department receives a complaint that a dog or cat is at
large, the person making the complaint shall be asked for permission to
locate an animal cage on their property. If permission is granted, city
employees will place a baited animal cage on the property of the person
making the complaint. When a dog or cat is caught in the cage, the animal
will be transferred and impounded at the shelter designated as the McDowell
County Animal Shelter. The police department will notify the owner of any
animal transferred to the animal shelter, if the animal has a collar on which
is written the name, address and phone number of the owner. If the
complaining party refuses to allow the cage to be located on their property
no further action will be taken unless the animal has attacked someone or
appears to be dangerous, potentially dangerous or sick, in which case the
police department will transport the animal to the McDowell County Animal
Shelter. The owner of the animal may appeal the taking of the animal and the
determination that the animal is dangerous, potentially dangerous or sick by
filing a written appeal stating his or her objections to the taking of the
animal and the determination that the animal is dangerous, potentially
dangerous or sick with the city manager within three (3) days. Upon receipt
of the appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing with the dangerous
animal appeals board within a reasonable time at a regular city council
meeting. The city council shall render a decision upholding or overturning
the determination of the animal control officer within sixty (60) days after
receiving said appeal. Any appeal from the city council shall be taken to
superior court, in accordance with G.S. 67-4.1(c). Pending a final decision
by the city council, the city shall request the animal shelter not to
euthanize the animal in question, on the condition that the owner of the
animal agrees to pay any applicable impoundment fees charged by the McDowell
County Animal Shelter. However, the city cannot provide a guarantee that the
animal will not be euthanized by the McDowell County Animal Shelter prior to
the appeal being filed, or even after the appeal is filed, in the event that
the McDowell County Animal Shelter does not comply with the request of the
city not to euthanize the animal in question.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-6.1. Tampering with cages prohibited.



   Once a cage is set on property, it shall be unlawful for any person to
tamper with said cage, to remove food from the cage, to move or relocate the
cage or to trigger the closing of the cage so as to prevent animals from
being captured in the cage.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-7. Redemption of impounded animals.



   The owner may reclaim his impounded dog or cat when he complies with
regulations established by the McDowell County Commissioners and city
ordinances as found in this chapter and pays the necessary impoundment fees
imposed by the county.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-8. Barking dogs.



   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to keep or have within the city
a dog that habitually or repeatedly barks in such a manner or to such extent
that it is a public nuisance.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-8.1. Cruel treatment.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, torture,
torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate
or kill, wound, injure, poison or abandon subject to condition detrimental to
its health or general welfare any animal, or to cause or produce such action.



   (b)    The words "torture", "torment" and "cruelly," as used in this
section, shall be held to include every act, omission or neglect whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted; but
such terms shall not be construed to prohibit lawful taking of animals under
the jurisdiction and regulation of the State Wildlife Resources Commission,
or to prohibit animal control officers or duly authorized persons or
veterinarians from taking or destroying dangerous, unwanted or injured
animals in a humane manner, or to prohibit the lawful use of animals in
scientific research, or legitimate pest control activities.



   (c)    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep animals under
unsanitary or inhumane conditions and to fail to provide proper food and
water daily, shelter from the weather, reasonably clean quarters and proper
medical attention for sick, diseased and injured animals, as well as adequate
inoculation against disease.



   (d)    For purposes of this section, "shelter" shall be defined as
an enclosure of at least three (3) sides, a roof and a floor. The enclosure
shall be ventilated and must have sufficient room for the animal(s) to move
around freely and to lie down comfortably. Animals housed under the following
conditions shall not constitute adequate shelter:



   (1)   Underneath outside steps, deck and stoops; or



   (2)   Inside of vehicles; or



   (3)   Underneath vehicles; or



   (4)   Inside metal barrels placed in direct sunlight during the
summer; or



   (5)   Inside cardboard boxes.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-19-3, § 2, 2-19-08; Ord. No. O-09-02-17-4, § 2, 2-17-09)



Sec. 3-9. Investigation.



   To discharge the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its
provisions the city animal control officer, any agent of the city animal
control officer or any police officer may obtain an administrative search
warrant to enter any premises where a dog or cat is kept or harbored and may
require the animal's owner to show proof the animal has a current rabies
vaccination, as described in section 3-2.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: search and inspection warrants, G.S. § 15-27.2.



Sec. 3-10. Interference with animal control officer.



   No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the city
animal control officer in performing any of his duties or seek to release any
animal from the custody of the city animal control officer, his agents or the
instrument of capture except as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-11. Records.



   (a)    The police department shall keep or cause to be kept accurate
and detailed records of the impoundment of all animals that come into its
custody.



   (b)    The police department shall keep or cause to be kept accurate
and detailed records of all bite cases reported and of the investigation of
the bites.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-12. Fowl running at large prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit turkeys, geese, ducks,
chickens, or other domestic fowl to run at large upon any land in the city.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-13. Grazing prohibited.



   No person shall permit any cattle, sheep or other animals to graze, or
tie such animal up, on any vacant lot or within fifty (50) feet of any
dwelling or street within the city.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-14. Hitching animals.



   No person shall hitch any horse or other animal to any of the trees,
lampposts, electric lights, power, telephone or telegraph poles, mailboxes,
wires or hydrant on any of the streets, sidewalks, squares or parks in the
city.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-15. Hogs prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a hog within the corporate
limits of the city.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



Sec. 3-16. Restriction as to certain animals in public places.



   No person shall permit his horse, mule, donkey, hog, sheep, goat, or
cattle of any kind, to run at large in the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares
or cemeteries of the city. Horses or mules which are being used for riding or
driving may be fastened to hitching posts or blocks, but no person shall
stake or otherwise fasten any such animal, for grazing purposes, in any of
the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares, or cemeteries of the city, nor shall
any person feed any such animal in any of the streets, sidewalks, parks or
squares of the city.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   Cross References: sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15.



Sec. 3-17. Cleanliness and location of animal enclosures.



   (a)    Every stable and place where cattle, horses, chickens, geese
or other animals are kept, shall be maintained in a clean and healthy
condition at all times. No person shall erect upon any lot any cow, horse,
mule, sheep or goat stable or any coop or pen for the keeping of any
chickens, geese, turkeys, ducks, or any other gallinaceous birds, within one
hundred (100) feet of any street or dwelling.



   (b)    This section shall not apply to animals located within the
city prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section
derives. However, the number of animals shall not be increased nor shall the
animals be replaced or relocated to some other property in violation of this
section.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: and sanitation, Ch. 9.



Sec. 3-18. Bird sanctuary; eradication of pests.



   (a)    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the
city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to
shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or
wild fowl nests; provided, however, that if starlings or similar birds are
found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they
constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the
city council, then the city council may bring the matter to the attention of
the state commissioner of agriculture or state pesticide board which shall
make such disposition of the matter as may be appropriate pursuant to the
provisions of G.S. 113-300.2.



(Ord. No. O-08-02-05-12, § 2, 2-5-08)



   State Law References: wild animal or bird a pest, G.S. § 113-300.2;
bird sanctuaries, G.S. § 160A-188. 



Chapter 4
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*



__________



*   Cross References: prevention and protection, Ch. 7; blasting and
pyrotechnics, § 7-56 et seq.; flood hazard management, Ch. 8; planning, Ch.
13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; house moving, §
15-2; building and house numbers, § 15-4; subdivisions, Ch. 16; water and
sewerage, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: of city regarding buildings, G.S. §§
160A-411--160A-438.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 4-1--4-25



   Art. II. Regulatory Codes, §§ 4-26--4-50



   Art. III. Inspections, §§ 4-51--4-75



   Art. IV. Permits, §§ 4-76--4-105



   Art. V. Insulation Contractors, §§ 4-106--4-124



   Art. VI. Dwellings Unfit for Human Habitation and Abandoned Structures,
§§ 4-125--4-140



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 4-1. Swimming pools.



   All pools, other than wading pools for small children, must be fenced.



of 9-18-89, § 4)



Secs. 4-2--4-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
REGULATORY CODES



Sec. 4-26. Scope.



   (a)    The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory code
adopted in this article shall apply to the location, design, materials,
equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance,
moving, demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure
or any appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure.



   (1)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains,
waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures
and appurtenances thereof;



   (2)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and
appurtenances thereto;



   (3)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.



   (b)    The adoption of this chapter and the codes adopted by
reference in this article shall constitute a resolution within the meaning of
G.S. section 143-138(d) making the regulatory codes adopted in this article
applicable to dwellings and out buildings used in connection therewith and to
apartment buildings used exclusively as the residence of not more than two
(2) families.



(Code 1982, § 9-2001)



Sec. 4-27. Adoption.



   (a)    The 1978 edition of the North Carolina State Building Code,
Volume I, General Construction, as adopted by the North Carolina Building
Code Council and as amended, is adopted by reference as fully as though set
forth in this article as the building code of the city to the extent such
code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods of construction,
minimum standards, and use of materials in building or structure erected,
enlarged, altered, repaired, or otherwise constructed or reconstructed
subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives.



   (b)    The 1967 edition or later edition of the North Carolina
Uniform Residential Building Code, Volume I-B, as adopted by the North
Carolina Inspectors Association, and as published by the North Carolina
Building Code Council is adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in
this article as the residential building code for one (1) and two (2) family
residential buildings in the city.



(Code 1982, §§ 9-2002; 9-2006)



   State Law References: Carolina State Building Code, G.S. § 143-138.



Sec. 4-28. Electrical code adopted.



   The 1981 edition of the North Carolina Electrical Code (North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical), adopting by reference the 1965
edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection
Association as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this article
as the electrical code for the city.



(Code 1982, § 9-2005)



Sec. 4-29. Heating code adopted.



   The 1980 edition of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume III, Heating) as adopted and published by the
North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is adopted by reference
as fully as though set forth in this article as the heating code for the city.



(Code 1982, § 9-2004)



Sec. 4-30. Plumbing code adopted.



   The 1980 edition of the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing) as adopted and published by the
North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended is adopted by reference
as fully as though set forth in this article as the plumbing code for the
city.



(Code 1982, § 9-2003)



   State Law References: of technical codes by reference, G.S. § 160A-76.



Sec. 4-31. Amendments.



   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this
article, which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or
organizations referred to in this article shall be effective in the city at
the time such amendments are filed with the building inspector as provided in
section 4-33.



(Code 1982, § 9-2007)



Sec. 4-32. Compliance.



   (a)    All buildings or structures which are constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section
derives shall conform to the requirement, minimum standard, and other
provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, General
Construction, Volume I or the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building
Code, Volume I-B, whichever is applicable, or of both if both are applicable.



   (b)    Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy, or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of
the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume
II, Plumbing).



   (c)    All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina State Building
Code, Volume III, Heating).



   (d)    All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the North Carolina
Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical).



(Code 1982, § 9-2008)



Sec. 4-33. Official copies; location.



   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this article, and
official copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the
office of the building inspector. Such copies shall be the official copies of
the codes and the amendments.



(Code 1982, § 9-2009)



Secs. 4-34--4-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
INSPECTIONS*



__________



*   Editors Note: and inspections for heating, air conditioning,
electrical, plumbing and insulation are administered through the county.



__________



Sec. 4-51. Organization of department.



   The inspection department shall consist of a building inspector and
such other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as may be authorized
by the city council.



(Code 1982, § 9-1001)



   State Law References: standards and certificates for code-enforcement
officials, G.S. § 143-151.13; authorization to create inspection department,
G.S. § 160A-411.



Sec. 4-52. Inspection department's duties.



   It shall be the duty of the inspection department to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted in this
chapter, and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not
the provisions of this chapter and such codes are being met.



(Code 1982, § 9-1002)



   State Law References: and responsibilities of inspection department,
G.S. § 160A-412.



Sec. 4-53. Conflicts of interest.



   No officer or employee of the inspection department shall be
financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for
the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building or any part
thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he is
the owner of such building. No officer or employee of the inspection
department shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or
with the interest of the city.



(Code 1982, § 9-1003)



   State Law References: of interest, G.S. § 160A-415.



Sec. 4-54. Reports and records.



   The inspection department, and each inspector, shall keep complete,
permanent, and accurate records in convenient form of all applications
received, permits issued, inspections, and reinspections made, and all other
work and activities of the inspection department. Periodic reports shall be
submitted to the city manager, and to other agencies, as required.



(Code 1982, § 9-1004)



   State Law References: and reports, G.S. § 160A-433.



Sec. 4-55. Procedure.



   (a)    The inspection department shall inspect all buildings and
structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as
often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with this
chapter and the appropriate codes.



   (b)    When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials
and assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication,
or inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection
organizations; provided, no approval shall be based upon reports of such
organizations unless they are in writing and certified by a responsible
officer of such organization.



   (c)    All holders of permits shall notify the inspection department
and the appropriate inspector at each of the following stages of construction
so that approval may be given before work is continued:



   (1)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated
and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place, and before concrete
is placed. Drilled footings, piles, and similar types of foundations shall be
inspected as installed.



   (2)   Framing inspection. To be made after all structural framing is
in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and electrical and heating
installations have been installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing
and vents are installed, but before any of the structure is enclosed or
covered. Poured in place concrete structural elements shall be inspected
before each pour of any structural member.



   (3)   Fireproofing inspection. To be made after all areas required
to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the plastering or
other fireproofing is applied.



   (4)   Final inspection. To be made after building or structure has
all doors hung, fixtures set, and ready for occupancy, but before the
building is occupied.



   (d)    Requests for inspections may be made to the office of the
inspection department or to the appropriate inspector. The inspection
department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after a request is
made, provided such work is ready for inspection at the time the request is
made.



   (e)    Reinspections may be made at the convenience of the
inspector. No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed
condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the
inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspector
and placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the
work shall be furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice
posted on the building or given to the permit holder. Failure to call for
inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage of construction
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (f)    Where the applicant for a permit proposes to erect any
building or structure on the line of any street, alley, or other public
place, he shall secure a survey of the line of such street, alley or other
public place, adjacent to the property upon which such building or structure
is to be erected before proceeding with construction of such building or
structure. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that the
building does not encroach upon such street, alley, or other public place.



   (g)    No new building or part thereof shall be occupied, and no
addition or enlargement of any existing building shall be occupied, and no
existing building after being altered or moved shall be occupied, and no
change of occupancy shall be made in any existing building or part thereof,
until the inspection department has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or
portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion
and occupancy of the entire building. Application for a certificate of
occupancy may be made by the owner or his agent after all final inspections
have been made for new buildings, or, in the case of existing buildings,
after supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes and the zoning ordinance
for the occupancy intended. The inspection department shall issue a
certificate of occupancy when, after examination and inspection, it is found
that the building in all respects conforms to the provisions of this chapter,
the regulatory codes, and the zoning ordinance for the occupancy intended.



(Code 1982, § 9-1005)



   State Law References: of work in progress, G.S. § 160A-420;
certificates of compliance, G.S. § 160A-423.



Sec. 4-56. Oversight not to legalize violation.



   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or any
other official or employee of the inspection department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any regulatory code adopted in this chapter.



(Code 1982, § 9-1006)



Sec. 4-57. Powers of inspection officials.



   (a)    Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered, and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory
codes adopted by this chapter.



   (b)    Right-of-entry. Inspectors shall have the right-of-entry on
any premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes adopted by this
chapter at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of
the requirements of this chapter and the regulatory codes, upon presentation
of proper credentials.



   (c)    Stop orders. Whenever any building or structure or part
thereof is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired
in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or
any other city ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory
code adopted by this chapter, or in violation of the terms of the permit or
permits issued therefor, or in such manner as to endanger life or property,
the appropriate inspector may order such work to be immediately stopped. Such
order shall be in writing to the owner of the property or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which
the work may be resumed.



(Code 1982, § 9-1007)



   State Law References: orders, G.S. § 160A-421; periodic inspections;
right of entry, G.S. § 160A-424.



Sec. 4-58. Enforcement of zoning ordinance.



   No permit for alteration, repair, or construction of any building or
structure shall be issued until a zoning permit has first been issued by the
appropriate official charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance.



(Code 1982, § 9-1008; Ord. of 6-6-95, § 1)



Secs. 4-59--4-75. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
PERMITS*



__________



*   Editors Note: and inspections for heating, air conditioning,
electrical, plumbing and insulation are administered through the county.



   Cross References: permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



   State Law References: G.S. § 160A-417.



__________



Sec. 4-76. Building.



   (a)    No person shall commence or proceed with the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of any building or
other structure, or any part thereof, without a written permit therefor from
the building inspector; provided, however, that no building permit shall be
required for work the total cost of which does not exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) and which does not involve any change of the structural parts or
the stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of egress of the
building or the structure in question. Local board of health approval of
property for septic tanks is required where the sewage system cannot be
connected to city sewer.



   (b)    In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or
structure a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be posted by the property owner or by his contractor at the
time of application for a permit, to insure complete removal or demolition,
including all rubble and debris. Failure on the part of the property owner or
his contractor to completely demolish, remove, and clear the premises, after
thirty (30) days' notice by the building inspector, shall be cause for
forfeiture of such bond.



(Code 1982, § 9-1012(a))



Sec. 4-77. Plumbing.



   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension,
or general repair of any plumbing system without a written permit therefor
from the plumbing inspector; provided, however, no permit shall be required
for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a trap to an installed
system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements do not disrupt the
original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems. Local board of
health approval of property for septic tanks is required where the sewage
system cannot be connected to city sewer.



(Code 1982, § 9-1012(b))



Sec. 4-78. Heating-air conditioning.



   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension,
alteration or general repair of any heating or cooling equipment system
without a written permit from the heating-air conditioning inspector;
provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor repairs or minor
burner services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces or cooling
systems.



(Code 1982, § 9-1012(c))



Sec. 4-79. Electrical.



   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension,
alteration, or general repair of any electrical wiring, devices, appliances
or equipment without a written permit therefor from the electrical inspector;
provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor repair work such as
the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable devices to suitable
receptacles which have been permanently installed; provided, further, no
permit shall be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of the
electrical wiring, devices, appliances, and equipment installed by or for an
electrical public utility corporation for the use of such corporation in the
generation, transmission, distribution, or metering of electrical energy, or
for the use of such corporation in the operation of signals or the
transmission of intelligence.



(Code 1982, § 9-1012(d))



Sec. 4-80. Application.



   Written application shall be made for all permits required by this
article, and shall be made on forms provided by the inspection department.
Such application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure
affected or by his authorized agent or representative, and in addition to
such other information as may be required by the appropriate inspector to
enable him to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued,
shall show the following:



   (1)   Name, residence, and business address of owner;



   (2)   Name, residence, and business of authorized representative or
agent, if any; and



   (3)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with
evidence that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state
licensing board for such contractors, if such be required for the work
involved in the permit for which application is made.



(Code 1982, § 9-1013)



Sec. 4-81. Plans and specifications.



   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for
permit for any building or structure where plans and specifications are
deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector in order for him to determine
whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate regulatory codes.
Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature
and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and specifications together
shall contain information sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will
conform to the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory
codes. Where plans and specifications are required, a copy of them shall be
kept at the work site until all authorized operations have been completed and
approved by the appropriate inspector.



(Code 1982, § 9-1014)



Sec. 4-82. Limitations on issuance.



   (a)    No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure the estimated total cost of which is more than thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00) unless the work is to be performed by a licensed general
contractor.



   (b)    No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure, other than a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling, the estimated
total cost of which is more than ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) unless
the plans bear the state seal of a registered architect or a registered
engineer.



   (c)    Where any provision of the state statutes or of any ordinance
requires that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no
permit for such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed by such
licensed specialty contractor.



   (d)    Where detailed plans and specifications are required under
this chapter, no building permit shall be issued unless such plans and
specifications have been provided.



(Code 1982, § 9-1015; Ord. of 6-6-95, § 1)



Sec. 4-83. Issuance.



   When proper application for a permit has been made, and the appropriate
inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with
the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall
issue such permit upon payment of the proper fee as provided in section 4-87.



(Code 1982, § 9-1016)



Sec. 4-84. Revocation.



   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for such
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for:



   (1)   Any material departure from the approved application, plans,
or specifications;



   (2)   Refusal or failure to comply with proper orders of the
inspector;



   (3)   Refusal or failure to comply with requirements of this chapter
and the appropriate regulatory codes; or



   (4)   False statements or misrepresentations made in securing such
permit.



(Code 1982, § 9-1017)



   State Law References: of permits, G.S. § 160A-422.



Sec. 4-85. Time limitations.



   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation six
(6) months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit
has not been commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire.
No work authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be
performed until a new permit therefor has been secured.



(Code 1982, § 9-1018)



   State Law References: limitation on validity of permits, G.S. §
160A-418.



Sec. 4-86. Changes in work.



   After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the terms
of the application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or
of any regulatory code adopted herein except where changes or deviations are
clearly permissible under the state building code shall be made until
specific written approval of such changes or deviations has been obtained
from the appropriate inspector.



(Code 1982, § 9-1019)



Sec. 4-87. Fees.



   (a)    Building permit fees and inspection fees for new buildings,
additions, and alterations to existing buildings constructed inside the city
limits shall be based on the total number of square feet in the building at
such rates as set from time to time by the city council and maintained
according to a schedule in the city clerk's office.



   (b)    The building permit, sign permit or swimming pool permit
shall serve as a zoning permit. Where a building permit, sign permit on
swimming pool permit is not required, the zoning permit fee shall be as set
from time to time by the city council and maintained according to a schedule
in the city clerk's office.



   (c)    Certificate of occupancy fees inside the city limits shall be
as set from time to time by the city council and maintained according to a
schedule in the city clerk's office.



   (d)    Plumbing, electrical, mechanical and insulation permit fees
shall be as set from time to time by the city council and maintained
according to a schedule in the city clerk's office.



   (e)    Permit fees for location of mobile homes and other buildings
shall be as set from time to time by the city council and maintained
according to a schedule in the city clerk's office.



   (f)    Swimming pool permits shall be required for swimming pools
assembled or constructed on site. Fees shall be in an amount as set from time
to time by the city council and maintained according to a schedule in the
city clerk's office.



of 6-7-83, §§ 1--4; Ord. of 9-18-89, §§ 1--7; Ord. of 6-6-95, § 1)



Secs. 4-88--4-105. Reserved.



ARTICLE V.
INSULATION CONTRACTORS*



__________



*   Cross References: permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; signs, Ch.
14.5.



__________



Sec. 4-106. Authority.



   This article is adopted pursuant to Chapter 703, North Carolina Session
Laws of 1977, and G.S. § 160A-194.



(Code 1982, § 9-2011)



   State Law References: of building code insulation and energy
utilization standards, G.S. § 143-151.26 et seq.; authorization of city to
regulate and license businesses and trades, G.S. § 160A-194.



Sec. 4-107. License required.



   No person may for a consideration install, alter, or restore within the
city any insulation or other materials or energy utilization equipment
designed or intended to meet the state building code requirements for
insulation and energy utilization standards who is not either:



   (1)   Licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under chapter
87 of the general statutes;



   (2)   Working under the supervision of a registered architect or
professional engineer;



   (3)   An owner working upon his own building; or



   (4)   Licensed under this article.



(Code 1982, § 9-2012)



Sec. 4-108. Permit required; fee; exceptions.



   (a)    No person may for a consideration install, alter or restore
any insulation or other materials or energy utilization equipment designed or
intended to meet the state building code requirements for insulation and
energy utilization without first securing a special insulation and energy
utilization permit from the building inspector for each item of work, which
permit shall evidence compliance with the insulation and energy utilization
standards of the state building code.



   (b)    There shall be a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each permit
issued.



   (c)    The following shall not be required to obtain the permit
required by subsection (a):



   (1)   An owner working upon his own building;



   (2)   An installer working under the supervision of a registered
architect or professional engineer, when the work is being performed under a
general building permit; or



   (3)   A contractor licensed to do the proposed work under chapter 87
of the general statutes, when the work is being performed under a general
building permit.



(Code 1982, § 9-2019)



   State Law References: G.S. § 143-151.29; persons entitled to permit,
G.S. § 143-151.31.



Sec. 4-109. Application for license.



   Every person desiring a license under this article shall submit an
application for such license to the building inspector conforming to the
following requirements:



   (1)   Each application shall be a written statement upon forms
provided by the building inspector.



   (2)   Each application shall contain the following information:



   a.   Name and home address of the applicant, if an individual, or
home office address, if a corporation or partnership;



   b.   Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership;



   c.   Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a
corporation;



   d.   Place where the proposed business is to be located;



   e.   Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts
involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit by the applicant or any employee,
partner, officer, or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other
state or jurisdiction;



   f.   Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant authorizing
activities of the type authorized in this article or other activities
involving construction, alteration, or modification of buildings and
structures;



   g.   Information as to the circumstances in which any local, state,
or federal government or agency has refused, suspended, or revoked a license
of the type described in subsection f. to the applicant or any employee,
partner, officer or director of the applicant.



   (3)   Each application for such license shall be accompanied by a
fee in the amount as set from time to time by city council and maintained on
a schedule of fees on file in the clerk's office, such amount to be for the
fiscal year and prorated by quarters to the end of such year.



   (4)   False statements on any application for a license shall be
grounds for immediate revocation or denial of such license.



(Code 1982, § 9-2013)



Sec. 4-110. Procedure for issuance of license.



   (a)    Each application received by the building inspector shall be
promptly forwarded to the police department.



   (b)    The application and any comments and recommendations relating
thereto shall be considered by the building inspector, which shall then issue
or deny the license pursuant to the following standards.



   (c)    The building inspector shall issue the license unless he
shall find that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer or director
of the applicant has:



   (1)   Been convicted within the last three (3) years of a felony or
an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, whether in this or any other
state or jurisdiction;



   (2)   Been refused a license to do the type of work authorized in
this article or has had such a license suspended or revoked by any local,
state or federal government or agency and such government or agency has not
subsequently granted or restored such license;



   (3)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application; or



   (4)   Failed to post the bond or other security required by section
4-111.



(Code 1982, § 9-2014)



Sec. 4-111. Bond.



   (a)    Before a license shall be issued to any applicant, the
applicant shall post a bond with the city in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). In lieu of posting a bond, the applicant may deposit a
cashier's check or cash in the same amount.



   (b)    The security required by this section shall be available to
indemnify any person for any damage which may accrue by reason of the
applicant's failure to properly provide or install insulation, energy
utilization equipment or other materials designed or intended to meet the
state building code standards for insulation and energy utilization.



(Code 1982, § 9-2015)



Sec. 4-112. Termination and renewal of licenses.



   All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall terminate on the
last day of the fiscal year for which issued. Renewal of such license shall
be pursuant to the same procedures and requirements set forth for initial
issuance.



(Code 1982, § 9-2016)



Sec. 4-113. Suspension, revocation of license.



   (a)    The building inspector may suspend or revoke any license
issued pursuant to this article at any time upon a showing that the applicant
or any employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant has:



   (1)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application for a
license;



   (2)   Violated the state building code requirements as to insulation
or energy utilization equipment or materials, whether in this or any other
jurisdiction; or



   (3)   Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, or
deceit with respect to any contract entered into for work requiring this
license.



   (b)    Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal
the suspension or revocation to the city council. After reasonable notice to
the licensee, the city council shall afford the licensee an opportunity to
show why its license should not be suspended or revoked.



(Code 1982, § 9-2017)



   State Law References: revocation, G.S. § 143-151.35.



Sec. 4-114. Change of location.



   The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided ten (10)
days' notice thereof is given to the city and operation at such new location
does not violate any applicable state or local law, ordinance, or regulation.



(Code 1982, § 9-2018)



Secs. 4-115--4-124. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI.
DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION AND ABANDONED STRUCTURES



Sec. 4-125. Designation of public officer.



   The building inspector of the City of Marion or other person appointed
by the city manager is hereby designated as the public officer that is to
exercise the powers granted in this article.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03; Ord. No. O-06-04-04-1, § 2, 4-4-06)



Sec. 4-126. Investigation of dwellings unfit for human habitation; hearing
before public officer.



   Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public
authority or by at least five (5) residents of the City of Marion charging
that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the
public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place within
McDowell County, said hearing date to be fixed not less than ten (10) days
nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint; that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the public officer.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-127. Determination of findings of fact after hearing; order to repair
or demolish dwelling.



   If, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he shall state in
writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order stating:



   (a)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can
be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, the
owner is required, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the
dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and
close the dwelling as a human habitation; or



   (b)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling,
the owner is required, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve
the dwelling in order to remove or demolish such dwelling. However,
notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a
locally designated historic district of the City of Marion and the historic
district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by
ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward
maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been
condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and
closed consistent with G.S. section 160A-400.14(a).



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-128. Failure of owner to comply with order of public officer; posting
of placard on dwelling.



   (a)    If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter
or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the public officer may cause
the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed;
that the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human
habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted
shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (b)    If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished.



   (c)    The duties of the public officer set forth in subsections (a)
and (b) of this section shall not be exercised until the city council shall
have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the
purpose of this article and Part 6, Article 19, Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes with respect to the particular property or
properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human
habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the
ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a
dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to
bring it into conformity with the housing code. This ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the register of deeds in McDowell County and shall
be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-129. Lien for costs of repairs or demolition.



   The amount of the costs of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be
a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien
shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessments provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the
public officer, he shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal
property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and
shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or
demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court
by the public officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court,
and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Marion to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by
summary proceedings, or otherwise.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-130. Failure to comply with order to vacate a dwelling.



   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the
public officer may file a civil action in the name of the City of Marion to
remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the
nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint
naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The clerk of
superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before
a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten (10) days
from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and
complaint shall be served as provided in section 42-29. The summons shall be
returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been
duly served, and if at the hearing the public officer produces a certified
copy of an ordinance adopted by the city council pursuant to subsection
4-128(c) authorizing the public officer to proceed to vacate the occupied
dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be
vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the
dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for
summary ejectment entered unto G.S. section 42-30. An appeal from any
judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S.
section 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided
in G.S. section 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is
a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant was served with
notice at least thirty (30) days before the filing of the summary ejectment
proceeding that the city council has ordered the public officer to proceed to
exercise his duties under section 4-128 of this article to vacate and close
or remove and demolish the dwelling.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-131. Requirements for mailed notice of order to repair or demolish
dwelling to organizations involved in promoting affordable housing.



   That whenever a determination is made pursuant to section 4-127 of this
article that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed and
demolished, under the provisions of this article, notice of the order shall
be given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or
restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request
for such notices. A minimum of forty-five (45) days from the mailing of such
notices shall be given before any removal or demolition by action of the
public officer to all the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with
the owner to make repairs, lease or purchase the property for the purpose of
providing affordable housing. The public officer or city clerk shall certify
the mailing of the notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the
absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for
such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the
sole remedy shall be an order requiring the public officer to wait forty-five
(45) days before causing removal or demolition.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-132. Applicability of article to abandoned structures.



   All of the provisions and procedures prescribed by this article for the
repair, closing or demolition of dwellings found to be unfit for human
habitation shall also apply to any abandoned structures which the city
council has found to be a health or safety hazard as a result of the
attraction of insects, rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous
conditions constituting a threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as
living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-133. Conditions existing in a dwelling that determine if a dwelling is
unfit for human habitation.



   The public officer may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he finds that conditions exist in the dwelling that render it
dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of
the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of
the City of Marion. Defective conditions may include, but are not limited to:
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other
calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; and/or uncleanliness.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-134. Service of complaints and orders.



   Service of complaints and orders issued pursuant to this article shall
be governed by the following:



   (a)   Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to
this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a
copy of the complaint or order may also be sent be regular mail. Service is
deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or
refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten
(10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.



   (b)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons
are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to
accept service by registered or certified mail, and the public officer makes
an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon
the owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the City of Marion at least once no later than the
time at which personal service would be required under this article. When
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected thereby.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-135. Housing appeal board established; procedures for appeal.



   The city council for the City of Marion shall serve as the housing
appeals board. Appeals under this article shall be governed by the following:



   (a)   Appeals from any decision or order of the public officer may
be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or
commission of the City of Marion. Any appeal from the public officer shall be
taken within ten (10) days from the rendering of the decision or service of
the order by filing with the public officer and with the housing appeals
board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is based. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the public officer
shall forthwith transmit to the housing appeals board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When
an appeal is from a decision of the public officer refusing to allow the
person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force
until modified or reversed. When an appeal is from a decision of the public
officer requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have
the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the housing
appeals board, unless the public officer certifies to the housing appeals
board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that because of facts
stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the
appellant), a suspension of his requirement would cause imminent peril to
life or property. In that case the requirement shall not be suspended except
by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not
less than one (1) day's written notice to the public officer, by the housing
appeals board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to
subparagraph (d) herein.



   (b)   The housing appeals board shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render a
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The housing appeals board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any
decision or order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to
that end it shall have all the powers of the public officer, but the
concurring vote of four-fifths of its members shall be necessary to reverse
or modify any decision or order of the public officer. The housing appeals
board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the
strict letter of this article, to adopt the application of this article to
the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the article shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.



   (c)   Every decision of the housing appeals board shall be subject
to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within
fifteen (15) days of the decision of the housing appeals board, but not
otherwise.



   (d)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the public officer
or a decision rendered by the housing appeals board may petition the superior
court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the
order or decision and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary
injunction restraining the public officer pending a final disposition of the
cause. The petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after issuance of
the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the court on
a petition within twenty (20) days, and shall be given preference over other
matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine issues
raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may
require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before
obtaining a temporary injunction under this article or G.S. section
160A-446(f).



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-136. Powers of public officer.



   The public officer is hereby granted the authority to exercise any
powers necessary or convenient in carrying out and effectuating the purpose
and provisions of this article and Part 6, Article 19, Chapter 160A of the
North Carolina General Statutes, including, but not limited to, the following:



   (a)   The power and authority to investigate the dwelling conditions
within the City of Marion in order to determine which dwellings therein are
unfit for human habitation;



   (b)   The power and authority to administer oaths and affirmations,
examine witnesses and receive evidence;



   (c)   The power and authority to enter upon premises for the purpose
of making examinations in the manner that will do the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession;



   (d)   The power and authority to appoint and fix the duties of
officers, agents and employees necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article; and



   (e)   The power and authority to delegate any of his functions and
powers under this article to other officers and other agents.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-137. Violations.



   If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted,
maintained, or used in violation of: (1) Part 6, Article 19, Chapter 160A of
the North Carolina General Statutes, (2) this article, or (3) any validly
issued order or decision of the public officer or the housing appeals board
made pursuant to this article, the public officer or housing appeals board
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain,
correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling, or
to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the
dwelling.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-138. Preparation of estimate of annual expenses or costs to enforce
provisions of this article.



   The city manager, in consultation with the public officer, is directed
to, within a reasonable time after the adoption of this article, prepare an
estimate of the annual expenses or costs to provide the equipment, personnel
and supplies necessary for periodic examinations and investigations of the
dwellings within the City of Marion for the purpose of determining the
fitness of dwellings for human habitation, and for enforcement and
administration of this article.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-139. Definitions.



   All definitions contained in G.S. section 160A-442 are incorporated
herein by reference as if fully set forth herein, including but not limited
to the following:



   (a)   Dwelling shall mean any building, structure, manufactured home
or mobile home, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or
intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not
include any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely for a
seasonal vacation purpose.



   (b)   Owner shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and
every mortgagee of record.



   (c)   Parties in interest shall mean all individuals, associations
and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are
in possession thereof.



   (d)   Public authority shall mean any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the City of Marion, McDowell
County, or the State of North Carolina relating to health, fire, building
regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the City of Marion.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03)



Sec. 4-140. Conflicts with other ordinances or statutes.



   This article is enacted pursuant to and consistent with Part 6, Article
19, Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. To the extent that
any conflicts exist between this article and Part 6, Article 19, Chapter 160A
of the North Carolina General Statutes, the applicable North Carolina General
Statutes shall prevail.



(Ord. No. O-03-01-21-1, § 2, 1-21-03) 



Chapter 4.5
BUSINESSES



   Art. I. In General, §§ 4.5-1--4.5-25



   Art. II. Sexually Oriented Businesses, §§ 4.5-26--4.5-47



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Secs. 4.5-1--4.5-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Sec. 4.5-26. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article shall be to set forth the regulatory and
licensing requirements for adult establishments located within the City of
Marion. Adult establishments, because of their very nature, are recognized as
having serious objectionable operational characteristics. Studies and
experiences that are relevant to North Carolina have shown that lower
property values and increased crime rates tend to accompany and are brought
about by adult establishments. The city council finds that regulation of
these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse secondary effects do not
contribute to the blighting of surrounding neighborhoods and to regulate
acts, omissions or conditions detrimental to the health, safety or welfare
and the peace and dignity of the city. Regulation to achieve these purposes
can be accomplished by the procedures set forth hereinafter.



   The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually, oriented entertainment
to their intended market. This article represents a balancing of the
legitimate ends of the community by imposing an incidental, content neutral
place, time and manner regulation of sexually oriented businesses, without
limiting alternative avenues of communication and at the same time, requiring
the business to carry its share of financing administrative and enforcement
activities.



of 7-18-00, § 1)



Sec. 4.5-27. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Adult bookstore means a bookstore:



   (1)   Which receives a majority of its gross income during any
calendar month from the sale or rental of publications (including books,
magazines, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section or other periodicals,
videotapes, compact discs, other photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital,
or other imaging medium)



   (2)   Having as a preponderance (Either in terms of the weight and
importance of the material or in terms of greater volume of materials) of its
publications, including books, greeting cards, magazines, other periodicals,
videotapes, compact discs, other photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital,
or other imaging medium, which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section.



   Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that on a regular, sporadic, or transient basis features:



   (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or



   (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities", or



   (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
or



   (d)   Persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are
intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers.



   Adult establishment means an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult mini motion picture theater,
escort agency, exotic car wash, exotic maid service, nude modeling studios,
sexual encounter center or any other sexually oriented business that is
similar in nature or intent to any other adult entertainment business as
defined in this section .



   Adult live entertainment means any performance of or involving the
actual presence of real people which exhibits specified sexual activities or
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
section.



   Adult live entertainment business means any establishment or business
wherein adult live entertainment is shown for observation by patrons. This
shall apply whether the entertainment is presented on a regular, sporadic, or
transient basis.



   Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
that:



   (a)   Offers accommodation to the public for any form of
consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
and has a sign visible from the public right of way that advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or



   (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than twenty-four (24) hours; or



   (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the
room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours.



   Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building or premises
used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons
therein. "Adult motion picture theater" does not include any adult mini
motion picture theater as defined in this section.



   Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with
viewing booths designed to hold patrons which is used for presenting motion
pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for
observation by patrons therein.



   Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or
independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said
person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said
business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises
for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or
for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a
person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer.



   Enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor
areas occupied by the business by more than ten (10) percent, as the floor
areas exist on July 18, 2000.



   Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person and whose advertisements, promotions, or obvious intent to the public
is sexual in nature.



   Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration and whose
advertisements, promotions, or obvious intent to the public is sexual in
nature.



   Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within or at an
adult establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided by that person as
an employee or an independent contractor.



   Erotic refers to any seductive, titillating, lustful, immodest,
indecent, suggestive, passionate, or similar, reference, act, service or deed.



   Establishment means and includes any of the following:



   (a)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business;



   (b)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



   (c)   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or



   (d)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   Exotic car wash means a facility that offers a car cleaning or washing
service performed by employees that are in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.



   Exotic maid service means any cleaning service for a residence or
business where the employee is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.



   Licensed day-care facility means a facility licensed by the state of
North Carolina whether situated within the city of not that provides care,
training, education, custody, treatments or supervision for children under
fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than
twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is
operated for a profit or charge for the services it offers.



   Licensee means a person in whose name a license has been issued, as
well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
license.



   Licensed group care facility means a facility licensed by the state of
North Carolina to provide custodial care for physically or mentally
challenged individuals regardless of age.



   Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons for consideration.



   Nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female
genitals, or vulva, with less than fully opaque covering; or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.



   Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented
business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon,
including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds,
private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto,
under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in
the application for a business license pursuant to section 4.5-29 of this
chapter.



   Semi-nude means the appearance of the female breast below a horizontal
line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, other wearing apparel provided
the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:



   (a)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or



   (b)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.



   Sexually oriented devices means without limitation any artificial or
simulated specified anatomical area or their device or paraphernalia that is
designed principally for specified sexual activities but shall not mean any
contraceptive device.



   Specified anatomical areas means:



   (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:



   A.   Human genitals, pubic region;



   B.   Buttock; or



   C.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or



   (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.



   Specified sexual activities means:



   (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;



   (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or



   (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
regions, buttocks or female breasts.



   Sexually oriented business means any businesses or enterprises that
have as one of their principal business purposes or as a significant portion
of their business an emphasis on matter and conduct depicting, describing, or
related to anatomical areas and sexual activities as specified in N.C.G.S.
14-202.10. This term may be used interchangeably with adult establishment.



   Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means
and includes any of the following:



   (a)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



   (b)   The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or



   (c)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device that transfers the ownership of control of the business, except for
the transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



   City means City of Marion, North Carolina.



   City clerk, as used in this article, means chief administrative city
official. The city clerk is responsible for the enforcement of this article.



of 7-18-00, § 2)



Sec. 4.5-28. Application for licenses.



   (a)    Business license.



   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an
adult establishment in the city unless the owner or operator thereof has
obtained an adult establishment license from the city. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to operate such business after such license has been
revoked or suspended by the city or has expired.



   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any entertainer to knowingly perform
any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an
unlicensed adult establishment within the city.



   (3)   It shall be prima facie evidence that any adult establishment
that fails to have posted, in the manner required by this article, an adult
establishment license, has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall
be prima facie evidence that any entertainer who performs any service or
entertainment in an adult establishment in which an adult establishment
license is not posted, in the manner required by this article, had knowledge
that such business was not licensed.



   (b)    Entertainer license. It is unlawful for any person to work as
an entertainer at an adult establishment without first obtaining a license to
do so from the city, or to work as an entertainer at an adult establishment
after such person's license to do so has been revoked or suspended by the
city or has expired.



   (c)    License classification and fees.



   (1)   The term of all licenses required under this article shall be
for a period of twelve (12) months, commencing on the date of issuance of the
license. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in
full of the fees referred to in this article and established by the city
council. Payment shall be made by certified or cashier's check or money
order. No application shall be considered complete until all such fees are
paid.



   (2)   All license shall be issued for a specific location and/or
person and shall be non-refundable and nontransferable.



   (3)   The license fees shall be as set by the city council from time
to time and be recorded in the city council meeting minutes at which they are
set.



of 7-18-00, § 3)



Sec. 4.5-29. Application procedures.



   (a)    Adult establishment business license. All persons desiring to
secure a license to conduct, operate or maintain an adult establishment under
the provisions of this article shall make a verified application to the city
clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person
proposing to conduct, operate or maintain the adult establishment. All
applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and
shall require the following information:



   (1)   The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by
which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, and
the residence addresses for the past two years, the business and home
telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth, social security
number, drivers license number, and a recent photograph of the applicant.



   (2)   (a)   The name of the adult establishment, a description of
the adult entertainment to be performed on the licensed premises, the name of
the owner of the premises where the adult establishment will be located, the
business address and McDowell County parcel identification number on which
the business resides;



   (b)   If the persons identified as the fee owner of the tract of
land in item (a) is/are not also the owner of the establishment, then the
lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or
other document evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or
proposed owners of the adult establishment to have or obtain the use and
possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the purpose
of the operation of an adult establishment;



   (c)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared
within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor
depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of
the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, library, or public park or recreation area
within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property to be
certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing
or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted;



   (d)   Any of the criteria above shall not be required for a renewal
application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished
the city clerk with the original application or previous renewals thereof
remain correct and current.



   (3)   The names, residence addresses for the past two (2) years,
social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant
is a partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information
for all corporate officers, directors, and individuals having a ten (10)
percent or greater interest in the corporation.



   (4)   A statement from the applicant, or from each partner, or from
each corporate officer, director, or ten (10) percent shareholder that each
such person has not been convicted of, released from confinement for
conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on:



   a.   A felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately
preceding the application, or



   b.   A misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately
preceding the application.



   Where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses,
prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography
or related offenses as defined in the laws of North Carolina or any other
comparable violation of the laws of this state or the laws of any other state.



   (5)   If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of
existence issued by the North Carolina Secretary of State.



   (6)   A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal
knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the
information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has
read the provisions of this article regulating adult establishments.



   (7)   All applicants shall submit to fingerprinting by the Marion
Police Department. The fingerprint cards shall be submitted to the S.B.I. for
processing. Returned fingerprint cards and criminal histories shall be kept
on file in the Marion Police Department.



   (8)   A statement signed under oath that the applicant consents to
investigation of his/her background by the city to include fingerprinting and
that the applicant agrees to furnish within ten days at his/her expense, a
criminal history from the clerk of court of any county in which the applicant
has resided during the five (5) preceding years. Failure to provide the
information and documentation required by this subsection shall constitute an
incomplete application and it shall not be processed until complete.



   (b)    Adult entertainer license. All persons desiring to secure a
license under the provisions of this article to be an entertainer shall make
a verified application to the city clerk. All applications shall be made in
person to the city clerk or his designee. All applications shall be submitted
on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following
information:



   (1)   The applicant's full name and any aliases or other names by
which the applicant is known or which the applicant has used at any time, and
the residence addresses for the past two (2) years, the home telephone
number, date and place of birth, social security number, and any stage names
or nicknames used in entertaining.



   (2)   The name and address of the adult establishment where the
applicant intends to work as an entertainer.



   (3)   A statement from the applicant, that the applicant has not
been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted
from prosecution on:



   (a)   A felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately
preceding the application, or



   (b)   A misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately
preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act
involving sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual
abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the laws of
the State of North Carolina or any other comparable violation of the laws of
this state or the laws of any other state.



   (4)   Photographs shall be taken of the applicant by the Marion
Police Department. The police department shall have the photographs processed
and retain the copies.



   (5)   All applicants shall submit to fingerprinting by the Marion
Police Department. The fingerprint cards shall be submitted to the S.B.I. for
processing. Returned fingerprint cards and criminal histories shall be kept
on file in the Marion Police Department.



   (6)   The applicant shall present to the city clerk for copying
documentation that the applicant has attained the age of twenty-one (21)
years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be
accepted as documentation of age:



   a.   A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing
the applicant's photograph and date of birth;



   b.   A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth;



   c.   An official and valid passport issued by the United States of
America;



   d.   An immigration card issued by the United States of America;



   e.   Any other form of picture identification issued by a
governmental entity that is deemed reliable by the city clerk; or



   f.   Any other form of identification deemed reliable by the city
clerk.



   (7)   A statement signed under oath that the applicant consents to
investigation of his/her background by the city to include fingerprinting and
that the applicant agrees to furnish within ten days at his/her expense, a
criminal history from the clerk of court of any county in which the applicant
has resided during the five (5) preceding years. Failure to provide the
information required by this subsection shall constitute an incomplete
application and it shall not be processed until complete.



   (c)    Application processing. Upon receipt of a complete
application for an adult establishment license or for an entertainer
licenses, the city clerk shall immediately commence investigation of the
application as follows:



   (1)   In the case of an application for a license for an adult
establishment, the city clerk shall:



   a.   Transmit a copy of the application to the code enforcement
officer, the board of adjustment and to the Marion Police Department.



   b.   The city clerk, no later than fifteen (15) working days after
the receipt of the application, shall determine whether or not a proposed
adult establishment complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance
regarding location of the adult establishment, building, fire, health, or
similar State or local codes. In the event that the city clerk fails to make
such a determination within the prescribed time period, the city clerk shall
proceed with processing the application.



   c.   The board of adjustment shall review the application to confirm
compliance with the zoning ordinance. If the board confirms compliance then a
special exception shall be granted and the findings transmitted to the city
clerk within twenty (20) working days of receipt of the application.



   d.   The police department shall report to the city clerk no later
than twenty (20) working days after the receipt of the application by the
police department the results of its investigation of the applicant. In the
event that the police department fails to report to the city clerk within
this time period, the city clerk shall proceed with processing the
application.



   e.   Upon completion of his/her investigation, payment of the
applicable license fee, and upon receipt of the report of the board of zoning
adjustment and the police department (or upon expiration of the time periods
referenced above without receiving a report), the city clerk shall determine
whether or not a license shall be issued. In no event shall the time period
for determination by the city clerk exceed forty-five (45) working days from
the date the application is received by the city clerk, unless consented to
by the applicant.



   (2)   In the case of an application for a license for an
entertainer, the city clerk shall:



   a.   Transmit a copy of the application to the Marion Police
Department.



   b.   The police department shall report to the city clerk no later
than twenty (20) working days after receipt of the application the results of
its investigation of the applicant. In the event that the police department
fails to report to the city clerk within this time period, the city clerk
shall proceed with processing the application.



   c.   Upon completion of his/her investigation, payment of the
appropriate license fee, and upon receipt of the report of the police
department (or upon expiration of either or both time periods referenced
above without receiving a report), the city clerk shall determine whether or
not a license shall be issued. In no event shall the time period for
determination by the city clerk exceed sixty (60) days from the date the
application is received by the city clerk, unless consented to by the
applicant.



   (d)    Reasons for disapproval. The city clerk shall deny the
license application for one or more of the following reasons:



   (1)   The license application is incomplete so as to not contain all
information required by this article.



   (2)   The applicant (including any partners, corporate officers,
directors, and shareholders where applicable), has been convicted of a crime
in the local, state or federal court systems for any violations listed in
this section.



   (3)   The applicant (including any partners, corporate officers and
directors, where applicable), has made false or fraudulent statements in the
application, evidence of which is disclosed by a city background
investigation or by any other lawful means.



   (4)   The application for an adult establishment does not meet the
requirements of this article.



   (5)   The applicant for a sexually oriented business has not
received special exception from the zoning board of adjustment.



   (e)    Notice of approval or disapproval.



   (1)   Upon a determination by the city clerk of the disapproval or
approval of the application, the city clerk shall notify the applicant by
personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address
of the applicant as shown on the application. In the event that the
application is disapproved, the notification shall state the basis for such
disapproval.



   (2)   In the event an application is disapproved, the applicant
shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice of disapproval to
appeal that determination to the Superior Court of McDowell County.



   (f)    Changes to application. All applicants shall notify the city
clerk of any changes to the application within five (5) working days of the
date the change occurs.



of 7-18-00, § 4)



Sec. 4.5-30. Prohibited acts and conduct.



   (a)    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be
permitted on the premises of any adult establishment.



   (b)    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be
granted a license for an adult establishment business or as an entertainer.



   (c)    No owner, operator, manager, employee or entertainer, nor any
customer or patron, shall appear "bottomless" or in a state of nudity while
on the premises of the adult establishment.



   (d)    No owner, operator, manager, employee or entertainer, nor any
customer or patron, shall perform any specified sexual activities as defined
in this article, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which
simulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate
objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities, as
defined in this article, or participate in any act of prostitution while on
the premises of the adult establishment.



   (e)    No owner, operator, manager, employee, entertainer, customer
or patron of an adult establishment shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress
any specified anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another
person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of his or
hers, whether such specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered
or exposed, while on the premises of the adult establishment.



   (f)    There shall be a minimum separation of twenty-four (24)
inches between any entertainer or performer and any patron or customer.



   (g)    No owner,operator, manager or employee shall mix, dispense,
or serve any alcoholic beverage while in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.



   (h)    No owner, operator, manager or employee shall solicit,
receive, or accept nor shall any customer, or patron give, offer, or provide
any gratuity, tip, payment or any other form of compensation for
entertainment for or while either or both is/are in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity. This also pertains to the purchase of an unrelated item that
includes a "free" dance, act, or service.



   (i)    No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the
premises of an adult entertainment premises shall knowingly allow or permit
any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to be in or upon the
premises or knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article.



of 7-18-00, § 4)



Sec. 4.5-31. License; posting and display.



   (a)    Every person, corporation or partnership licensed under this
article as an adult establishment shall post such license in a conspicuous
place and manner of the adult establishment premises.



   (b)    Every person holding a license as an entertainer shall post
his or her license in his or her work area on the adult establishment
premises so it shall be readily available for the inspection by city
authorities responsible for enforcement of this article.



of 7-18-00, § 6)



Sec. 4.5-32. Inspections.



   All adult establishments shall permit representatives of the mayor and
city council, the Marion Police Department, the McDowell County Sheriff's
Department, and all city or state departments or agencies acting in their
official capacity, to inspect the premises as necessary to ensure that the
business is complying with all applicable regulations and laws.



of 7-18-00, § 7)



Sec. 4.5-33. Suspension of revocation of licenses.



   (a)    The city clerk shall conduct a hearing to determine whether
or not a license should be suspended or revoked, with the hearing conducted
within ten (10) working days of his/her knowledge that:



   (1)   The owner or operator of an adult establishment or the holder
of a license as an entertainer has violated, or knowingly allowed or
permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this article; or



   (2)   There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this
article that have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or
operator of an adult establishment knew or should have known that such
violations were committed; or



   (3)   The license was obtained through false statements in the
application for such license, or renewal thereof; or



   (4)   The license has been materially altered or defaced or is being
or was used by a person other than the license holder or at a location other
than that identified on the license or for a use or type other than that for
which the license was issued; or



   (5)   The licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all
information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or



   (6)   The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate
officer or director holding an adult establishment license has become
disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this
article; or



   (7)   The holder of an entertainer license has become disqualified
from having a license by a conviction as provided in this article.



   (b)    At the hearing, the licensee shall have an opportunity to be
heard, to present evidence and to be represented by an attorney. Based on the
evidence produced at the hearing, the city clerk shall take, within five (5)
working days after the hearing, any of the following actions:



   (1)   Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days; or



   (2)   Revoke the license; or



   (3)   Place the license holder on administrative probation or a
period of up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of
this article occur during the period of probation; or



   (4)   Take no action.



   (c)    The city clerk shall provide written notice of his/her
decision to the applicant by certified mail, returned receipt requested. The
notice shall be sent immediately after the city clerk determines what action
to take, as described above.



   (d)    In the event of suspension or revocation of the license or
the placement on administrative probation, the licensee shall have the right
to appeal that determination to the Superior Court of McDowell County within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of suspension, revocation or
probation.



of 7-18-00, § 8)



Sec. 4.5-34. License renewal.



   (a)    A license may be renewed by making application to the city
clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Any license issued
under this article shall expire as of the end of the 12-month period from the
date of its issuance, and renewal applications for such licenses shall be
submitted no sooner than forty-five (45) days prior to expiration and no
later than the city business day immediately preceding the date of expiration
of the license.



   (b)    Upon timely and proper application for renewal and the
payment in full of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue to the
applicant a receipt showing the date of the renewal application and granting
to the applicant a temporary extension of the license for a period of
forty-five (45) days or until the application for renewal is approved or
disapproved. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be
renewed by issuance of a new license for an additional 12-month period. All
applications for renewal of license shall be processed in the manner provided
for the issuance of the initial license.



of 7-18-00, § 9)



Sec. 4.5-35. Transfer of license.



   A licensee shall not transfer his/ her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



of 7-18-00, § 10)



Sec. 4.5-36. Locational restrictions.



   Sexually oriented businesses may be permitted as a special exception in
the following zoning districts: C-1 central business district and C-2 general
business district provided that:



   (a)   The sexually oriented business may not be located or operated
within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of:



   (1)   A church, synagogue, or regular place of worship;



   (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;



   (3)   A public library;



   (4)   A public park or playground;



   (5)   A licensed child-care facility;



   (6)   A licensed group-home facility;



   (7)   An entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards
children;



   (8)   Another sexually oriented business.



   (b)   For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of any use listed in (a) above.



of 7-18-00, § 11; Ord. O-06-01-17-3, § 2, 01-17-06)



Sec. 4.5-37. Non-conforming uses.



   (a)    Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article derives that is in violation of the
locational or structural configuration requirements of this article shall be
deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to
continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner terminated
for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days
or more. Such non-conforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended
or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2)
or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business that was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the
later-established business is non-conforming.



   (b)    A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license.
This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid business license, and
does not apply when an application for a business license is submitted after
a business license has expired or has been revoked.



of 7-18-00, § 12)



Sec. 4.5-38. Additional regulations for adult motels.



   (a)    Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the enterprise is an adult motel as that term is defined in
this article.



   (b)    It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does
not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or sub-rents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented,
he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.



   (c)    For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms
"rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any
form of consideration.



of 7-18-00, § 13)



Sec. 4.5-39. Additional regulations for escort agencies.



   (a)    An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years.



   (b)    A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort
or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years.



of 7-18-00, § 14)



Sec. 4.5-40. Additional regulations for nude model studios.



   (a)    A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years.



   (b)    A person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is in
violation of this article if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of
nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to
prosecution under this subsection if the person under twenty-one (21) years
was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person.



   (c)    It is a violation of this article if the person appears in a
state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity
in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the
public right-of-way.



   (d)    A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.



of 7-18-00, § 15)



Sec. 4.5-41. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films,
videos, and live performances.



   (a)    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises
in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor
space, a film, video cassette, other video reproduction, or live performance
that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:



   (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously
posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designed street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The
city clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



   (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.



   (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the city clerk or his
designee.



   (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to
ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



   (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the
entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designed, then
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there
is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.



   (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by
any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times
and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in
the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.



   (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at
any time.



   (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 foot-candle as
measured at the floor level.



   (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present in the premises.



   (10)   No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



   (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any
kind between viewing booths or rooms.



   (12)   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, during
each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine
if any openings or holes exist.



   (13)   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause
all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



   (14)   The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause
all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed
of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood,
plywood, composition board or other composition board or other porous
material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the floor.



   (b)    A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14) of
this section is in violation of this article if he/she knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty.



of 7-18-00, § 16)



Sec. 4.5-42. Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually
oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment
to be visible from a point outside the establishment.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually
oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented
business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to
the extent permitted by the provisions of the ordinance.



   (c)    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually
oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be
painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall
not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:



   (1)   The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center;
and



   (2)   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the
commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the
business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a
way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of
the commercial multi-unit center.



   (d)    Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the
painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented
business.



   (e)    A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute
a violation of this article.



of 7-18-00, § 17)



Sec. 4.5-43. Signage.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or
maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than as permitted
in the zoning ordinance for the City of Marion.



   (b)    Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only
the name of the enterprise.



of 7-18-00, § 18)



Sec. 4.5-44. Massages or baths administered by a person of the opposite sex.



   It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether in a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon,
massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with
the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex.
Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.



of 7-18-00, § 19)



Sec. 4.5-45. Hours of operation.



   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00 a.m.) and ten o'clock
(10:00 a.m.) on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00 a.m.) and
twelve o'clock (12:00 p.m.) on Sundays.



of 7-18-00, § 20)



Sec. 4.5-46. Exemptions.



   It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



   (1)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of North
Carolina, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



   (2)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.



of 7-18-00, § 21)



Sec. 4.5-47. Notices.



   (a)    Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city
clerk or any other city office, division, department or other agency under
this article to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented
business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United
States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most
recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice
of address change that has been received by the city clerk. Notices mailed as
above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In
the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service,
the city clerk or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal
entrance to the establishment.



   (b)    Any notice required or permitted to be given to the city
clerk by any person under this article shall not be deemed given until and
unless it is received in the office of the city clerk.



   (c)    It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the
license application and each operator to furnish notice to the city clerk in
writing of any change of residence or mailing address.



of 7-18-00, § 22)



Sec. 4.5-48. Reserved.



   Editors Note: 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted Jan. 15,
2008, deleted § 4.5-48, which pertained to injunctions and derived from §
23 of an ordinance adopted July 18, 2000. 



Chapter 5
CEMETERIES*



__________



*   Cross References: Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
Ch. 15; zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: cemeteries, G.S. § 65-37 et seq.; North Carolina
Cemetery Act, G.S. § 65-46 et seq.; authority to establish and operate
cemeteries, G.S. § 160A-341; regulation of city cemeteries, G.S. § 160A-348.



__________



Sec. 5-1. Permit for disinterment.



   No person shall disinter the remains of any human body, without first
having obtained written permission from the city clerk and thereafter
proceeding in accordance with the provisions of G.S. section 65-13 et seq.



(Code 1982, § 4-3001)



   State Law References: of graves, G.S. § 65-13; exhumations, G.S. §
130A-390.



Sec. 5-2. Depth of graves.



   All graves over four and one-half (4 1/2) feet in length shall have a
depth of at least six (6) feet.



(Code 1982, § 4-3002)



Sec. 5-3. Reopening graves for interment of additional bodies.



   No grave shall be reopened for the interment of an additional body,
except in accordance with Section 5-12 of this Chapter.



(Ord. No. O-15-10-06-5, § 2, passed 10-6-15)



Sec. 5-4. Memorial plantings.



   In memory of persons buried at Oak Grove Cemetery, friends and
relatives of the deceased may have the opportunity to place a memorial
planting on the grounds of the cemetery, as long as the following guidelines
are met:



   (1)   The planting desired by the sponsoring individual or group
must receive prior approval from city officials as to species of tree and
location and date for the planting.



   (2)   All costs for the tree and its planting are the responsibility
of the sponsor. Whether the sponsor or city personnel plants the tree shall
be at the discretion of city officials.



   (3)   The sponsor, through signing this form, releases the city and
its employees from any responsibility for upkeep and survival of the memorial
planting, including watering, trimming, fertilizing, and weeding.



   (4)   If, in the opinion of city officials, the memorial tree needs
to be relocated or cut down for any reason, such action may be taken by the
city without notice to the sponsor. If the tree is cut down, the sponsor may
have the option of requesting another planting under the same terms as
specified in this form.



   (5)   A plaque, engraved marker, or other recognition of the
deceased which the sponsor may desire to have placed at the planting site
must be approved by city officials. Such markers may not exceed six (6)
inches by twelve (12) inches or seventy-two (72) square inches, must not
protrude above ground level, and should be made of metal, rock, or other
equally durable material.



of 11-22-88)



Sec. 5-5. Night visits prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any cemetery at any time
between sunset and sunrise for any purpose without written consent from the
city manager.



Sec. 5-6. Damaging graves and related items; trespassing prohibited.



   (a)    No person shall disturb any grave, or deface, pull up or
remove any grave markers or ornamentation, or any paling or wall around a
grave or remove any plank, post or timbers in a graveyard, except by order of
or with the permission of the person in charge of such graveyard, or that of
the owner of such grave.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on the burial
lots in Oak Grove Cemetery, throw stones, break the flowers or shrubbery on
such lots, or take away or molest in any manner the flowers or ornaments
placed upon the graves or upon the lots, or in any way commit any depredation
or damage.



(Code 1982, §§ 4-3004--4-3005)



   State Law References: or desecrating grave sites, G.S. § 14-148;
desecrating, plowing over or covering up graves, G.S. § 14-149; removal of
graves, G.S. § 65-13.



Sec. 5-7. Sale of merchandise prohibited.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any article of merchandise or
any fruit, drink, or beverage, or any other thing of value within the limits
of the cemetery.



(Code 1982, § 4-3006)



Sec. 5-8. Playing.



   No person shall use any part of any cemetery as a playground.



(Code 1982, § 4-3007)



Sec. 5-9. Permission of city clerk required.



   No person shall do any work of any kind on any cemetery lot belonging
to any other person, without first notifying the city clerk thereof and
presenting to him a written order from the owner of such lot.



(Code 1982, § 4-3009)



Sec. 5-10. Plan not to be disturbed.



   No person authorized to do the work mentioned in the preceding section
shall do the same in such manner as to interfere with the walks, decoration
or general arrangement of such cemetery, except with the permission of the
city clerk.



(Code 1982, § 4-3010)



Sec. 5-11. Driving over walks prohibited.



   No person shall drive any vehicle over any walks of a cemetery, or
allow such vehicle to stand thereon.



(Code 1982, § 4-3011)



Sec. 5-12. General rules for Oak Grove Cemetery.



   The following general rules shall apply within Oak Grove Cemetery and
shall be enforced by the city manager or his designee:



   (a)   No interment of any body, or the cremated remains of any body,
other than that of a human being, shall be permitted in the Oak Grove
Cemetery.



   (b)   Floral  arrangements  for  mausoleum  vaults  or 
columbarium  units  are permitted only in approved memorial vases. The city
reserves the right to remove any floral arrangements, as well as items which
the city manager or his  designee  deems  to  detract  from  the 
unifonn  appearance  of  the mausoleum or columbarium.



   (c)   Payment  of any and  all indebtedness  due  the City of
Marion  from  the purchase of a mausoleum vault, columbarium niche, or
gravesite must be received in full before interment will be allowed.



   (d)   Remains  that are not cremated must be in a suitable casket
and of such sufficient durable construction as approved by the funeral
director.



   (e)   The City of Marion  shall in no way be held liable for any
delay in the disposition of a body, or for delay in the fulfillment of any of
its contract or legal obligations, including but not limited to maintenance,
care, memorial work  or  construction,  which  may  arise  from 
causes  beyond  the  city's reasonable  control  and especially  from
delays  caused  by the elements,  an act  of  God,  equipment 
breakdown,  common  enemy,  thieves,  vandals, malicious  mischief 
makers,  explosions,  unavoidable accidents,  invasions, insurrections, or
order of any military or civil authority.



   (f)   The  city does  not provide  and is not responsible for
temporary  storage  of caskets or urns.



   (g)   All  funerals  and  burials  shall  be under  the
direction  of the public  works director  or designee upon entering the
city cemetery.



   (h)   No more than one (1) body or cremated remains of a body may be
placed in any single gravesite,  mausoleum vault, or columbarium niche, with
the following exceptions:



      1.   Where a single family owns a block of four (4) or more
contiguous gravesites, in which case one (1) additional gravesite may be
permitted only if physical space exists within the bounds of the family owned
block to allow an additional gravesite. Such additional gravesite shall not
be allowed to extend into any walkway or common area of the cemetery.



      2.   Up to two (2) cremated remains of bodies may be placed in
one (1) single gravesite, if physical space exists within the bounds of said
gravesite to allow for two (2) sets of cremated remains. In such a case, only
one marker shall be permitted per gravesite.



      3.   If a single gravesite already contains a casket, one (1)
additional cremated remains of a body may also be buried in said gravesite,
if physical space exists within the gravesite to allow for the burial of the
cremated remains. In such a case, only one marker shall be permitted per
gravesite.



      4.   Up to two (2) cremated remains of bodies may be placed in
one (1) single mausoleum vault, if physical space exists within said vault to
allow the placement of two (2) sets of cremated remains. In such a case, only
one marker shall be permitted per mausoleum vault.



      5.   If a mausoleum vault already contains a casket, one (1)
additional cremated remains of a body may also be placed in said vault, if
physical space exists within the vault to allow for the placement of the
cremated remains. In such a case, only one marker shall be permitted per
mausoleum vault.



   (i)   The cost of a mausoleum vault or columbarium niche does not
include any cost for a plaque. After payment for the plaque is made, in the
amount set by city council, the city will approve, order and install the
appropriate plaque at the request of family.



   (j)   The city is not responsible for any unauthorized cremated
remains or ashes deposited on the grounds of the city cemetery.



   (k)   The opening and closing of a mausoleum vault or columbarium
niche to place or remove a body or the cremated remains of a body shall be
performed only by city personnel after payment of a predetermined charge, as
set by city council. Such charge must also be paid for the opening and
closing of a mausoleum vault for the placement of a second set of cremated
remains.



   (l)   No body shall be placed in any mausoleum vault unless it has
been embalmed.



   (m)   Vaults or concrete boxes must be installed for burials in a
gravesite, to help prevent graves from sinking.



   (n)   Cremated remains to be placed in a gravesite, mausoleum vault
or columbarium niche must be in an approved container designed for the sole
purpose of holding human ashes.



(Ord. No. O-15-10-06-5, § 3, passed 10-6-15)



Chapter 6
CIVIL EMERGENCIES*



__________



*   Cross References: prevention and protection, Ch. 7; flood hazard
management, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 14.



   State Law References: of municipalities to enact ordinances to deal
with states of emergency, G.S. § 14-288.12; local emergency authorizations,
G.S. § 166A-8.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 6-1--6-25



   Art. II. State of Emergency, §§ 6-26--6-28



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Secs. 6-1--6-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
STATE OF EMERGENCY



Sec. 6-26. Definition; mayor's powers.



   (a)    A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever,
during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or
similar public emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities
are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives
or property.



   (b)    In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
city, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the mayor is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to
all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives and property of people within the city, to
place in effect any or all of the restrictions authorized in this section.



   (c)    The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to:



   (1)   Limit by the proclamation the application of all or any part
of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within
the corporate limits of the city and to specific hours of the day or night;
and



   (2)   Exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law
enforcement officers, firemen and other public employees, doctors, nurses,
employees of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty military
personnel whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities,
public transportation companies, newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and
television broadcasting corporations operated for profit, and such other
classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order
and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of
the people within the city.



   (d)    The mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency
or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances
warrant or when directed to do so by the city council.



   (e)    During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the
mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:



   (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of
explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind, and
prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;



   (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one's own premises;



   (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil,
or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon
any public property;



   (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;



   (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or
roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of
medical assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain
the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;



   (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of
any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly.



   (f)    Any proclamation may be extended, altered, or repealed in any
particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of
emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.



   (g)    During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it
shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction
imposed by any proclamation authorized by this section.



(Code 1982, § 3-3001)



   Cross References: § 2-66 et seq.



Sec. 6-27. Form and content of emergency proclamations.



   The proclamation for the declaration of a state of emergency and the
imposition of specific prohibitions and restrictions shall take substantially
the following form.



"WHEREAS, The governing body of the ________ of ________, has duly adopted an
ordinance authorizing the Mayor to determine and proclaim the existence of a
state of emergency and to impose various restrictions after he determines
that such restrictions are necessary as a response to an emergency.



"NOW THEREFORE, I, ________, Mayor of the ________ of ________ proclaim that:



   I.



"An emergency exists, and restrictions set forth in this proclamation are
necessary in order to maintain an acceptable level of public order, services,
and protection of lives, safety, and property during this emergency.



   II.



   Editors Note: proclamation may specify any one or more of the following
restrictions which are presented herein as options.



"I proclaim the following restrictions:



   A.    No person shall be a part of any assembly of three or more
persons in the area bounded by the Corporate limits of ________, ________.



   B.    Possession, consumption, and transfer of intoxicating liquor.



1. No person shall possess or consume any intoxicating liquor, including beer
and wine, other than on his premises.



2. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any intoxicating liquor,
including beer and wine.



   C.    Curfew.



   1.    No person not exempted by this proclamation shall appear in
public in the geographic area described in this proclamation between the
hours of ________ p.m. and midnight or between the hours of midnight and
________ a.m. of any day until I remove this curfew by proclamation.



   2.    This curfew shall apply to the area bounded by ________.



   3.    I find it necessary to the preservation of the public health,
safety, and welfare to exempt from these curfew restrictions the following
classes of people in the circumstances indicated:



   (a)    (Those whose appearance is essential in order to obtain or
furnish a service or commodity which is immediately necessary to sustain the
health or well-being of themselves or of someone within curfew area.)



   (b)    (Those whose appearance necessarily occurs in the process of
leaving a place at which they were temporarily engaged and from which they
could not reasonably have planned their departure so as to avoid appearing
during the period during which the curfew was applicable.)



   (c)    ________



   (d)    ________



   D.    Possession and transfer of dangerous weapons or substances.



   1.    No person shall possess any dangerous weapons or substances
unless they remain in a place of storage on his premises, or, if they cannot
be readily stored on his premises, unless they remain in a customary place of
storage not readily available to the possessor. No person may transport or
sell or otherwise transfer any dangerous weapons or substances.



   2.    I find it necessary to the prevention of the public health,
safety, and welfare to exempt from these restrictions the following classes
of people in the circumstances indicated:



   Police officers may possess any weapon necessary to carry out their
duties when on active duty.



   Anyone may possess gasoline when the gasoline is in the tank of a car
in his possession.



________ may transfer ________ when ________



   E.    Access for restricted areas.



   1.    I direct the Chief of Police and his subordinates to restrict
or deny access to any area, location, or street where such a restriction is
necessary in order to help overcome this emergency or to prevent the
emergency from worsening. These restrictions on access shall be indicated by
means of barricades, posted notices, or orders to anyone in the area.



   2.    No person shall obtain access or attempt to obtain access to
any area, location, or street to which the Chief of Police and his
subordinates have restricted access according to the directions I have just
given to them.



   III.



"Anyone violating any restriction imposed by this proclamation or under its
authority violates a City ordinance and is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   IV.



"This proclamation shall take effect immediately.

 

 


 
Hour and Date


 


 
Mayor


SEAL OF THE CITY"
 



 



(Code 1982, § 3-3002)



Sec. 6-28. Reserved.



   Editors Note: 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted Jan. 15,
2008, deleted § 6-28, which pertained to penalties for violations and
derived from the 1982 Code.



Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*



__________



*   Cross References: Burning permit required,  9-39; discharge of
fireworks prohibited,  11-8; fire lanes,  18-39.



   State Law References: Fire protection, G.S.  69-1 et seq., 160A-291 et
seq.



__________



Art. I. In General,  7-1--7-35



Art. II. Fire Prevention Code,  7-36--7-55



Art. III. Blasting and Pyrotechnics,  7-56--7-61



ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL



Sec. 7-1. Primary fire limits established.



   The primary fire limits of the city are established and defined as
follows:



   Beginning at the corner of Logan and Fort Streets, running with Fort
Street to Garden Street, with Garden Street to State Street, State Street to
and across Main Street to Morgan Street, Morgan Street across Railroad and up
Depot Street to Henderson Street, Henderson Street to Logan Street, Logan
Street to beginning.



   State Law References: Establishment of fire limits, G.S.  160A-435.



Sec. 7-2. Chief of the fire department.



   Subject to the Charter, the chief of the fire department shall have
general control of the fire department, the personnel, apparatus and fire
alarm system.



(Code 1982,  3-2001) (Ord. O-10-06-15-5,  1, 6-15-10)



   Cross References: Officers and employees,  2-51 et seq.



Sec. 7-3. Assistant chief.



   In the absence of the chief of the fire department or if he is
prevented from attending to his duties by sickness or otherwise, the
assistant chief shall perform all duties required of the chief and shall be
clothed with the same authority as the chief.



(Code 1982,  3-2002)



   Cross References: Officers and employees,  2-51 et seq.



Sec. 7-4. Duties of fire chief.



   Where not otherwise prescribed, the duties of the fire chief shall be
to preserve and care for fire apparatus, have charge of fighting and
extinguishing fires and training the fire department, seek out and have
corrected all places and conditions dangerous to the safety of the city and
its citizens from fire, and make annual reports to the council concerning
these duties.



(Code 1982,  3-2003)



   State Law References: Duties of fire chief, G.S.  160A-292.



Sec. 7-5. Investigation of fires; submission of fire report.



   (a)    The state attorney general, through the state bureau of
investigation, and the chief of the fire department, are hereby authorized to
investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in
the city in which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall specially
make investigation whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design.
A preliminary investigation shall be made by the chief of the fire department
and must be begun within three (3) days, exclusive of Sunday, of the
occurrence of the fire, and the attorney general, through the state bureau of
investigation, shall have the right to supervise and direct the investigation
when he deems it expedient or necessary.



   (b)    The chief of the fire department shall forthwith notify the
attorney general, and must within one (1) week of the occurrence of the fire
furnish to the attorney general a written statement of all facts relating to
the cause and origin of the fire, the kind, value and ownership of the
property destroyed, and such other information as is called for by the forms
provided by the attorney general.



(Code 1982,  3-2004)



   State Law References: Investigation of fires and inspection of
premises, G.S.  69-1 et seq.



Sec. 7-6. Record of fires to be kept.



   The chief of the fire department shall maintain a file with copies of
all written statements of facts on the forms required to be submitted to the
attorney general as specified in section 7-5.



(Code 1982,  3-2005)



Sec. 7-7. Inspection to be made upon complaint.



   Whenever any person shall make written complaint to the chief of the
fire department that any business or premises constitutes a fire hazard, it
shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to have such business
or premises inspected immediately.



(Code 1982,  3-2006)



Sec. 7-8. Chief to order fire hazards remedied.



   Whenever the chief of the fire department shall find that any building
or premises constitutes a fire hazard for any reason, he shall serve upon the
owner and the occupant of such building a written notice specifying the
condition complained of, ordering the same to be remedied promptly, and
indicating a reasonable time for the compliance with such order.



(Code 1982,  3-2007)



Sec. 7-9. Service of order.



   The service of the order to remedy a defect may be made upon the
occupant of the premises, either by delivering a copy of the order to the
occupant personally or by delivering the same to any person in charge of the
premises or, in case no person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy
of the order in a conspicuous place to the entrance of the premises. If the
owner of the premises is some person other than the occupant thereof, service
of notice may be made by delivering a copy of it to the owner personally or
by mailing the copy to his last known address. If the occupant or owner is a
partnership, service upon any partner shall be sufficient or, if a
corporation, upon any official or local agent thereof.



(Code 1982,  3-2008)



Sec. 7-10. Failure to comply with order unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply within a reasonable time after
the service of such order with the requirements thereof.



(Code 1982,  3-2009)



Sec. 7-11. Right to enter a building or premises.



   The chief of the fire department or any member of the fire department
when so directed by the chief of the fire department shall have the right to
enter any building or premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of
making any inspection provided for by this chapter.



(Code 1982,  3-2010)



Sec. 7-12. Fire department official may call on citizens to assist in
extinguishing fires and protecting property.



   During the continuance of any fire, the chief of the fire department
and each of the captains of the fire department shall have the power to call
on any and all citizens to assist in extinguishing such fire, or in removing
any goods, wares, merchandise or furniture from any building on fire or in
danger to some place of safety. No person shall fail to obey any such order
given for the purpose specified in this section.



(Code 1982,  3-2011)



Sec. 7-13. Interference with fire department prohibited.



   No person shall be in any street, alley or square near where a fire is
in progress, in such a way as to interfere with the activities of the fire
department.



(Code 1982,  3-2012)



   State Law References: Authority of firemen; penalty for willful
interference with firemen, G.S.  69-39.



Sec. 7-14. Interference with firemen or fire apparatus prohibited.



   No person shall interfere with a fireman in the discharge of his duty,
nor shall any person, other than a member of the fire department, loiter
about any fire station or change, handle or meddle in any manner with any
fire engine or other fire apparatus.



(Code 1982,  3-2013)



   State Law References: Approach of police, fire department or rescue
squad vehicles or ambulances; driving over fire hose or blocking firefighting
equipment; parking, etc., near police, fire department or rescue squad
vehicle or ambulance, G.S.  20-157.



Sec. 7-15. Riding on fire truck prohibited.



   No person other than a bona fide member of the fire department shall
mount any fire engine, wagon or apparatus while on its way to or from a fire,
or at any other time, unless by permission of the driver or officer in
command of such engine, wagon or other apparatus.



(Code 1982,  3-2014)



   Cross References: Traffic, Ch. 18.



Sec. 7-16. Interfering with fire alarm apparatus prohibited.



   No person shall interfere or tamper with the fire alarm system or
injure the poles, wires, boxes or other apparatus connected therewith.



(Code 1982,  3-2015)



   State Law References: Molesting fire alarm system, G.S.  14-286.



Sec. 7-17. Giving false fire alarm unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly and willfully give or
cause to be given, or to advise, counsel, or aid and abet anyone in giving, a
false alarm of fire, or to break the glass key protector, or to pull the
slide, arm, or lever of any station or signal box of any fire alarm system,
except in case of fire.



(Code 1982,  3-2016)



   State Law References: Giving false fire alarms, G.S.  14-286.



Sec. 7-18. Unlawful to pass fire truck.



   It shall be unlawful for any automobile or truck to overtake a fire
truck while such fire truck is answering a fire alarm.



(Code 1982,  3-2017)



   Cross References: Traffic, Ch. 18.



Sec. 7-19. Protection of fire hose.



   It shall be unlawful to drive any automobile or other vehicle, however
propelled, over any hose connected with the water line and in use by the city
or the fire department for any purpose.



(Code 1982,  3-2018)



   State Law References: Driving over fire hose, G.S.  20-257.



Sec. 7-20. Fire inspections--Schedule.



   In order to preserve and protect public health and safety, and to
satisfy the requirements of G.S. 153A-364 and G.S. 160A-124, and assuming
inspection duties, as set out in G.S. 153A-351 and G.S. 160-411, the
following fire inspection schedule is hereby established:



   Once every year. Hazardous, institutional, high-rise, assembly and
residential, except one- and two-family dwellings and only interior common
areas of dwelling units of multifamily occupancies.



   Once every two years. Educational (except public schools) and
industrial.



   Once every three years. Business, mercantile storage, churches and
synagogues.



   The fire department will not inspect facilities outside the city limits.



(Ord. of 11-2-93,  1)



   Editors Note: An ordinance of Nov. 2, 1993, purported to amend the Code
by the inclusion of new provisions pertaining to fire inspections, to be
designated as  7-50 and 7-51. For purposes of classification, such
provisions have been redesignated as  7-20 and 7-21, at the discretion of
the editor.



Sec. 7-21. Same--Fees.



   (a)    There will be no charge for required fire inspections as
listed in section 7-20; however, there will be a charge for re-inspections
for serious violations and for requested inspections more frequently than
required.



   (b)    The schedule for fire inspection fees as set from time to
time by the council shall be kept current and maintained in the office of the
clerk.



(Ord. of 11-2-93,  1)



   *Note: See editor's note following  7-20.



Secs. 7-22--7-35. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
FIRE PREVENTION CODE



Sec. 7-36. Adoption of fire prevention code.



   There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code
recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the
1976 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as
are deleted, modified or amended by this article, of which code not less than
three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the clerk of
the city. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length in this article, and from the date of adoption of the ordinance
from which this section derives, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the city.



(Code 1982,  3-2021)



   State Law References: Authority to adopt technical codes by reference,
G.S.  160A-76(b).



Sec. 7-37. Enforcement.



   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire
department.



(Code 1982,  3-2022)



Sec. 7-38. Definition.



   Wherever the word municipality is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it
shall be held to mean the City of Marion.



(Code 1982,  3-2023)



   Cross References: Definitions and rules of construction generally, 
1-3.



Sec. 7-39. Establishment of limits of district in which storage of flammable
liquids, other explosives restricted.



   The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the code hereby adopted in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits
referred to in section 16.22a of the code hereby adopted in which storage of
Class I liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits
referred to in section 21.6a of the code hereby adopted, in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established as in
section 7-40.



(Code 1982,  3-2024)



Sec. 7-40. Key box system.



   (a)   A key box entry system is required in all new and existing
commercial and multi-tenant residential structures containing automatic
sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems.



   (b)   An authorization order form shall be obtained from the fire
department, which identifies the proper size, type, and placement of the key
box.



   (c)   The owner/tenant of the business is responsible for all entry
keys to be retained in the key box and to be current at all times.



   (d)   For existing commercial and multi-tenant residential
structures presently without a key box system but, otherwise containing an
automatic sprinkler system and or alarm system prior to the effective date of
the ordinance, a key box is not required.



   (e)   Response to the structure shall be provided by the owner or a
designated key holder within 15 minutes of the initial alarm for fire
department access. This shall be provided 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. If
this requirement cannot be met, conformance to the key box system designated
and described in this section shall apply.



(Ord. No. O-15-09-15-1, § 1, 9-15-15)



   Cross Reference: North Carolina Fire Code Section 506.1



Sec. 7-41. Amendments made in the fire prevention code.



   The Fire Prevention Code is amended and changed in the following
respects:



   (1)   Page 49, Section 12.5b--delete "The storage of explosives, and
blasting agents is prohibited within the limits established by laws as the
limits of the district in which such storage is to be prohibited, except
for:" Add "The storage of explosives, and blasting agents is prohibited
within the corporate limits of the City of Marion, except for:"



   (2)   Page 102, Section 16.22a.--delete "The storage -- to be
prohibited" Add a. "RESTRICTED LOCATIONS" The storage of Class I liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the primary fire
limits of the City of Marion.



   (3)   Page 204, Section 21.6a--delete "Within the limits  . . . 
water capacity;" Add "Within the established primary fire limits of the City
of Marion, the aggregate capacity of any one (1) installation shall not
exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons water capacity;"



(Code 1982, § 3-2025) (Ord. No. O-15-09-15-1, § 2, 9-15-15)



Secs. 7-42--7-55. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
BLASTING AND PYROTECHNICS*



__________



*   Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4.



   State Law References: Authority to regulate explosives, G.S.  160A-183.



__________



Sec. 7-56. Precautions to prevent damage by blasting; who may blast.



   Any person engaged in blasting shall take all necessary precautions to
make such blasting harmless to persons and property. None but an experienced
blaster, authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of section
7-57, shall directly superintend or carry on as a workman any blasting
operations in the city.



(Code 1982,  8-6001)



   State Law References: Explosive or incendiary device or material
defined, G.S.  14-50.1; exploding dynamite cartridges and bombs, G.S. 
14-283; regulation of sale of explosives, G.S.  14-284.1.



Sec. 7-57. Permit for blasting.



   Every permit for blasting shall be issued in the name of the contractor
who is to do the specified blasting. Every such permit shall show on the face
thereof the name of the foreman or other person authorized directly to
superintend the blasting operations covered by the permit, together with the
name of every person authorized to participate in such blasting operations. A
separate permit shall be required for the blasting incident to each separate
construction, excavation or other project. If, during the course of any
authorized blasting operation, any person named in the permit is for some
reason unable to continue his work under the permit, the chief of the fire
department may, upon application by the holder of the permit, substitute for
such person any other qualified person.



(Code 1982,  8-6002)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 7-58. Pyrotechnics defined; exceptions.



   The term "pyrotechnics" whenever used in this article shall be deemed
to be included and all kinds of fireworks and explosives, which are used for
exhibitions or amusement [purposes; provided, however, that nothing contained
in this] section shall prevent the manufacture, purchase, sale,
transportation, and use of explosives or signaling flares used in the course
of ordinary business or industry, or shells or cartridges used as ammunition
in firearms. This section shall not apply to the sale, use, or possession of
the following:



   (1)   Explosive caps designed to be fired in toy cap pistols,
provided that the explosive mixture of such explosive caps shall not exceed
twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a gram for each cap.



   (2)   Snake devices consisting of a tube or sphere containing a
pyrotechnic mixture that produces white or colored smoke.



   (3)   Smoke devices consisting of a tube or sphere containing a
pyrotechnic mixture that produces white or colored smoke.



   (4)   Trick noisemakers which produce a small report designed to
surprise the user and which include:



   a.   A party popper, which is a small plastic or paper item
containing not in excess of sixteen (16) milligrams of explosive mixture. A
string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite the device, expelling
paper streamers and producing a small report.



   b.   A string popper, which is a small tube containing not in excess
of sixteen (16) milligrams of explosive mixture with string protruding from
both ends. The strings are pulled to ignite the friction-sensitive mixture,
producing a small report.



   c.   A snapper or drop pop, which is a small, paper wrapped item
containing no more than sixteen (16) milligrams of explosive mixture coated
on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device produces a small report.



   (5)   Wire sparklers consisting of wire or stick coated with
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition. These items must not exceed one hundred (100) grams of mixture per
item.



   (6)   Other sparkling devices which emit showers of sparks and
sometimes a whistling or crackling effect when burning, do not detonate or
explode, do not spin, are hand-held or ground-based, cannot propel themselves
through the air, and contain not more than two hundred (200) grams if
multiple tubes are used.



(Code 1982,  8-6003; Ord. of 10-8-02  2)



   Cross References: Definitions and rules of construction generally, 
1-3.



   State Law References: Pyrotechnics defined; exceptions, G.S.  14-414.



Sec. 7-59. Possession and use of pyrotechnics.



   No person, without a permit therefor, as provided in section 7-61 shall
have in his possession, or cause to be fired, any pyrotechnics within the
city limits.



(Code 1982,  8-6005)



Sec. 7-60. Sale of pyrotechnics.



   No person shall sell at retail within the city any pyrotechnics, except
to a person holding a permit for a pyrotechnic display, issued under the
provisions of section 7-61, nor shall any person sell at wholesale any
pyrotechnics, to be resold in the city, except for an authorized pyrotechnic
display. This section shall not be construed to prevent the sale of
pyrotechnics by wholesale merchants, holding a permit therefor, to any
merchant whose place of business is outside the city.



(Code 1982,  8-6006)



Sec. 7-61. Permit for pyrotechnics.



   No person shall store, sell or use pyrotechnics without securing a
permit therefor. The chief of the fire department may, upon due application,
issue a permit to a properly qualified person for giving a display of
fireworks in the public parks or other places within the city. Such permit
shall impose such restrictions as may be necessary to properly safeguard life
and property.



(Code 1982,  8-6007)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



   State Law References: Manufacture, sale and use of pyrotechnics
prohibited; public exhibitions permitted; common carriers not affected,
G.S.  14-410.



Chapter 8
FLOOD HAZARD MANAGEMENT*



__________



*   Editors Note: Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2, adopted July 15, 2008, amended
ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 8 consisted of 
8-1--8-55, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances
adopted Oct. 29, 1987, Mar. 8, 1988, June 5, 1990; and Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,
adopted Jan. 15, 2008.



   Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; civil
emergencies, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 13; subdivisions, Ch. 16; zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: Assessments for flood protection, G.S. 
160A-238; municipal floodway regulations, G.S.  160A-458.1.



__________



Art. I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives, 
8-1--8-25



Art. II. General Provisions,  8-26--8-50



Art. III. Administration,  8-51--8-75



Art. IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction,  8-76--8-100



Art. V. Legal Status Provisions,  8-101, 8-102



ARTICLE I
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES



Sec. 8-1. Statutory authorization.



   Municipal: The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part
6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter
160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes,
delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   Therefore, the City Council of the City of Marion, North Carolina, does
ordain as follows.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1, 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-2. Findings of fact.



   (1)    The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of
Marion are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life,
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



   (2)    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in floodprone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
other hazards.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1, 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-3. Statement of purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to:



   (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



   (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;



   (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1, 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-4. Objectives.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (1)   Protect human life, safety, and health;



   (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (4)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;



   (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges) that are located in floodprone areas;



   (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of floodprone areas; and



   (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
special flood hazard area.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1, 7-15-08)



Secs. 8-5--8-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 8-26. Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure located
on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports
and storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay
sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may
not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



   Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in
the floor area or height of a building or structure.



   Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   Area of special flood hazard: See "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)".



   Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   Base flood elevation (BFE) means a determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a "special flood hazard area", it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other
source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
combined with the "freeboard", establishes the "regulatory flood protection
elevation".



   Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   Building: See "Structure".



   Chemical storage facility means a building, portion of a building, or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



   Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



   Disposal means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part
of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.



   Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



   Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill,
excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



   Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.



   Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the
special flood hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official
map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM).



   Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of
the special flood hazard areas have been defined as zone A.



   Flood insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the
National Flood Insurance Program.



   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.



   Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study
report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and
floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.



   Floodprone area: See "Floodplain."



   Flood zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary
map or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of
flooding in the area.



   Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.



   Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   Floodplain development permit means any type of permit that is required
in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement
of any development activity.



   Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one (1) foot.



   Freeboard means the height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood
elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the "regulatory flood
protection elevation".



   Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used
for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   Hazardous waste management facility means, as defined in G.S. 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.



   Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.



   Historic structure means any structure that is:



   (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



   (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



   (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program"; or



   (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a "Certified Local
Government (CLG) Program".



   Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department
of Cultural Resources through the state historic preservation officer as
having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
as amended in 1980.



   Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk
or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after
completion of the building.



   Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".



   Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.



   Market value means the building value, not including the land value and
that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market
value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost
depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value); or adjusted tax assessed values.



   Mean sea level means, for purposes of this chapter, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are
referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.



   New construction means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   Nonencroachment area means the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one (1) foot as designated in the flood insurance study report.



   Post-FIRM means construction or other development for which the "start
of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   Pre-FIRM means construction or other development for which the "start
of construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   Principally above ground means that at least fifty-one (51) percent of
the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.



   Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicle, which is:



   (a)   Built on a single chassis;



   (b)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



   (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck; and



   (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   Reference level is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of the lowest floor for structures within all special flood hazard
areas.



   Regulatory flood protection elevation means the "base flood elevation"
plus the "freeboard". In special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus
two (2) feet of freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has
been established, this elevation shall be at least two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade.



   Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development
into compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations,
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways
that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.



   Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



   Salvage yard means any nonresidential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



   Solid waste disposal facility means any facility involved in the
disposal of solid waste, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(35).



   Solid waste disposal site means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(36),
any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary
landfill, or any other method.



   Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain
subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given
year, as determined in article II, section 8-28 of this chapter.



   Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.



   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of
"substantial improvement". Substantial damage also means flood-related damage
sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on
the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.



   Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals
or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures,
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:



   (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or



   (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   Threat to public safety and/or nuisance means anything which is
injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or
any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay,
stream, canal, or basin.



   Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.



   Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in articles IV and V
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.



   Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
coastal or riverine areas.



   Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2, art. 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-27. Lands to which this chapter applies.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs) of the City of
Marion and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing
body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-28. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.



   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North
Carolina and FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying
flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), for McDowell County dated October 2, 2008,
which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



   The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date:



   McDowell County Unincorporated Area, dated July 15, 1988.



   City of Marion, dated October 20, 1987.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-29. Establishment of floodplain development permit.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with
the provisions of article II, section 8-28 of this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-30. Compliance.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-31. Abrogation and greater restrictions.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-32. Interpretation.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-33. Warning and disclaimer of liability.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Marion or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-34. Penalties for violation.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned for not more than
thirty (30) days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
City of Marion from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 3), 7-15-08)



Secs. 8-35--8-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATION



Sec. 8-51. Designation of floodplain administrator.



   The city manager or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
"floodplain administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 4), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-52. Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements.



   (1)    Application requirements. Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any
development activities located within special flood hazard areas. The
following items shall be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



   (a)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not
be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:



   (i)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area
of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility
systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage
facilities, and other development;



   (ii)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated
on the firm or other flood map as determined in article II, section 8-28, or
a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;



   (iii)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area
as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in article II,
section 8-28;



   (iv)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or nonencroachment area(s) as
determined in article II, section 8-28;



   (v)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
article II, section 8-28; article III, section 8-53; or article IV, section
8-79;



   (vi)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



   (vii)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer.



   (b)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development
within a special flood hazard area including but not limited to:



   (i)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;



   (ii)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in zone AE, or A will be floodproofed; and



   (iii)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



   (c)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
81-65) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation,
exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.



   (d)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details
of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter
are met. These details include but are not limited to:



   (i)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and



   (ii)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with article IV, subsection 8-77(4)(c)
when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in zones A, AE, and A1-30.



   (e)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.



   (f)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (g)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.



   (h)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of
article IV, section 8-77, subsections (6) and (7) of this chapter are met.



   (i)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (2)    Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall
include, but not be limited to:



   (a)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit.



   (b)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in article II,
section 8-27.



   (c)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.



   (d)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.



   (e)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.



   (f)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or nonencroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable.



   (g)   The flood openings requirements, if in zones A, AE or A1-30.



   (h)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable) (i.e.,
parking, building access and limited storage only).



   (3)    Certification requirements.



   (a)   Elevation certificates.



   (i)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior
to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of
the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The
floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.



   (ii)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after
the reference level is established. Within seven (7) calendar days of
establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of
the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work
done within the seven-day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain
administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately
and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.



   (iii)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



   (b)   Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is
used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a
floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an
operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior
to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of
the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect and certified by same. The floodplain administrator shall review
the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and
maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by
the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified
design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.



   (c)   If a manufactured home is placed within zone A, AE, or A1-30
and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty-six (36) inches in
height abovegrade, an engineered foundation certification is required in
accordance with the provisions of article IV, subsection 8-77(3)(b).



   (d)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description
of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional
engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties
located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the
permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.



   (e)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within zone A, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in items (a) and (b) of this subsection:



   (i)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of article IV,
subsection 8-77(6)(a);



   (ii)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of article IV,
subsection 8-77(7); and



   (iii)   Accessory structures less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet meeting requirements of article IV, subsection 8-77(8).



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 4), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-53. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.



   The floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



   (1)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



   (2)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard
areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been
received.



   (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



   (4)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained.



   (5)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and nonencroachment areas
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV,
section 8-81 are met.



   (6)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of
article III, subsection 8-52(3).



   (7)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of article III, subsection
8-52(3).



   (8)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of article III, subsection
8-52(3).



   (9)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of article III, subsection 8-52(3) and article
IV, subsection 8-77(2).



   (10)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or nonencroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.



   (11)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data have not been provided
in accordance with the provisions of article II, section 8-27, obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or
nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source,
including data developed pursuant to article IV, subsection 8-79(2)(b), in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter.



   (12)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data are provided but no
floodway or nonencroachment area data have been provided in accordance with
the provisions of article II, section 8-27, obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any floodway data or nonencroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter.



   (13)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood
hazard area are above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property
owner of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA.
Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development
permit file.



   (14)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy
Act of 1974, as amended.



   (15)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain
administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



   (16)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in
violation of this chapter, the floodplain administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed
to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state
the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and
the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a
stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



   (17)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The
floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked.



   (18)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator
and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



   (19)   Follow through with corrective procedures of article III,
section 8-54.



   (20)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.



   (21)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited
to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of article II, section 8-27 of this chapter,
including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued by
FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.



   (22)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision
(LOMRs).



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 4), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-54. Corrective procedures.



   (1)    Violations to be corrected. When the floodplain administrator
finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her
duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The
owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law
cited in such notification.



   (2)    Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the
owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action,
the floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal
service, stating:



   (a)   That the building or property is in violation of the
floodplain management regulations;



   (b)   That a hearing will be held before the floodplain
administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days
after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence
pertaining to the matter; and



   (c)   That following the hearing, the floodplain administrator may
issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill
as applicable.



   (3)    Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage
prevention ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period,
not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days. Where the floodplain administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that
corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.



   (4)    Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take
corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by
giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the
clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the
absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be
final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time
and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



   (5)    Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 4), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-55. Variance procedures.



   (1)    The board of adjustment as established by the City of Marion,
hereinafter referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (2)    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision to the court, as provided in Chapter 7A of the North
Carolina General Statutes.



   (3)    Variances may be issued for:



   (a)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure;



   (b)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in section 8-26 of this chapter, provided provisions of
article III, subsections 8-55(9)(b), (c), and (e) have been satisfied, and
such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or



   (c)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the
requirements of this section.



   (4)    In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in
other sections of this chapter, and:



   (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;



   (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as
defined under section 8-26 of this chapter as a functionally dependent
facility, where applicable;



   (f)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



   (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



   (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



   (5)    A written report addressing each of the above factors shall
be submitted with the application for a variance.



   (6)    Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.



   (7)    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation
(BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such
construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.



   (8)    The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of
all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.



   (9)    Conditions for variances:



   (a)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations,
or ordinances.



   (b)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
or nonencroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.



   (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (d)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.



   (e)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



   (i)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



   (ii)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and



   (iii)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (10)    A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities
or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided
that all of the following conditions are met:



   (a)   The use serves a critical need in the community.



   (b)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special
flood hazard area.



   (c)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (d)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and
local laws.



   (e)   The City of Marion has notified the Secretary of the North
Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to
grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the
variance.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 4), 7-15-08)



Secs. 8-56--8-75. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



Sec. 8-76. General standards.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:



   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.



   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.



   (4)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
accordance with the Federal Emergency Management Agencys manual Principles
and Practices for the Design and Construction of Flood Resistant Building
Utility Systems, Ed. 1999, as may be amended. These include, but are not
limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water
heaters, electric outlets/switches, and LP fuel tanks.



   (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



   (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.



   (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (8)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.



   (9)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter and located totally or partially within the
floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, nonencroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such
repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter.



   (10)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous
waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities
shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in article III,
subsection 8-55(10). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage
incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant
or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard
area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at
least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance
with the provisions of article III, subsection 8-52(3).



   (11)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (12)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (13)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (14)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



   (15)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood
hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.



   (16)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or
in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest
base flood elevation (BFE) shall apply.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 5), 7-15-08; Ord. No. O-11-01-18-2,  1,
1-18-11)



Sec. 8-77. Specific standards.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in article II, section 8-27, or article IV,
section 8-79, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of
article IV, section 8-76, are required:



   (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 8-26 of this
chapter.



   (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than
the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 8-26 of this
chapter. Structures located in A, AE, and A1-30 zones may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator as set forth in article III, subsection 8-52(3),
along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan.



   (3)   Manufactured homes.



   (a)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so
that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 8-26 of this
chapter.



   (b)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement,
either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the
most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S.
143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of
the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the
chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When
the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an
engineering certification is required.



   (c)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet
the requirements of article IV, subsection 8-77(4).



   (d)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within floodprone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the
local emergency management coordinator.



   (4)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction
and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:



   (a)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall
only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior
portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into
separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



   (b)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at
least to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and



   (c)   Shall include, in zones A, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:



   (i)   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;



   (ii)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
(1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;



   (iii)   If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each
enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically
enter and exit;



   (iv)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade;



   (v)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters
in both directions; and



   (vi)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.



   (5)   Additions/improvements.



   (a)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications
to the existing structure are:



   (i)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure.



   (ii)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.



   (b)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.



   (c)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications
to the existing structure are:



   (i)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction.



   (ii)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.



   (6)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:



   (a)   Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



   (b)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.



   (c)   No more than two (2) 40-pound LP tanks shall be permitted per
recreational vehicle located within a designated floodway; campgrounds and
other approved sites that provide fuel service to recreational vehicles shall
properly install and anchor all LP tanks in accordance with section 8-76
General Standards, and with the National Fire Protection Association Chapter
58 (NFPA 58) Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, Ed. 2011 as may be amended.



   (7)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of
a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood
warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing
to the floodplain administrator for review and written approval:



   (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three (3) months, renewable up to
one (1) year;



   (b)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



   (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of seventy-two (72) hours before landfall of a
hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);



   (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and



   (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will
be moved.



   (8)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds,
detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area,
the following criteria shall be met:



   (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);



   (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;



   (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;



   (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;



   (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with the provisions of article IV, subsection 8-76(1);



   (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed
in accordance with the provisions of article IV, subsection 8-76(4); and



   (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of article IV, subsection
8-77(4)(c).



   An accessory structure with a footprint less than one hundred fifty
(150) square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require
an elevation or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with article III, subsection 8-27(3).



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 5), 7-15-08; Ord. No. O-11-01-18-2,  2,
1-18-11)



Sec. 8-78. Reserved.



Sec. 8-79. Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations.



   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate zone A
and established in article II, section 8-27, where no base flood elevation
(BFE) data have been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition
to the provisions of article IV, section 8-76, shall apply:



   (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five (5) times the
width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with
supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (2)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:



   (a)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data are available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in article IV, sections
8-76 and 8-77.



   (b)   When floodway or nonencroachment data are available from a
federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial
improvements within floodway and nonencroachment areas shall also comply with
the requirements of article IV, sections 8-77 and 8-81.



   (c)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured
home sites. Such BFE data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with
the provisions of article II, section 8-27 and utilized in implementing this
chapter.



   (d)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data are not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall
be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in section 8-26. All other applicable
provisions of article IV, section 8-77 shall also apply.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 5), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-80. Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but
without established floodways or nonencroachment areas.



   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is
provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor
nonencroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the
FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all
development within such areas:



   (1)   Standards of article IV, sections 8-77 and 8-78; and



   (2)   Until a regulatory floodway or nonencroachment area is
designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification
with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1) foot at any point within the community.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 5), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-81. Floodways and nonencroachment areas.



   Areas designated as floodways or nonencroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in article II, section
8-27. The floodways and nonencroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry
debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to
the standards outlined in article IV, sections 8-77 and 8-78, shall apply to
all development within such areas:



   (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:



   (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain
administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or



   (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon
completion of the proposed encroachment.



   (2)   If subsection (1) is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.



   (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:



   (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of article IV,
subsection 8-78(3); and



   (b)   The no encroachment standard of subsection 8-81(1).



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 5), 7-15-08)



Secs. 8-82--8-100. Reserved.



ARTICLE V
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



Sec. 8-101. Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance.



   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted October 20, 1987
as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may
be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit
or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage
prevention ordinance of the City of Marion enacted on October 20, 1987, as
amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.



   The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for each
municipal jurisdiction within McDowell County is May 2, 1988.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 6), 7-15-08)



Sec. 8-102. Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the floodplain
administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to the
date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-2,  1(art. 6), 7-15-08)



Chapter 9
HEALTH AND SANITATION*



__________



*   Cross References: Cleanliness and location of animal enclosures
restricted,  3-17; street sanitation,  15-86 et seq.



   State Law References: Local health departments, G.S.  130A-34;
authority of city to prohibit or regulate conditions detrimental to health,
safety or welfare of the citizens, G.S.  160A-174(a).



   Cross References: Animals, Ch. 3.



   State Law References: Regulation of the placing of trash, refuse and
garbage within municipal limits, G.S.  160A-303.1.



__________



Art. I. In General,  9-1--9-25



Art. II. Solid Waste,  9-26--9-60



Art. III. Abandoned Vehicles,  9-61--9-100



Art. IV. Noise,  9-101--9-120



Art. V. Nuisances,  9-121--9-149



Art. VI. Graffiti,  9-150--9-153



ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL



Sec. 9-1. Unlawful to violate county health regulations.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any lawfully adopted
rule or regulation of the county board of health. The enforcement of this
section shall be under the supervision of the county health officer.



(Code 1982,  8-5001)



Sec. 9-2. Unlawful to interfere with health officer.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the
health officer or any of his assistants in the lawful discharge of their
duties.



(Code 1982,  8-5002)



Sec. 9-3. Right of entry.



   The county health officer shall have the right to enter any premises at
any reasonable hour for the purpose of making the inspections or
investigations.



(Code 1982,  8-5003)



Sec. 9-4. Human and animal waste; dead animals.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or deposit any
human waste on any street, lot or premises except in an approved sanitary
facility. No vendor of merchandise of any kind shall leave any refuse on the
streets or on the lots of the city.



   (b)    Owners of animals dying in the city shall, upon notice of
their death, immediately remove such animals.



(Code 1982,  8-5004; Ord. of 9-22-98,  1)



Sec. 9-5. Butchering restricted.



   No person shall butcher any cattle, hogs or sheep within the corporate
limits of the city.



(Code 1982,  8-5006)



Secs. 9-6--9-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
SOLID WASTE*



__________



*   Cross References: Water and sewerage, Ch. 20.



   State Law References: Control of litter, G.S.  14-399 et seq.;
radioactive waste, G.S.  104E-1 et seq.; solid waste management, G.S. 
130A-290 et seq.; location of garbage collection containers on state highway
rights-of-way, G.S.  136-18.3; placing glass, etc., or injurious
obstructions in road, G.S.  136-91; municipal regulation of trash and
garbage, G.S.  160A-192; municipal abatement of public health and public
safety nuisances, G.S.  160A-193; regulation of the placing of trash, refuse
and garbage within municipal limits, G.S.  160A-303.1; public enterprises,
G.S.  160A-311 et seq.



__________



Sec. 9-26. Residential collection.



   All garbage shall be placed in plastic bags and tied securely and
deposited in strong, sound cans of not more than thirty-five-gallon capacity
which shall be covered with tight-fitting, flyproof tops when they contain
garbage. Each can shall be equipped with two (2) handles. Cans of less
capacity than fifteen (15) gallons need be equipped with only one (1) handle.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  1; Ord. of 4-18-89,  1; Ord. of 9-22-98,  2)



Sec. 9-27. Limitation on container weight.



   The total weight of containers when filled shall not exceed fifty (50)
pounds.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  1.1)



Sec. 9-28. Placement of dry refuse.



   All dry refuse of any kind shall be placed near the edge of the
sidewalk or the edge of the street, if there is no sidewalk, but not onto the
sidewalk or onto the street.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  2.1; Ord. of 9-22-98,  3)



Sec. 9-29. Pickup of leaves.



   The city leaf machine will pick up leaves that are raked to the edge of
the sidewalk or the edge of the street, if there is no sidewalk, during the
months of October, November, and December, provided that leaves are separated
from other items or materials. Leaves shall not be raked onto the sidewalk or
onto the street. During all other months of the year the city will only pick
up leaves that are bagged and placed near the curb but not onto the sidewalk
or onto the street. During the months of October, November and December of
each year, the city will, upon request, provide a number of free leaf bags to
citizens to be used for leaves only. The public works department shall
determine the number of free bags.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  2.2; Ord. of 9-22-98,  4)



Sec. 9-30. Specifications for removal of dry refuse.



   Trees, limbs, trimmings and other dry refuse of this nature will be
removed by the city if the following specifications are met:



   (1)   They shall be placed at the edge of the sidewalk or the edge
of the street but not onto the sidewalk or onto the street.



   (2)   Tree trunks and limbs shall not exceed three (3) feet in
length and fifty (50) pounds in weight;



   (3)   Tree stumps of less than fifty (50) pounds in weight will be
removed.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  2.3; Ord. of 9-22-98,  5)



Sec. 9-31. Refuse from commercial tree trimmers or employees of businesses or
nonprofits not removed.



   The city will not remove any trees, limbs, stumps or trimmings cut by
commercial or contracted tree trimmers or landscapers. In addition, the city
will not remove any trees, limbs, stumps or trimmings cut by employees of
businesses or nonprofit organizations located in residential units eligible
to receive yard waste and brush collection. In situations where it is unclear
whether the city may collect yard waste or brush from a residential unit
pursuant to this section, the city manager shall determine whether yard waste
or brush collection shall be performed by the city.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  2.4; Ord. No. O-04-02-17-1,  2, 2-17-04)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10;
trees, Ch. 19.



Sec. 9-32. Regulation of number of refuse pickups; pickup of bulky items
restricted.



   Only one (1) truckload of dry refuse will be collected from any one (1)
location on any one (1) regular pickup day. The city will provide additional
pickups on a contract basis. Persons requiring additional pickups shall pay
to the city, in advance, an amount to be determined by the public works
director. Bulky items such as furniture and appliances will be picked up by
the city only upon request but only on the day that is set aside by the
public works director for special pickups. The city will not pick up
refrigerators, hot-water heaters, heavy automobile parts, washers, dryers,
stoves, dishwashers, couches, tubs, toilets, heavy chairs or any extremely
large items of this nature except by calling the public works department and
arranging for a special pickup. The public works director will determine what
items will be picked up and the amount to be charged for each pickup, in
accordance with the City Fee and Rate Schedule adopted by the City Council,
and the payment will be made to the city in advance. Residents may request a
trailer from the public works department for loading of items, except items
prohibited for collection under this Article, upon paying the fee established
by the City Fee and Rate Schedule.



(Ord. No. O-17-06-06-1, § 2, 6-6-17)



Sec. 9-33. Prohibition on pickup of dangerous items.



   Under no circumstances will the city pick up any item that may be
considered dangerous to handle as determined by the public works director.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  2.6; Ord. of 9-22-98,  7)



Sec. 9-34. Regulation of metal containers (dumpsters) for businesses.



   (a)    Each business, commercial establishment, or industry, that
generates more than three (3) thirty-five-gallon containers of solid waste
per week, shall be required to use a metal container (dumpster).



   (b)    The city will provide an eight-cubic-yard container
(dumpster) for each business requesting solid waste pick-up services by the
city. The city shall own and maintain the container (dumpster). The city
council shall set a monthly rental charge for use of each container. In
addition, a monthly service fee, based on per container pickup, will be
charged each business. The service fee shall be at such rates as may be
established from time to time by the city council. Each business must enter a
contract with the city or provide for removal of its own solid waste.



      (1)   All accounts shall be paid by the due date printed on
the bill.



      (2)   Customers who fail to pay the amount charged for solid
waste services by 5:00 p.m. local time, the fifteenth day of the month in
which the statement is received shall be charged a late penalty in the amount
stated in the current ordinance establishing commercial garbage/recycling
collection rates. Customers who fail to pay the amount charged for solid
waste services by 5:00 p.m. local time the twenty-fifth day of the month in
which the statement is received shall be charged an additional late penalty
in the amount stated in the current ordinance establishing commercial
garbage/recycling collection rates and solid waste service to the premises
shall be terminated.



      (3)   Delinquent accounts where solid waste service has been
terminated shall not have such services restored until such delinquent
account, including all penalties, has been paid in full.



   (c)    It shall be unlawful to pile garbage or trash on or around a
container. The lid to each container must remain closed at all times except
when trash or garbage is being placed in the container, the container is
being cleaned or repaired, or when the container is being emptied. If the
establishment is producing more garbage or trash than can be adequately
handled by the container the public works director or his designee can
require added pickups.



   (d)    The public works director or his designee shall determine the
location or placement of each container.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  3.1--3.4; Ord. of 4-19-88,  1; Ord. of 6-20-00,  1;
Ord. No. O-11-06-21-3,  2, 6-21-11)



Sec. 9-35. Tires.



   The city shall not collect tires from any business, residence or any
other property.



(Ord. O-12-03-06-4,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 9-36. Owner required to remove construction waste.



   The city will not be responsible for removing building and construction
waste. All refuse, lumber and debris remaining both as a result of the repair
of any building or of the erection and completion of any new buildings shall
be removed by the property owner within ten (10) days of the completion of
such work.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  4)



Sec. 9-37. Littering prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or on any sidewalk,
street, alley, public highway or any private premises, any rubbish, dirt, or
other substance or rubbish matter of any kind whatsoever which would render
the streets and premises unclean, except in receptacles as hereinabove
provided, at the edge of the sidewalk or edge of the street. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to rake, sweep or blow any
trash, grass clippings or other materials onto any public sidewalk or street.
Said trash or grass clippings shall be bagged for pick up.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  5; Ord. of 9-22-98,  9)



Sec. 9-38. Solid waste to be deposited in landfill.



   All nonhazardous solid waste shall be disposed of in the county
sanitary landfill.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  6)



Sec. 9-39. Permit required for burning.



   No burning of solid waste is permitted in the city limits without a
permit issued by the fire chief.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  6.1)



   Cross References: Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; licenses,
permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 9-40. Open dumps prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, maintain, or operate an
open dump.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  6.2)



Sec. 9-41. Hazardous waste disposal to comply with state law.



   All hazardous waste shall be collected and disposed of in accordance
with state laws.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  6.3)



   State Law References: Dumping of toxic substances, G.S.  14-284.1.



Sec. 9-42. Removal of dead animals.



   (a)    Dead animals will be removed upon notice of the existence of
the dead animal. The dead animal should be placed in a plastic bag and should
not be placed in containers or garbage cans. Citizens should arrange to have
the animal picked up by calling the public works department. Public works
employees will not crawl under houses or enter the backyards of residences to
retrieve dead animals.



   (b)    The city will pick up and dispose of dead domestic animals
weighing less than seventy-five (75) pounds from residences and veterinarians
at such charge as may be established from time to time by the city council,
provided the dead animal is placed in a plastic bag. Said payment shall be
made in advance of service.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  7, 7.1; Ord. of 9-22-98,  10)



   Cross References: Animals, Ch. 3.



Sec. 9-43. Permit required to process refuse.



   No person shall collect, handle or transport over any of the streets,
alleys, or other public ways in the city any garbage or refuse, for a fee,
without first obtaining a permit from the city.



(Ord. of 6-25-87,  8)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Secs. 9-44--9-60. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
ABANDONED VEHICLES*



__________



*   Cross References: Traffic, Ch. 18.



__________



Sec. 9-61. Administration.



   The police department and city manager (or his designee) shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The
police department shall be responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets
and highways within the city, and on property owned by the city. The city
manager (or his designee) shall be responsible for administering the removal
and disposition of "abandoned," "nuisance," or "junked" motor vehicles
located on private property. The city may, on an annual basis, contract with
private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose
of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in
compliance with this article and applicable state laws. Nothing in this
article shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers
of the city police department and fire department in enforcing other laws or
in otherwise carrying out their duties.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  1)



Sec. 9-62. Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, certain words and terms are defined as
herein indicated:



   Abandoned vehicle(s). As authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, an
abandoned motor vehicle is one that:



   (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law
or ordinance prohibiting parking; or



   (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven
(7) days; or



   (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer
than twenty-four (24) hours; or



   (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two (2) hours.



   Authorizing official. The supervisory employee of the police department
or city manager (or his designee) respectively, designated to authorize the
removal of vehicles under the provisions of this article.



   Motor vehicle or vehicle. All machines designed or intended to travel
over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.



   Junked motor vehicle. As authorized and defined in G.S. section
160A-303.2, the term "junked motor vehicle" means a vehicle that does not
display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:



   (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or



   (2)   Cannot be self propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or



   (3)   Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



   Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



   (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, or other insects,
rats, or other pests; or



   (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation
over eight (8) inches in height; or



   (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or



   (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or
other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or



   (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated
from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.; or



   (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over; or



   (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste,
animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or



   (8)   One which has sharp points thereon which are jagged or contain
sharp edges of metal or glass; or



   (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety
hazard and a public nuisance by the city council.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  2)



Sec. 9-63. Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (b)    Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  3)



Sec. 9-64. Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located, to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (b)    Upon investigation, the city manager (or his designee) may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle as defined above and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  4)



Sec. 9-65. Junked or inoperable motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked or inoperable motor vehicle, or for
the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked or
inoperable motor vehicle is located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain
on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful to have more than one (1) junked or
inoperable motor vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of public or
private property except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. A
single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the
location, screening and concealment requirements of this section.



   (c)    It shall be unlawful for any owner or person entitled to the
possession of a junked or inoperable motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee,
or occupant of the real property upon which a junked or inoperable motor
vehicle is located, to fail to comply with the location requirements of this
section.



   (d)    Subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section,
upon investigation, the city manager (or his designee) may order the removal
of a junked or inoperable motor vehicle after finding in writing that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on
the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the
monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the
public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance.
The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:



   (1)   Protection of property values;



   (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;



   (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



   (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community;
and



   (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of
residents.



   (e)    Permitted concealment or enclosure of a junked or inoperable
motor vehicle:



   (1)   One (1) junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, may be located
in the rear yard, as defined in the city zoning ordinance, provided the
junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public
street and/or abutting premises by an acceptable covering. Junked motor
vehicles kept on the premises shall be kept inside a completely enclosed
building. The city manager (or designee) has the authority to determine
whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this
provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to
deteriorate.



   (2)   Any more than one (1) junked or inoperable motor vehicle must
be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure
so that the junked or inoperable motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from a
public street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means
either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected
pursuant to the lawful issuance of the building permit and which has been
constructed in accordance with all zoning ordinances and building code
regulations.



   (f)    To the extent that the provisions in this chapter 9, article
III are inconsistent with chapter 21, article VII, sections 21-7.5 and 21-7.8
or article VIII, subsection 21-8.5(c), the most restrictive provisions shall
apply.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  5; Ord. No. O-03-10-21-02,  2, 10-21-03; Ord. No.
O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08)



Sec. 9-66. Removal of abandoned, nuisance, junked or inoperable motor
vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements.



   Except as set forth in section 9-67 below, abandoned, nuisance, junked
or inoperable vehicles which are to be removed shall be towed only after
notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the
vehicle(s). In the case of nuisance, junked or inoperable vehicles, if the
names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the
possession of the vehicle(s), or the owner or lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle(s) is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to
show the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If
such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be
removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on
the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle, a notice
indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date
(no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall
state that the vehicle(s) will be removed by the town on a specified date, no
sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle(s) are moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.



   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given,
if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is
abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked or inoperable motor
vehicle that aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens,
such appeal shall be made to the city council in writing, heard at the next
regularly scheduled meeting or the city council, and further proceedings to
remove the vehicle(s) shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  6; Ord. No. O-03-10-21-02,  3, 10-21-03)



Sec. 9-67. Exceptions to prior notice requirement.



   This requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings
shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles
without prior notice include:



   (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the
public streets and highways, the city council hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:



   a.   Obstructing traffic;



   b.   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;



   c.   Parked in a no-stopping or -standing zone;



   d.   Parked in loading zones;



   e.   Parked in bus zones; or



   f.   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
under Code sections.



   (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to
abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property other than the
streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of
limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such
allocation or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage
to public or private property.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  7)



Sec. 9-68. Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements.



   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage garage or area
by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such
services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing
city official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the
vehicle, such notice to include the following:



   (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



   (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



   (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



   (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and



   (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable
cause hearing on the removal.



   The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5)
above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address,
unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent.



   If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given
within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state,
notice shall be given to the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours
from the removal of the vehicle.



   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and
such vehicle has no valid registration or registering plates, the authorizing
town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (1)
through (5) above.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  8)



Sec. 9-69. Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition
of vehicle.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is
entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause
existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in
writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court
judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing
within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will
be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. section 20-219.11, as
amended.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  9)



Sec. 9-70. Redemption of vehicle during proceedings.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double
the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of
a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle
shall not allow or engage in further violations of this article.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  10)



Sec. 9-71. Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle.



   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by
the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle.
Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the
town and in accordance with article 1 of chapter 44A of the North Carolina
General Statutes.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  11)



Sec. 9-72. Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property.



   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the city from a private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a
vehicle has been ordered removed by the city manager (or his designee). The
city may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance
or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against
any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or
sale thereof.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  12)



Sec. 9-73. Protection against criminal or civil liability.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided
in this article.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  13)



Sec. 9-74. Exceptions.



   Nothing in this article shall apply to: (1) any vehicle not visible
from the public roadway or adjoining property and located in an enclosed
building, or (2) which is in an appropriate enclosed storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner as permitted by the city.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  14; Ord. No. O-03-10-21-02,  4, 10-21-03)



Sec. 9-75. Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code unless and until all towing
and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been
paid.



(Ord. of 6-8-93,  15)



Secs. 9-76--9-100. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV
NOISE*



__________



*   Cross References: Zones of quiet,  18-36.



   State Law References: Authority of city to regulate and prohibit noise,
G.S.  160A-184.



__________



Sec. 9-101. Scope.



   This article shall apply to all sound, sound vibration, and noise
originating within the corporate limits of the City of Marion. Nothing in
this article shall be construed to limit or prevent the City or any person
from pursuing any other legal remedies for damages or the abatement of noises
in the City.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 9-102. Definitions.



   The words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning
indicated when used in this article unless otherwise specifically provided,
or unless otherwise clearly required by the context:



   Amplified sound means any sound or noise, including the human voice,
that is increased in volume or intensity by means of electrical power.



   Construction means erection, repair, assembly, alteration, landscaping,
or demolition of any building or building site.



   Daytime hours means 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., local time.



   Motorized vehicles means:



   Generally—Any vehicle as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(49) including, but
not limited to:



   (1)   Excursion passenger vehicles as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)a.



   (2)   Common carriers of passengers as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)c.



   (3)   Motorcycles and mopeds as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27)d. and
d.1.



   (4)   Truck tractors as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(48).



   (5)   Farm tractors as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(11).



   Nightime hours means 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., local time.



   Noise means any sound or combination of sounds which, because of its
volume or quality, tends to disturb reasonable persons of normal sensitivity
or to interfere with normal human activity.



   Noise disturbance means any unreasonably loud and raucous sound or
noise which:



   (1)   Endangers or injures the health or safety of humans or animals;



   (2)   Endangers or injures personal or real property; or



   (3)   Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity.



   To determine whether a noise or sound constitutes a noise disturbance,
the following factors incident to such noise are to be considered: whether
the noise occurred during daytime or nighttime hours, proximity to
residential areas, whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant,
the volume and intensity, whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or
range by any type of mechanical means and the nature and zoning of the area.



   Person means any individual, association, firm, partnership,
corporation, or business entity.



   Residential Areas means any area in the City that is zoned the
following:  R-1 Single Family Residential or R-2 General Neighborhood
Residential. 



   Sound means any disturbance of the air or other medium that is
detectable by the unaided human ear or which produces vibrations detectable
by reasonable persons of normal sensitivity.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 9-103. General regulation.



   Except as allowed in this article, no person shall willingly engage in
any activity on any premises or public area in the City, which activity
produces or constitutes a noise disturbance on occupied neighboring premises
or public areas.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 9-104. Noise producing activities; frequent sources of complaint; noise
sensitive areas.



   In addition to the general prohibition set forth above, the following
activities are recognized as tending to produce unreasonably loud and raucous
noises and as tending to constitute noise disturbances when conducted or
permitted in an unreasonable manner. No person shall engage in any of the
enumerated activities so as to cause a noise disturbance on neighboring
premises.



   (1)   Operation of radios, televisions, or other personal sound
reproduction devices in such a manner as to be plainly audible by persons
other than those for whose use the device is being operated, including the
operation of automobile sound systems in such a manner as to be plainly
audible by pedestrians or the occupants of other vehicles; 



   (2)   Playing of any amplified or nonamplified musical instrument;



   (3)   Keeping of any animal or bird that frequently or for long
periods of time makes noises that tend to annoy or disturb others; 



   (4)   Operation of domestic power tools or mechanical devices; 



   (5)   Repair or testing of any motor vehicle, however fueled or
powered; 



   (6)   Operation of any motor vehicle with an improper muffler system
in violation of G.S. 20-128(a) and (b); 



   (7)   Operation of any motor vehicle so as to cause the tires to
squeal or screech unnecessarily; 



   (8)   Operation of model cars, boats, or airplanes, go carts, mini
bikes, scooters or all-terrain vehicles or other unlicensed toy or
recreational vehicles or devices powered by an internal combustion engine;



   (9)   Street vending or peddling;



   (10)   Sounding of any automobile horn except as a warning or danger
signal, or as required by law; 



   (11)   Construction operations, including excavating, demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building in a residential or business district,
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekends. The building inspector is authorized to grant
exceptions from these time periods through the issuance of a permit in
emergency situations, in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public safety or in situations necessary for health or medical reasons, which
permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days, or less, while the
emergency continues. Exceptions from these time periods for the reasons
listed above for a period longer than three (3) days requires the approval of
the City Council;



   (12)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than
police, fire, ambulance or other official emergency vehicle;



   (13)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary
boiler, except as a warning of danger; 



   (14)   The operation of machinery in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicles or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates, and containers; 



   (15)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show, or sale or display of merchandise; 



   (16)   The firing or discharge of firearms, squibs, crackers, gun
powder, pyrotechnics or other combustible substances in the streets or
elsewhere, except by permit from the police department or as part of an event
specifically approved by the City Council; 



   (17)   Yelling, shouting; 



   (18)   Parties; 



   (19)   The sounding of a security alarm for more than twenty (20)
minutes after the owner or responsible party has been notified by law
enforcement personnel;



   (20)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out
of repair, overloaded or loaded in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noises; 



   (21)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air,
unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled; 



   (22)   The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on
trucks or other moving vehicles, for advertising or other purposes, except
where specific license is given by the Police Department; 



   (23)   For any engineer, fireman or other person to blow the whistle
of any locomotive engine within the city, the drivers of passenger trains
excepted when blowing necessary signals;



   (24)   Using any language calculated to annoy the public or to bring
on a breach of the peace; 



   (25)   Willfully or wantonly disturbing any public meeting or
gathering; 



   (26)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or
filling station in the residential district so as to cause loud or offensive
noises to emit therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 



   (27)   Cursing or swearing on any street or other public place loud
enough to be heard by a passerby; 



   (28)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the
corporate limits of the city at any time any electric welding torch or
device, or any other similar device or implement, the operation of which
produces a brilliant and blinding light, unless such torch, device or
implement at the time of such operation is enclosed in a building from which
such light cannot escape; and 



   (29)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate,
carry on or engage in any business within the corporate limits of the city
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the conduct or operation of
which produces any loud and disturbing noise or any brilliant and blinding
light or lights; 



   It is further recognized that certain uses, including churches,
synagogues and other places of worship, medical and convalescent facilities,
funeral homes and mortuaries, schools and courthouses are particularly
sensitive to sound and noise. Noise-producing activities, including those
specified above, may become noise disturbances when conducted in the
immediate vicinity of those uses during their hours of operation. 



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 9-105. Exceptions. 



The following are excepted from the application of this article:



   (1)   Construction activity performed by an agency of government
provided that all equipment is operated in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications and is equipped with all noise-reducing equipment in proper
condition; 



   (2)   Sound or noise of safety signals, warning devices, emergency
pressure relief valves and church bells or chimes between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and midnight; 



   (3)   Sound or noise emanating from street fairs, festivals, or
celebrations conducted by or with the approval of the City; 



   (4)   Sound or noise emanating from film and video production
activities for which permits have been issued by the City; provided all
equipment such as generators are properly muffled; 



   (5)   Sound or noise from lawful fireworks;



   (6)   Lawnmowers and agricultural equipment operated between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when operated in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications and with all standard noise reducing equipment
in place and in proper condition; 



   (7)   Musical accompaniment to parades or military ceremonies; 



   (8)   Sound emanating from regularly scheduled athletic events at
City or County parks, athletic facilities and public or private schools;



   (9)   Governmental emergency vehicles in the course of performing
their official duties; 



   (10)   Railroad operations, to the extent said operations are in
furtherance of interstate commerce; 



   (11)   Sound or noise emanating from construction or repair work and
regulated activities of utilities regulated by the North Carolina Utilities
Commission; 



   (12)   Commercial refuse collection vehicles operating between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; and 



   (13)   Unamplified noncommercial speeches made from a fixed location
in non-residentially zoned areas.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 9-106. Non-exclusivity. 



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or limit any
person from seeking any remedy available in law or equity for activities that
are or may be subject to regulation by this chapter, or from pursuing said
remedy simultaneously with proceedings under this chapter, nor shall any of
the procedures specified herein be a condition precedent to the initiation of
any legal action.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 9-107. Violations; owner and occupant responsibility.



   Violations of this article shall subject the offender to penalties as
set forth in Sections 1-10 through 1-10.17, subject to the limitations set
forth below:



   (1)   Penalties for violations of this article may be assessed
against persons responsible for the premises or device producing or causing
the noise disturbance. 



   (2)   An owner of any premises subject to this article who is not
also an occupant of the premises shall be responsible for any actions by
tenants, guests, or other licensees that constitute second or subsequent
violations of this article; provided, that no absentee owner shall be liable
unless notified of first or previous violations of the article, and further
provided that such first or previous violations shall have occurred within
the previous 12-month period. Notice of any first or previous violations
pursuant to this paragraph shall be effected by registered or certified mail.
No absentee owner may be subjected to criminal liability under this section,
but shall be subject to civil penalties and equitable relief as provided in
herein. This section shall in no way relieve any other person from
responsibility for violations of this article.



   (3)   The person responsible for any premises shall be responsible
and liable for any violations of this article by tenants, guests, or
licensees on the premises if the person responsible is actively or
constructively present at the time of the violation.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 9-108. Enforcement; penalties for violation; remedies; additional civil
penalty for subsequent offenses. 



   (a)   Violations of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to the civil penalties set forth in City Code Section 1-10.9. 



   (b)   In addition to the civil penalties provided for above, the
City may enforce the provisions of this article by appropriate equitable
remedies as set forth in Section 1-10.14. 



   (c)   This article may be enforced by employees of the City Police
Department as designated by the Police Chief and by other employees of the
City as designated by the City Manager. Animal control officers employed by
the City, or employees of an animal control agency working under contract
with the City for the enforcement of animal control ordinances, and who have
been designated by the Police Chief  may enforce the provisions of this
article relating to animals and animal noises. 



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-3, § 2, 1-15-13)



Secs. 9-109--9-120. Reserved.



ARTICLE V
NUISANCES*



__________



*   Editors Note: Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5, adopted Mar. 7, 2006, amended
Art. V,  9-121--9-128, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former
Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance of
July 5, 1979; the 1982 Code; an ordinance of Feb. 2, 1988; an ordinance of
May 6, 1997; and an ordinance of June 6, 2000.



   Cross References: Health and sanitation, Ch. 9.



   State Law References: Authority to regulate trash and garbage, G.S. 
160A-192, 160A-303.1.



__________



Sec. 9-121. General provisions; definition.



   (a)    For purposes of this article, the term "nuisance" means any
condition or use of property, or any act or omission affecting the condition
or use of property which directly threatens the safety of citizens or
adversely affects the general health, happiness, security and welfare of
others, or is detrimental to the rights of others to the full use of their
own property and their own comfort, happiness and emotional stability because
of decreased property values and the unattractiveness and livability of
neighborhoods. Further, the city council finds and declares that the
following specific conditions are prejudicial to the general health, safety
and welfare of the city and its citizens, lessen the attractiveness and
livability of the city and when located on any lot or parcel of land within
the city limits of the city are a nuisance and therefore unlawful:



   (1)   Overgrowth or heavy growth of weeds, bushes, poison oak,
poison ivy or other noxious vegetation or overgrowth of grass and weeds over
six (6) inches in height;



   (2)   Conditions which have become or will become, if not corrected,
a breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, snakes, rats or other pests;



   (3)   A collection place for lumber, brick, blocks, nails, building
materials and building rubbish unless such conditions are temporary in nature
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days and caused by current
construction in progress pursuant to a lawfully issued building permit;



   (4)   Any accumulation of garbage, food waste, litter, animal waste,
trash and refuse or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind which
is the result of the absence of or the result of overflowing or improperly
closed trash or garbage containers;



   (5)   Rotten, damaged or dilapidated sheds, outbuildings, portable
canopies, garages or other uninhabited structures which have collapsed or
partially collapsed or pose a danger of fire or pose a risk to neighborhood
children or to adjacent property and property owners;



   (6)   An open or unsecured storage or collection place for
chemicals, oils, gasoline, flammable liquids or other similar harmful or
dangerous substances, gases or vapors;



   (7)   Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash or junk causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes or vermin prejudicial
to the public health;



   (8)   A collection or storage place for old, worn out, broken or
discarded machinery, car parts, glass, junk, furniture, stoves, refrigerators
and appliances, cans or containers, household goods or plumbing and
electrical fixtures or other similar materials;



   (9)   An open place of concentration of combustible items such as
mattresses, wood, boxes, paper, automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash,
refuse, brush, old clothes, rags, or any other combustible materials or
objects of a like nature;



   (10)   A collection place or pool or pond of stagnant or foul water
caused by any manmade berm, dam, ditch or impoundment;



   (11)   A storage place or place of collection for broken bottles,
glass, tin, aluminum and other sharp, pointed, jagged or rusted metal;



   (12)   Barns, animal pens and enclosures, dog lots and runs or other
similar places that house animals and which are not kept in a sanitary
condition, attract flies and other pests or emit foul odors;



   (13)   A collection place for sewage and sewage drainage or the
seepage from septic tanks;



   (14)   A collection place for tree limbs, dried brush, dead
vegetation or other rubbish;



   (15)   Any discharge into or polluting of any stream, creek, river
or other body of water of any dangerous substance or any other material
likely to harm the water or any vegetation, fish or wildlife in or along the
water or the storage of such harmful materials and substances in a manner so
that it is likely that such streams, creeks, rivers or other bodies of water
will be polluted;



   (16)   Any conditions or use of property which results in the
emission of pollutants and particles into the atmosphere or causes noxious
odors and stenches to be emitted into the air;



   (17)   The use of portable screening devices such as a tarp, fabric,
canvas, nylon, vinyl, plastic or other nonrigid material to cover or hide the
above referenced collection, accumulation or storage of any and all
conditions referenced in this section.



   (18)   Any other act or condition declared to be a nuisance in the
manner provided in this article by the city council.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-122. Findings; policy.



   (a)    The city council finds as a fact that there are many parcels
of land and vacant lots throughout the city which are overgrown with weeds
and other noxious growth, that have become a collection place for trash,
garbage, debris, junk or other undesirable material or have specific
unattractive conditions located thereon. The city council further finds as a
fact that such conditions adversely affect one (1) or more of the following:



   (1)   The safety of the citizens of the city;



   (2)   The general health and welfare of the citizens of the city;



   (3)   The health and safety of children who are attracted to such
conditions;



   (4)   The quality of urban attractiveness and aesthetic appearance
of the city;



   (5)   The protection of property values throughout the city;



   (6)   The preservation of the livability and attractiveness of
neighborhoods;



   (7)   The opportunities for full economic development of the city;



   (8)   The comfort, happiness and emotional stability of occupants of
property in the vicinity of unattractive conditions and nuisances;



   (9)   The full use, ownership and enjoyment of property in the
vicinity of such conditions.



   (b)    It is the policy of the city that each person is entitled to
live in a community which is generally safe and free of conditions which
adversely affect the general health and welfare of the community. Citizens
also ought to have the right to live in an attractive community free of
litter, garbage and unsightly junk especially when such conditions do not
further individual rights or ownership of property. To protect against such
conditions, the city intends to define, prohibit and restrain nuisances or to
cause such nuisances to be removed from the city. The city manager or his or
her designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
this article.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-123. Nuisances prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance or cause a
nuisance to be created or for the owner, lessee, occupant, caretaker or
person in possession of any lot, parcel or tract of land in the city to
create a nuisance or otherwise permit, allow or suffer a nuisance to be
created or to allow a nuisance to remain on such property after it has been
declared a nuisance.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-124. Exceptions.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 9-123, the use of property
for a lawful business or commercial purpose pursuant to all required licenses
and permits and in full compliance with the zoning rules and regulations in
effect in the city shall not be considered as a nuisance so long as the use
of the property and the conditions created thereon further such lawful
business use or commercial use.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-124.1. Notice; abatement.



   (a)   When any condition in violation of this Article is found to
exist, the City Manager or his designee shall give notice of the owner of the
premises to abate or remove such conditions within seven (7) days.  Such
notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises
sufficient for identification and shall set forth the violation and state
that, if the violation is not corrected within seven (7) days, the City may
proceed to correct the same as authorized by this Article.  Service of such
notice shall be any one of the following methods:



   (1)   By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the notice
at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the age of
sixteen (16) years old and a member of the family of the owner.



   (2)   By mailing a copy of the notice by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person to be served and
delivered to the addressee;



   (3)   By delivering a copy of the notice to any officer, employee or
agent of a corporation, partnership or business; or



   (4)   By posting, for ten (10) days, a copy of the notice in placard
form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the violation exists,
when notice cannot be served by (1), (2) or (3) above.



   (b)   When the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice
given pursuant to this Article, within seven (7) days after the service of
such notice, he or she shall be subject to any criminal or civil penalties
authorized by Chapter 1 of the City Code in accordance with law and each day
that such failure continues shall be a separate offense.  In addition, the
City Manager or his designee may have the condition described in the notice
abated, removed or otherwise corrected and all expenses incurred thereby
shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the property and shall be
collected as taxes and levies are collected.  All such expenses shall
constitute a lien against the property on which the work was done. 



   (c)   The city may notify a chronic violator of the City's public
nuisance ordinance that, if the violator's property is found to be in
violation of the ordinance, the City shall, without further notice in the
calendar year in which notice is given, take action to remedy the violation,
and the expense of the action shall become a lien upon the property and shall
be collected as unpaid taxes. The notice shall be sent by certified mail. A
chronic violator is a person who owns property whereupon, in the previous
calendar year, the City took remedial action at least three times under any
provision of the public nuisance ordinance.



   (d)   The procedure set forth in this article shall be in addition
to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the
abatement of public nuisances, and this chapter shall not prevent the City
from proceeding in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions of the Article as provided in G.S. 14-4.



(Ord. No. O-12-06-19-4, § 2, passed 6-19-12)



Sec. 9-124.2. Emergency action.



   Notwithstanding the notice provisions set out in section 9-124.1, the
city manager shall have authority to summarily remove, abate or remedy any
condition that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-124.3. Other nuisances not enumerated.



   (a)    In addition to the conditions declared to be a nuisance
enumerated above, the city council may, by ordinance, define, prohibit,
regulate or abate other acts, omissions or conditions detrimental to the
health, safety or welfare of its citizens and the peace and dignity of the
city.



   (b)    Prior to adopting such ordinance, the city council shall
conduct a hearing at any regularly scheduled or specially convened meeting of
the city council after giving written notice to the owner, occupant or person
in possession of the premises on which the conditions alleged to be a
nuisance are located. The notice shall describe the conditions believed to be
a nuisance and shall set forth the date, place and time of the public
hearing. The notice shall be served in the same manner other notices are
served in this article; except, that if the notice is served by posting on
the property, then such notice shall also be advertised once in a newspaper
having local circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.



   (c)    At the hearing, the city council may receive and consider
evidence in the form of testimony, affidavits, statements, documents or other
written proof and the property owner, occupant or person in possession of the
premises shall have a right to appear and show cause why the conditions are
not a nuisance or ought not to be abated.



   (d)    If the conditions are thereafter determined by the city
council to be a nuisance, the city council may order the removal or abatement
of the nuisance or take such other remedial action as may be appropriate
except that the city council may not declare unattractive conditions a
nuisance and order the abatement thereof without finding in writing that the
aesthetic benefits of removing or abating the conditions outweigh the burdens
imposed upon the private property owner. Such special findings shall be based
upon a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community,
neighborhood or area appearance, including protection of property values,
promotion of economic and community development opportunities, indirect
protection of the public health and safety, preservation of the character and
integrity of the community and the promotion of the comfort, happiness and
emotional stability of area residents.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-125. Policy to promote safety.



   It shall be the policy and intent of the city council of the city to
promote and provide for the safety of pedestrians and operators and
passengers of motor vehicles using public streets, roads, ways and sidewalks
within the city. It is fundamentally important that all such pedestrians and
operators of motor vehicles be able to have access to and use all public
streets, roads, ways and sidewalks without visual interference, obstruction
or impairment.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-126. Unlawful to obstruct vision along streets.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any
premises within the city to plant, install, build, maintain, cultivate or
allow to exist any bush, shrub, hedge, tree, living plant, fence, wall or
other item which obstructs vision if such item:



   (1)   Is located within five (5) feet of the outer edge of the curb
(or other edge of the pavement if there is no curb) of a public street;



   (2)   Has a height greater than two and one-half (2 ) feet; or



   (3)   Is located in any other place of any height if such item
interferes with, obstructs or impairs the vision of any pedestrian or
operator of a motor vehicle in gaining access to or using any public street,
road, way or sidewalk.



   (b)    Buildings in existence as of February 2, 1988, shall be
exempt from this article.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-127. Notice to remove visual obstruction; remedy for noncompliance.



   If any person violates the provisions of this article, it shall be the
duty of the building inspector or his or her designee to give notice to the
owner, or to any person in possession and occupying said premises, directing
that within ten (10) days or sooner from the time of such notice, all plant
growth or fence or other visual obstruction shall be pruned, trimmed,
shortened or removed from the designated area. If such owner or occupant
fails or refuses to take such corrective action so as to come into compliance
with this article, the building inspector shall promptly take such corrective
action as is necessary to remove the visual obstruction, and all costs and
charges shall be charged against the premises. If such costs and charges are
not paid within thirty (30) days, they shall become a lien against said
property and shall be collected in the manner provided for the collection of
delinquent taxes.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Sec. 9-128. Location of portable toilets; permit required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to locate a
portable toilet within the city without first applying for and receiving a
permit issued by the public works director or his designee. The public works
director or his or her designee shall direct the specific location where the
portable toilet(s) shall be located and it shall not be relocated without a
new permit. Portable toilets shall be located, where possible, out of public
view, so as not to be conspicuous.



(Ord. No. O-06-03-07-5,  2, 3-7-06)



Secs. 9-129--9-149. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI
GRAFFITI



Sec. 9-150. Graffiti defined.



   As used in this article, the word "graffiti" shall refer to any marks
made by drawing, painting or writing one, or inscribing or otherwise defacing
any real or personal property without the prior consent of the owner or
person in control of the premises.



(Ord. No. O-01-09-18-1,  2, 9-18-01)



Sec. 9-151. Graffiti declared a public nuisance.



   Graffiti on public or private property creates a condition tending to
reduce the value of such property, to promote blight and deterioration, to
reflect poorly on the community, and may be injurious to the general welfare.
Furthermore, graffiti has been used as a forum for gang-related activities
and can lead to an increase in crime in the city, which is detrimental to the
health and safety of the citizens of the city. Therefore, the presence of
constitute a public nuisance which may be summarily abated as such in
accordance with provisions of this chapter, or any other applicable provision
of law.



(Ord. No. O-01-09-18-1,  2, 9-18-01)



Sec. 9-152. Premises to be kept free of graffiti.



   Every person, owning or occupying any premises in the city, shall keep
such premises free from graffiti.



(Ord. No. O-01-09-18-1,  2, 9-18-01)



Sec. 9-153. Notice to remove: removal; lien for cost.



   If any person shall violate the provisions of section 9-152, it shall
be the duty of the chief of police to give notice to the owner or to any
person in possession of such premises, directing that, within ten (10) days
or sooner from the time of such notice, all graffiti shall be removed from
such premises. Should any owner or any person in possession refuse, or fail
to abate such nuisance, the chief of police shall proceed to remove it or
have it removed. The cost of such removal shall be charged against such
premises and shall become a lien upon such property, and if such cost is not
paid within thirty (30) days it shall be collected in the manner as is
provided for the collection of delinquent taxes. Each day on which any of the
provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate offense
which shall also be punishable in accordance with the provisions of section
1-10.



(Ord. No. O-01-09-18-1,  2, 9-18-01)



Chapter 10
LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS*



__________



*   Cross References: Permits,  4-76 et seq.; insulation contractors, 
4-106 et seq.; permit for blasting,  7-57; permit for pyrotechnics,  7-61;
establishment of development permit,  8-8; removal of refuse from commercial
tree trimmers,  9-31; burning permit required,  9-39; refuse processing
permit required,  9-43; excavation permit required for streets,  15-41;
driveway construction permit required,  15-70; driveway standards for
businesses,  15-72; display of goods on streets prohibited,  15-134; sale
of newspapers restricted,  15-138; demonstration permit required,  15-157;
taxicab license required,  17-3; taxicab driver's permit required,  17-61
et seq.



   State Law References: Authority to regulate and license businesses,
trades and forms of amusement, G.S.  160A-194; municipal taxation, G.S. 
160A-206 et seq.



__________



Art. I. In General,  10-1--10-10



Art. II. Business License Tax,  10-11--10-55



Div. 1. Generally,  10-11, 10-12



Div. 2. Requirement for License, 10-13--10-17



Div. 3. Licenses,  10-18--10-29



Div. 4. Enforcement, §§ 10-30--10-75



Art. III. Reserved



Art. IV. Pool Rooms, Bowling Alleys, Pinball Machines and Video Games, 
10-76--10-110



Div. 1. Generally,  10-76--10-90



Div. 2. Permit,  10-91--10-110



Art. V. Peddlers and Solicitors,  10-111--10-150



Div. 1. Generally,  10-111--10-125



Div. 2. Permit,  10-126--10-150



Art. VI. Pawnbrokers,  10-151--10-170



Art. VII. Itinerant Merchants,  10-171--10-190



Art. VIII. Franchise Tax on Electric Power,  10-191--10-204



ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL



Secs. 10-1--10-10. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
BUSINESS LICENSE TAX*



__________



*   Editors Note: Ord. No. O-08-01-15-9, adopted Jan. 15, 2008, amended
art. II in its entirety. Former art. II consisted of §§ 10-26--10-50,
pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted May
8, 1990. Ord. No. O-10-06-01-1, adopted June 1, 2010, repealed and replaced
art. II in its entirety. Ord. No. O-11-06-07-6, adopted June 7, 2011,
repealed and replaced art. II in its entirety. Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, adopted
November 17, 2015, repealed and replaced art. II in its entirety.



   State Law References: Regulating and licensing businesses, trades,
etc., G.S.  160A-194; authority to levy privilege license taxes, G.S. 
160A-211.



__________



DIVISION 1.



GENERALLY



Sec. 10-11. Definitions.



   When used in this chapter (unless the context requires a different
meaning):



   Administrator shall be the person designated by the City Manager to
operate the program required by this article.



   Business includes each trade, occupation, profession, business, and
franchise licensed under this chapter.



   Person includes any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship,
company, firm, or other legal entity.



   A business is seasonal in nature when it is conducted for profit six
(6) months out of the year or less.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-12. Construction of this article.



   This article is enacted for regulation purposes only.  In addition,
issuance of a license in accordance with this article does not excuse a
licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute. This
article does not prevent the City from requiring licenses for additional
businesses.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



DIVISION 2.



REQUIREMENT FOR LICENSE



Sec. 10-13. Who must be licensed.



   Each person who conducts a business within this City is subject to this
article. A person conducts business "within the City" if he or she maintains
a business location within the City; or if, either personally or through
agents, he or she (1) solicits business within the City limits or (2) picks
up or delivers goods or services within the City limits.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-14. Period of license; due date.



   (a)   Annual licenses. Unless the section of this article applicable
to a particular business provides otherwise, a license issued in accordance
with this article is good for the 12-month period beginning July 1 and ending
June 30.



   (b)   Licenses for periods shorter than one year. If the section of
this article applicable to a particular business so provides, a license may
be issued for a period of one (1) day, one (1) week, or some comparable
period of less than a full license year. A person may not commence a business
conducted within the City until the business license is obtained and may not
continue such a business beyond the period for which the license is issued.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-15. Refunds.



   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his or her business during
the license year, he or she is not entitled to a refund.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-16. Separate businesses.



   A separate license is required for each place of business unless two
(2) or more places of business under common ownership are contiguous to each
other, communicate directly with and open into each other, and are operated
as a unit.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-17. Exemptions.



   Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person is exempt from the
requirement of obtaining a license required by this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



DIVISION 3.



LICENSES



Sec. 10-18. Application.



   A person shall apply to the Administrator for each license required by
this article before commencing business.  The application, which shall be
submitted on forms provided by the Administrator, shall contain:



   (a)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, a partnership, a corporation, or some other entity.



   (b)   The nature of the business.



   (c)   Where the business is conducted.



   (d)   An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as
required by this chapter.



   (e)   Whether the business is regulated by a state occupational
licensing board subject to G.S. Chapter 93B, and, if so, the serial number of
the state license the applicant currently holds.



   (f)   Any other information the Administrator determines to be
necessary to issue the license.



   The application shall be accompanied by the payment of a license fee,
which is described in Section 10-22 below.  In compliance with state law,
this fee shall not exceed the cost to the City of the administrative process
of the production and issuance of the license.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-19. Reasons for refusal or revocation of a license.



   The Administrator shall refuse to issue a license or shall revoke a
license for either of the following reasons:



   (a)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to his or her
qualifications for a license.



   (b)   The applicant refuses to provide necessary information.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-20. Unqualified applicants; right to a conference.



   After receipt of the completed application, if the Administrator
believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under Section 10-19 of
this article, the Administrator shall not issue the license.  At the
applicant's request, the Administrator shall, in accordance with Section
10-29 of this article, give the applicant a written statement of the reason
for refusing the license. The applicant may, within ten (10) days after the
day the statement is received, request a conference to discuss the refusal.
In the request, the applicant shall specify why the application for a license
should not be refused. The Administrator shall arrange the conference within
a reasonable time.



   If the Administrator refuses to issue a license, the applicant may
reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the
application was refused no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the Administrator shall issue the license in
compliance with Section 10-21 of this article.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-21. Administrator to issue license; payment of license fee a
prerequisite.



   After receipt of the completed application and payment of the license
fee, if the Administrator believes that no reason exists for refusal of a
license under Section 10-19 of this article, the Administrator shall issue
the license.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-22. License fee.



   The fee required of every applicant for any business conducted or
engaged in within the City as required by this article shall be set forth and
made a part of the City of Marion Fee and Rate Schedule adopted by the City
Council, as amended from time to time.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fee shall in no case be more than the maximum permitted by state law for that
particular business or enterprise.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-23. Revocation.



   The Administrator shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke
it as set forth in Section 10-19 of this article. Before revoking a license,
the Administrator shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds for
revocation, in accordance with Section 10-29 of this article.  The licensee
may, within ten (10) days after the day on which notice is served, request a
conference with the Administrator in writing. The request shall specify the
reasons why the license should not be revoked. The Administrator shall
arrange the conference within a reasonable time.



   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten (10) days
after the day on which notice is served, the Administrator shall revoke the
license. If the licensee requests a conference, the Administrator may not
revoke the license until after the conference.



   If the Administrator revokes a license, the former licensee may apply
for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the license
was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing to
issue a license, the Administrator shall issue the license in accordance with
Section 10-21 of this article.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-24. Form and contents of license.



   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where
the business is conducted (if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature
of the business licensed and the period for which the license is issued. 
The Administrator shall keep a copy of each license issued.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-25. Assignments.



   A license may be assigned if (1) a business licensed under this article
and carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person, and (2) the
purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change
shall be reported to the Administrator in accordance with Section 10-26 of
this article.  Otherwise, each license issued under this article is a
personal license and is not assignable.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-26. Changes in the business conducted by licensee during the year.



   A licensee or an assignee shall report a change in the information
contained in the license application to the Administrator within ten (10)
days after the change occurs. If information shown on the license itself is
affected, the licensee or assignee shall surrender the license to the
Administrator when reporting the change.



   (a)   Fee for change.  If the change does not result in a separate
license fee, the Administrator shall reissue a license reflecting the change
upon payment of a fee of $5.00.



   (b)   Change requiring refusal of a license. If there is reason for
revoking the license under Section 10-19 of this article, the Administrator
shall refuse to reissue a license and shall instead begin proceedings to
revoke the license in accordance with Section 10-23 of this article.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-27. Administrator to furnish duplicates.



   Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the
Administrator shall furnish a duplicate for a fee of $5.00.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-28. Record of conferences.



   The Administrator shall maintain for three (3) years a record of each
conference held in accordance with this article. The record shall contain the
applicant's or licensee's name, the date of the conference, and a brief
statement of the issues discussed and the result reached. After three (3)
years, the Administrator shall dispose of the record in accordance with G.S.
121-5.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-29. Providing notice to an applicant or licensee.



   Whenever this article requires the Administrator to give a written
statement or notice to an applicant or a licensee, the Administrator may do
so in one of three (3) ways:



   (a)   By personally delivering the statement or notice to the
applicant or licensee;



   (b)   By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified
mail and returning the receipt requested to the address specified for that
purpose in the license application; or



   (c)   By causing the statement or notice to be served on the
applicant or licensee in accordance with the procedures for service of
process under Rule 4, North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



DIVISION 4.



ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION



Sec. 10-30. Duty to determine whether license is required.



   Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he or she
conducts is required to be licensed under this article and, if so, whether
that license has been obtained.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-31. Administrator to investigate.



   If the Administrator has reason to believe that a person is conducting
a business in the City in violation of this chapter, the Administrator shall
conduct an investigation to determine the status of the business.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-32. Duty to permit inspection.



   Each person who conducts business in the City shall permit the
Administrator to inspect the business premises during normal business hours
to determine the nature of the business conducted there.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-33. Duty to post license.



   A licensee shall post the license or licenses conspicuously in the
place of business licensed. If the licensee has no regular place of business,
the license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by the proper
City officials.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 10-34. Enforcement of ordinance.



   (a)   Criminal remedies. Conducting business within this City
without a valid license issued in accordance with this chapter, or without
posting a valid license in compliance with Section 10-33 of this article is a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.  Each day that a person
conducts business in violation of this article is a separate offense.



   (b)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set
forth in subsection (a) of this section and in compliance with G.S.
160A-175(d), the City may seek an injunction against any person who conducts
a business in violation of this article.



(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-1, § 2, 11-17-15)



Secs. 10-35--10-75. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
RESERVED



ARTICLE IV
POOL ROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS, PINBALL MACHINES AND VIDEO GAMES*



__________



*   State Law References: Billiard and pool tables, G.S.  105-64;
authority to regulate places of amusement, G.S.  160A-181; authority to
license and regulate forms of amusement and entertainment, G.S.  160A-194.



__________



DIVISION 1.



GENERALLY



Sec. 10-76. Prohibited activities.



   Holders of permits required by this article shall not, and neither
shall their employees:



   (1)   Permit any gambling on the permitted premises at any time, nor
the sale or use of any racing, football or other parlay cards or gambling
board;



   (2)   Permit the permit holder's premises to become disorderly, or
permit any profane, obscene, or indecent language thereon;



   (3)   Permit any narcotic or other illegal drugs to be sold or
consumed on the permitted premises;



   (4)   Knowingly permit any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to enter or remain on the permitted premises of a pool room, where
before such minor under eighteen (18) years of age enters or remains in such
pool room, the manager or owner thereof has been notified by the parents or
guardian of such minor not to allow him to enter or remain in such pool room;



   (5)   Employ in carrying on the business, any person who has been
convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or



   (6)   Permit any keeley board, keno board, or any other such board
or device to be attached to or placed upon any tables.



(Code 1982,  6-1065; Ord. of 10-4-88,  5; Ord. No. O-11-05-03-3,  2,
5-3-11)



   State Law References: Permitting minors to enter barrooms or billiard
rooms, G.S.  14-317.



Secs. 10-77--10-90. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.



PERMIT



Sec. 10-91. Required.



   No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling
alley, pinball machine, or video game, or other game table or alley for any
game or play for which a charge is made, either directly or indirectly,
unless he shall first have secured a state license from the secretary of
revenue and a permit from the city council to do so. Such permit shall expire
on June thirtieth of each year and shall not be transferable.



(Code 1982,  6-1061; Ord. of 10-4-88,  1)



Sec. 10-92. Application.



   Application for a permit required by this article shall be made upon
forms provided by the chief of police, and shall contain all information
necessary for the city council to act intelligently upon such applications.



(Code 1982,  6-1062; Ord. of 10-4-88,  2)



Sec. 10-93. Form and content.



   Every permit issued pursuant to this article shall specify the premises
for which it is issued, the number of games, tables or alleys to be operated
thereunder, the name of the owner or operator, and the dates upon which the
permit begins and shall expire. Such permit shall be posted in a prominent
place on the premises at all times.



(Code 1982,  6-1064; Ord. of 10-4-88,  4)



Sec. 10-94. Criminal history check authorized; disqualifications.



   A criminal records background check is required for applicants for a
license under this article, in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. Such background check shall be conducted by the police department in
conformity with state law. The result of the background check can determine
the suitability of the applicant.



   The city council shall not issue a permit required by this article to
any person who:



   (1)   Has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors
or narcotic drugs; or



   (2)   Is not a citizen and resident of this state; or



   (3)   Is an excessive user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs;
or



   (4)   As a result of the criminal background check, is deemed by the
city council to be unfit to conduct a business for which the license is
applied.



(Ord. No. O-03-02-18-1,  2, 2-18-03)



   Editors Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. O-03-02-18-1, adopted February 18,
2003, deleted and replaced  10-94 in its entirety to read as herein set out.
Former  10-94 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from  6-1063
of the 1982 Code and  3 of an ordinance dated October 4, 1988.



Sec. 10-95. Revocation.



   A second conviction of a holder of permit required under this article,
or his agent or employee, for any violation of any provision of this article
shall by operation of law constitute an automatic revocation of the permit of
such permit holder. In addition, the city council may at any time for cause
and after a hearing, of which such permit holder shall be given such
reasonable notice as the city council may direct, revoke any permit issued
pursuant to this article.



(Code 1982,  6-1068; Ord. of 10-4-88,  7)



Secs. 10-96--10-110. Reserved.



ARTICLE V
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*



__________



*   State Law References: Authority of city to regulate solicitation
campaigns, flea markets and itinerant merchants, G.S.  160A-178.



__________



DIVISION 1.



GENERALLY



Sec. 10-111. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Peddler means any person who transports goods from place to place and
sells or offers for sale such goods, or who, without traveling from place to
place, sells or offers for sale any good from any vehicle or device,
provided, that any person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the
purposing of evading the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler.



   Solicitor means any person who travels from residence to residence
taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery
or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not
samples are displayed or money is collected in advance.



(Code 1982,  6-1071)



   Cross References: Definitions and rules of construction generally, 
1-3.



Sec. 10-112. Prohibited on certain streets.



   No person, whether he possesses a permit required by this article or
not, shall peddle any merchandise upon the following streets or sidewalks
abutting such streets:



   (1)   Main Street, from Crawford Street to Logan Street;



   (2)   Court Street, from Academy Street to Madison Street;



   (3)   State Street, from Main Street to Garden Street;



   (4)   Railroad Street, from Main Street to Willow Street; and



   (5)   Henderson Street, from Garden Street to Burgin Street.



   (6)   Garden Street, from State Street to Fort Street.



   (7)   Logan Street, from Henderson Street to Main Street.



(Code 1982,  6-1077; Ord. of 9-6-94,  1)



Sec. 10-113. Badge.



   (a)    The city clerk shall, in addition to the license issued under
section 10-128, issue to each successful applicant a badge which shall be
substantially in the following form:



20 ________ City of Marion, North Carolina No. ________



   SOLICITOR'S BADGE 



________ has registered with the City Clerk as required by Ordinance.



(date) ____



____



   City Clerk 



   (b)    During the time the applicant is engaged in the business of a
peddler or solicitor, this badge shall be worn on the front of his outer
garment in such manner as to be conspicuous.



(Code 1982,  6-1075)



Sec. 10-114. Certain exceptions.



   (a)    The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons
while engaged in selling farm or dairy products produced by such persons or
members of their immediate families, nor to the sale of newspapers.



   (b)    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the sale of
articles of merchandise or the solicitation of funds by residents of the
county, in behalf of civic, religious or charitable organizations based in
such county, or the public schools, for purely religious, educational or
charitable purposes, provided such organizations shall furnish for each
person selling articles of merchandise or soliciting funds for said
organizations, a hat, badge, pin, uniform or identification card which will
identify the organization for whom such person is selling or soliciting.



(Code 1982,  6-1078)



Secs. 10-115--10-125. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.



PERMIT



Sec. 10-126. Required.



   In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, it shall be
unlawful for a peddler or solicitor as defined by section 10-111 of this
article to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a
permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. Should any
person employed by another as a peddler or solicitor change employment, such
person shall be required to secure a new permit.



(Code 1982,  6-1072)



Sec. 10-127. Application.



   Each and every person doing business in the city as a peddler or
solicitor shall file with the city clerk on a form to be provided for this
purpose an application for a permit, which shall contain the following
information:



   (1)   Name and address of individual filing application;



   (2)   Name and address of principal or employer if applicant is an
agent or employee;



   (3)   Credentials showing relationship of agent or employee;



   (4)   Description of applicant including height, weight, sex, age,
color and distinguishing characteristics, if any;



   (5)   The goods to be sold or offered for sale, or the type of
services to be rendered;



   (6)   The period of time during which the business will be carried
on in the city;



   (7)   Description of automobile or other vehicle to be used in the
business, including the make, model, body style, color and license number;



   (8)   Whether or not the applicant, his principal or employer, or
any other person having management or supervision of the applicant's business
has been convicted of a crime, the nature of the offense, and the punishment
assessed therefor; and



   (9)   Such other information as to the identity of the applicant or
the nature of his business as the city clerk may deem proper to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.



(Code 1982,  6-1073)



Sec. 10-128. Issuance.



   (a)    Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk shall cause to
be made such investigation of the applicant's moral character and business
responsibility as is necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.



   (b)    A criminal records background check is required for
applicants for a license under this article, in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. Such background check shall be conducted by the
police department in conformity with state law. The result of the background
check can determine the suitability of the applicant.



   (c)    If, as a result of this background check, the character and
responsibility of the applicant appear to be satisfactory, the city clerk
shall issue a permit, providing that the applicant complies with sections
10-112 and 10-113.



   (d)    The city clerk shall not issue a permit required by this
article to any person who, as a result of the investigation and background
check:



   (1)   Appears to have an unsatisfactory character and business
responsibility; or



   (2)   As a result of the criminal background check, is deemed by the
city clerk to be unfit to conduct the activities for which the license is
applied.



(Code 1982,  6-1074; Ord. No. O-03-02-18-2,  2, 2-18-03)



Sec. 10-129. Fee; privilege license tax.



   The city clerk shall charge and collect a fee in an amount as may be
established from time to time by the city council in order to recover the
administrative costs of processing each application for a permit. In addition
to the permit fee, the city clerk shall also collect the annual privilege
license tax from each successful applicant before issuing a permit to such
applicant.



(Code 1982,  6-1076)



Secs. 10-130--10-150. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI
PAWNBROKERS*



__________



*   Editors Note: An ordinance of January 8, 1991,  1--3, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as  10-151 was at the
discretion of the editor.



__________



Sec. 10-151. Rules and regulations adopted by reference; penalty.



   (a)    The city council herewith adopts the provisions of G.S.
Chapter 91A, "Pawnbrokers Modernization Act of 1989," in accordance with G.S.
section 91A-12.



   (b)    The city council reserves the right to adopt further such
rules and regulations governing this activity as it deems appropriate,
subject to the specific limitations of G.S. Chapter 91A, and specifically the
limitations of G.S. section 91A-12.



   (c)    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with this
section shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed
thirty (30) days.



(Ord. of 1-8-91,  1--3)



Sec. 10-152. Criminal history check authorized; disqualifications.



   In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Marion and their properties, the procedures herein are
established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal history checks on all
applicants for pawnbroker licenses. Subject to subsection (c) of this
section, a pawnbroker license may be denied for those persons convicted of
any crime against a person, or crimes against property where intent is an
element, or any drug or gambling related offense.



   (a)   The city manager, or designee, shall conduct an investigation
of any person applying for a pawnbroker license and it shall be a
precondition of a pawnbroker license that an applicant for a pawnbroker
license shall, upon request, provide fingerprints and all other necessary
personal identification including a birth certificate, social security number
and driver's license, if available, so that the city manager, or designee,
may cause a thorough search to be made of local and state criminal records to
determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions or the
crimes enumerated above by the use of the Division of Criminal Information
Network (DCI).



   (b)   The Marion Police Department shall provide the findings from
the use of the DCI to the city manager or designee, provided that all
necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of
Criminal Information have been executed.



   (c)   An evaluation of any crime for purposes of issuing a
pawnbroker license will take into account the nature and the circumstances of
the offense and the time frame of the offense as it relates to the pawnbroker
license.



   (d)   Prior to denial or termination of a pawnbroker license based
upon criminal history record information (CHRI) received from the Marion
police department, the city manager shall verify the existence of a record by
either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint
card of the individual to the criminal information and identification section
for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the individual.



(Ord. No. O-11-09-20-3,  3, 9-20-11)



Secs. 10-153--10-170. Reserved.



ARTICLE VII
ITINERANT MERCHANTS



Sec. 10-171. License required.



   It shall be unlawful for an itinerant merchant as defined in section
10-172 to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a
license in compliance with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-172. Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, an itinerant merchant is defined as
any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or
employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary
business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the
city, and whom, in furtherance of such purposes hires, leases, uses or
occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad box car, public
room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley or
other place within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares
and merchandise, either privately or at public auction.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-173. Exemptions.



   The definition of itinerant merchant shall not be construed to include:



   (a)   Any licensed auctioneer selling goods at an auction.



   (b)   Any person selling farm or nursery products he or she produces.



   (c)   A licensed automobile dealer.



   (d)   Any person selling Christmas trees and holiday decorations.



   No person, firm, or corporation so engaged in the sale of goods, wares
and merchandise shall be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in
connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-174. Application for license.



   An application for an itinerant merchant license must be obtained from
the city zoning administrator two (2) weeks prior to the time of the sale.
The application for license will be approved or disallowed by the zoning
administrator after an investigation by the city police chief. The zoning
administrator shall determine if the city zoning ordinance allows the sale of
the goods, wares and merchandise to be sold in the proposed location(s). The
itinerant merchant will be notified in writing if the application has been
approved or disapproved. If the application is disapproved, the itinerant
merchant will not be permitted to conduct business within the city limits of
Marion. No application from an applicant previously convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving fraud, forgery, sale of counterfeit goods, ticket
scalping, violation of tax laws, or business license laws will be approved.
No application will be approved that would involve the sale of goods, wares
and merchandise in a location in violation of the city zoning ordinance. All
approved itinerant merchant applicants will be required to submit a crew and
vehicle registration form for purposes of information and identification. If
the application is approved, the license fee set by city council and on file
in the office of the tax collector must be paid prior to the issuance of the
itinerant merchant license.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02; Ord. No. O-08-04-15-1,  1, 4-15-08)



Sec. 10-175. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Ord. No. O-03-11-19-2, adopted Nov. 19, 2003, deleted in
its entirety  10-175 which pertained to bonds and derived from Ord. No.
O-02-03-19-1, adopted Mar. 19, 2002.



Sec. 10-176. Display and possession of license and identification.



   An itinerant merchant shall keep the license required by this article
conspicuously and prominently displayed so as to be visible for inspection by
patrons of the itinerant merchant at the place or locations at which the
goods are to be sold or offered for sale. Upon the request of any customer or
city official, an itinerant merchant shall provide their name and permanent
address. If the itinerant merchant is not a corporation, or is an employee of
a corporation, he shall, upon the request of any customer, state or local
revenue or law enforcement agent, provide a valid driver's license, a special
identification card issued under G.S. section 20-37.7, a military
identification, or a passport bearing a physical description of the person
named reasonably describing the itinerant merchant. If the itinerant merchant
is a corporation, it shall, upon request of any customer, state or local
revenue or law enforcement agent, give the name and registered agent of the
corporation and the address of the registered office of the corporation, as
filed with the state secretary of state or the county register of deeds.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-177. Permission of property owner.



   An itinerant merchant shall obtain a written statement, signed by the
owner or lessee of any property upon which the itinerant merchant offers
goods for sale giving the owner's or lessee's permission to offer goods for
sale upon the property of the owner or lessee, the location of the premises
for which the permission is granted, and the dates during which the
permission is valid.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-178. Display area.



   Any itinerant merchant conducting business shall have a display area
with a tent not less than ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet. No items are to be
displayed on automobiles, trucks, tractors or the ground.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-179. Method of payment.



   Payment of the license will be accepted only in the form of cash, money
order, or cashier's check.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-180. License not transferable.



   No license issued under this article shall be transferable.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-181. Duty of police to enforce.



   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to enforce the
provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Sec. 10-182. Issuance of license and renewal.



   (a)    All licenses issued under the provision of this article shall
conform to section 10-5 of this chapter.



   (b)    The applicant shall make a written application for renewal
stating that the person or persons managing the business are the same as
those listed in the original application, that the place or places where the
applicant proposes to conduct business have not changed, and a statement
explaining any material change in circumstances from the information given in
the original application.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02; Ord. No. O-08-04-15-1,  1, 4-15-08)



Sec. 10-183. Appeal.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of city staff to deny an application
for a license may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the city manager within fourteen (14) days after notice of the
decision by the city staff has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The
city council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and
notice of such hearing shall be given to such persons by first class mail.
The decision of the city council regarding the appeal shall be final.



(Ord. No. O-02-03-19-1,  2, 3-19-02)



Secs. 10-184--10-190. Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII
FRANCHISE TAX ON ELECTRIC POWER



Sec. 10-191. Citation.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Marion's
Franchise Tax on Electric Power Ordinance", and shall be codified as chapter
10, article VIII.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-192. Definitions.



   In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions
shall be applicable herein:



   City shall mean the City of Marion.



   City franchise tax shall mean the franchise enacted by this article.



   Revenue Act shall mean Subchapter I of Chapter 105 of the General
Statutes of North Carolina.



   Secretary of revenue shall mean the secretary of revenue of the State
of North Carolina.



   State franchise tax shall mean the franchise or privilege tax imposed
on an electric power company engaged in the business of furnishing
electricity, electric lights, current or power as provided in G.S. Chapter
105, Article 3 entitled "Franchise Tax."



   State Franchise Tax Act shall mean Article 3 of Chapter 105 of the
General Statutes of North Carolina.



   Tax collector means the department of the [city/town/village]
government or the official agency of the state designated by law and
authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.



   Taxpayer(s) shall mean any electric power company liable for the taxes
imposed by this article.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the definitions of words,
terms and phrases as set forth and/or applied in Article 3, Chapter 105 of
the North Carolina General Statutes are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part hereof. Reference to any provision or provisions in the General
Statutes shall include the same as may be from time to time amended,
modified, supplemented, revised or superceded.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-193. Ratifications of existing permits.



   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the secretary
of revenue pursuant to the Revenue Act are for the purposes of this article,
hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-194. Levy of tax.



   A franchise tax is hereby levied and imposed for the period(s)
designated in section 10-195 of this article upon the electric power
companies engaged in the business of furnishing electricity, electric lights,
current or power within the corporate limits of the city. The tax shall be
3.09 percent of the companies' taxable gross receipts from the business of
furnishing electricity, electric lights, current or power within the
corporate limits of the city. It is intended that taxable gross receipts
hereunder shall be the same as those taxable under the State Franchise Tax
Act.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-195. Period for which tax due.



   When a distribution to the city as required under the State Franchise
Tax Act shall not be made, the city franchise tax shall be levied for the
periods herein described. A period for which the tax shall be due shall begin
on the first day of the first calendar month following the month during which
a distribution under the State Franchise Tax Act was due, but not made, to
the city and shall continue from month to month until such time as a
distribution as required under the State Franchise Tax Act shall be made. The
city shall notify taxpayers within a reasonable time after a required
distribution is or is not made by the secretary of revenue.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-196. Report and payment of tax.



   The tax shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form
and manner provided for the payment of sales and use taxes pursuant to and in
accordance with G.S. section 105-164.16 as the same applies to a taxpayer who
is consistently liable for more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) a month. As applicable to sales and
use taxes, such a taxpayer must file a return and pay the taxes due on a
monthly basis. The tax shall be due and payable when a return is required to
be filed.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-197. Refunds.



   Upon the resumption of distributions by the secretary of revenue as
required under the State Franchise Tax Act, a refund may be due to a taxpayer
as specified in this section. A refund in the amount indicated herein below
shall be due to a taxpayer within thirty (30) days after presentation to the
city by the taxpayer of a written certification made by the secretary of
revenue stating that portion of the city's percentage distribution amount of
the State Franchise Tax that was paid by the taxpayer and allocable to the
calendar quarter for which the most recent distribution was made. The amount
of a refund shall equal the portion of the percentage distribution amount
designated by the secretary of revenue.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-198. Penalties and remedies.



   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to the
State Franchise Tax Act as contained in Article 9, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105
of the General Statutes, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax
authorized to be levied and collected under this article, to the extent that
the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The city council of
the city may exercise any power the secretary of revenue may exercise in
collecting the State Franchise Tax.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-199. Administration.



   In addition to the provisions herein and to the extent that the same
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the levy and
collection of taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the
same manner as the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in Article 9,
Subchapter 1, Chapter 105 of the General Statutes.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-200. Confidentiality of records.



   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files
concerning the administration of the City Franchise Tax is legislatively
recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provision of Chapter 105
of the North Carolina General Statutes are adopted by reference and made
fully effective and applicable to administration of the tax levied herein as
if set forth in full.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-201. Ordinance as cumulative.



   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of city ordinances.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-202. Severability.



   The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any
section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this article is for any reason
held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence, or clause
thereof.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-203. Service upon electric power companies.



   The city shall serve a copy of this article upon the registered agent
for any electric power companies affected hereby.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Sec. 10-204. Effective date.



   This article shall become and be effective on the date and time as
passed by the city council of the city.



(Ord. No. O-02-06-18-1, 6-18-02)



Chapter 11
OFFENSES



Sec. 11-1. Display of firearms prohibited.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful to display on the person any firearm on
the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public property within the city
except as follows:



   (1)   When a firearm is being transported for repair or sale;



   (2)   When a firearm is carried by an on duty member of the national
guard.



   (b)    No firearm carried or transported pursuant to the exceptions
of this section shall be loaded under any circumstances.



   (c)    This section is not intended to apply to law enforcement
personnel who are authorized to carry a weapon in the performance of their
official duties.



Sec. 11-2. Public disorderliness.



   No person shall be disorderly in any street, alley, or public place.



(Code 1982,  8-1002)



   State Law References: Disorderly conduct, G.S.  14-288.4; intoxicated
and disruptive in public, G.S.  14-444.



Sec. 11-3. Indecent conduct.



   Any person who shall willfully expose the genitals or buttocks of his
person in any business or public place and in the presence of any other
person, or who aids or abets in any such act, or who procures another to
perform such act; or any person, who knowingly as owner, manager, lessee,
director, promoter or agent, or in any other capacity, hires, leases or
permits the land, building, or premises of which he is owner, lessee or
tenant, or over which he has control, to be used for purposes of any such
act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Code 1982,  8-1003)



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  14-190.9; offenses
against public morals, G.S.  19-1 et seq.



Sec. 11-4. Displaying obscene pictures.



   No person shall display on any street or alley, or in any store, shop
or public place, any vulgar or obscene pictures, marks, words, or
representations of any kind.



(Code 1982,  8-1008)



   State Law References: Obscene literature and exhibitions, G.S. 
14-190.1; offenses against public morals, G.S.  19-1 et seq.



Sec. 11-5. Prostitution.



   (a)    No person shall knowingly sell, rent or use any house to be
used as a house of prostitution.



   (b)    No person shall solicit any man or woman for sexual
intercourse on any of the streets or public places.



(Code 1982,  8-1009, 8-1011)



   Cross References: Use of taxicabs for soliciting prostitution
unlawful,  17-15.



   State Law References: Prostitution, G.S.  14-203 et seq.



Sec. 11-6. Begging in public places prohibited.



   No person shall beg, panhandle, solicit alms or conduct any type of
performance for donations in any public street, alley, right-of-way or
sidewalk in the city or on any property owned or leased by the city. This
section shall not apply to performances conducted in conjunction with
city-sponsored or approved events on public streets or sidewalks or on
property owned or leased by the city. The permission of the event organizer
is required for performances conducted in conjunction with city sponsored or
approved events on public streets or sidewalks or on property owned or leased
by the city.



(Code 1982,  8-1013; Ord. No. O-09-08-18-3,  2, 8-18-09)



   State Law References: Authority of city to regulate begging, G.S. 
160A-179.



Sec. 11-7. Propelling harmful objects; archery exception.



   No person shall shoot or hurl any stone, rock, shot or other hard
substance by means of a slingshot, bean shooter, air rifle, shot shooter, pop
gun, bow or other similar contrivance, provided that archery shooting may be
practiced in such places as may be set aside and approved by the council.



(Code 1982,  8-1015)



Sec. 11-8. Discharge of firearms and fireworks prohibited; exception.



   (a)   No person shall fire any pistol, gun or other firearm,
fireworks or other pyrotechnics in the City Limits.



   (b)   Subsection (a) shall not apply when a weapon is used in a
lawful manner:



   (1)   In self-defense;



   (2)   By a law enforcement officer in the discharge of his or her
duties;



   (3)   In a licensed shooting gallery; or



   (4)   At a historical, ceremonial or commemorative function with the
approval of the Police Chief, provided that in no event shall live ammunition
be used or discharged.



(Ord. No. O-12-8-21-6, § 2, 8-21-12)



Sec. 11-9. Sleeping in stairways, being on private premises without consent,
blocking public way prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (1)   Sleep on, or at the foot of the stairway of any building;



   (2)   Sit upon the bridge railings or on anything on the sidewalk,
or on the private premises, or grounds, of another, without the consent of
the person in control of such premises or grounds;



   (3)   Assemble in such numbers as to interfere with the full and
free use and passage of public traffic on sidewalks, streets, bridges,
alleys, or other public places;



   (4)   Park in a business parking lot after business hours, when
signs are posted in a conspicuous place prohibiting such parking after
business hours; or



   (5)   Skate or skateboard on any private property or parking lot,
when signs are posted in a conspicuous place prohibiting such activities.



(Code 1982,  8-1017; Ord. of 9-7-99,  1)



Sec. 11-10. Animal and chicken fights.



   No person shall incite or cause any dogs, or other animals, or any
chickens to fight.



(Code 1982,  8-1021)



   Cross References: Animals, Ch. 3.



   State Law References: Cockfighting, G.S.  14-362; animal fights other
than cockfights and animal baiting, G.S.  14-362.1.



Sec. 11-11. Unauthorized use of police whistles and fire signals.



   No person, without authority from the police department or fire
department, shall carry or use any whistles, bells, horns or sirens, similar
in appearance or sound to the whistles, horns or sirens used by the police
department or fire department.



(Code 1982,  8-1022)



   State Law References: Unlawful to equip unauthorized vehicle with siren
or compression whistle, G.S.  20-125.



Sec. 11-12. Damaging public property.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful to deface any public property within the
city.



   (b)    No person shall willfully, or negligently, injure, or
interfere with, any valve, valve box, meter, meter box, storm or sanitary
sewer, manhole cover, storm sewer catch basin cover, fire hydrant, police or
fire alarm box, traffic signal or any other property used in the city's
water, sewer, police or fire alarm systems.



(Code 1982,  8-1023, 8-1024)



   State Law References: Willful and wanton injury to real property,
G.S.  14-127; damaging public buildings and facilities, G.S.  14-132;
molesting fire-alarm, fire-detection or fire-extinguishing system, G.S. 
14-286.



Sec. 11-13. Posting signs on city property prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bill, poster, placard
or sign of any type on any pole, post or tree on any city-owned property
including parking lots, street and alley rights-of-way.



(Code 1982,  8-1025)



   State Law References: Unlawful posting of advertisements, G.S.  14-145.



Sec. 11-14. Distributing notices on public streets prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any written or
printed notices, posters, or pamphlets of any kind upon any public street or
alley or to place such materials under the windshield wipers of vehicles or
on any type vehicle.



(Code 1982,  8-1026)



Sec. 11-15. Unlawful to carry certain items; exceptions.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his
possession, except when on his own premises, or to carry or use, any bowie
knife, dirk, dagger, razor or knife, with a blade of over three (3) inches in
length, anywhere within the corporate limits of the city.



   (b)    This section shall not apply to the following persons:
officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of the United States when
in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under orders
requiring them to carry arms or weapons, civil officers of the United States
while in the discharge of their official duties, officers and soldiers of the
militia and the state guard when called into actual service, officers of the
state or of any county, city, or town, charged with the execution of the laws
of the state, when acting in the discharge of their official duties.



(Code 1982,  8-6010, 8-6011)



   State Law References: Carrying concealed weapons, G.S.  14-269;
possession and sale of spring-loaded projectile knives prohibited, G.S. 
14-269.6.



Sec. 11-16. Weapons prohibited on city property.



   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:



   (1)   City recreational facility shall mean the following
properties, including all buildings, parking lots, internal driveways and
walkways and any other improvements associated with the listed properties,
but excluding areas within the state or city public rights of way:



   a.   The Community Building Park, on North Main Street, including
playground, basketball court, tennis court, splash pad and all other athletic
facilities.



   b.   The West Marion Community Park, on Addie's Chapel Drive,
including playground and basketball court.



   c.   The Cross Mill Community Park, on Granby Street, including
playground, basketball court, volleyball court and disc golf course.



   d.   The Eastfield Community Park, on Perry Street, including
playground and basketball court.



   e.   The Clinchfield Community Park, on Hill Street, including
playground and basketball court.



   (2)   City building or public property shall mean the following
properties including all buildings, parking lots, internal driveways and
walkways and any other improvements associated with the listed properties,
but excluding areas within the state or city public rights of way.



   a.   City Hall, on North Main Street



   b.   Community Building, on North Main Street



   c.   Historic Depot, on Depot Street



   d.   Police Department, on South Main Street



   e.   Fire Department, on West Court Street



   f.   Public Works Department/City Warehouse, on Shop Drive



   g.   City Firing Range, on Old Greenlee Road



   h.   Water Plant, on Old Greenlee Road



   i.   Wastewater Treatment Plant, on NC Highway 226 South



   j.   Marion ABC Store #1, on East Court Street



   k.   Marion ABC Store #2, on US 221 North



   l.   Buck Creek Water Intake, on US 70 West



   m.   Historic Marion Tailgate Shelter, on West Henderson Street



   (b)   Concealed weapons. As allowed by G.S.  14-415.23, the city
prohibits the carrying of concealed handguns as follows:



   (1)   It is prohibited, and not within the scope of any concealed
handgun permit, for any person to possess or carry a concealed handgun in or
upon any city building and appurtenant premises as specifically described
herein above.



   (2)   It is prohibited for any person to possess or carry a
concealed handgun in or upon an City Recreational Facility as specifically
described herein above, except for legally carried concealed handguns, which
are permitted under State law (presently G.S. § 14-415.23).



   (3)   State law (presently G.S.  14-269(b)) provides that certain
persons are not subject to  the  prohibition against carrying concealed
weapons. Such persons are also exempt from the prohibitions in this
subsection.



   (4)   State law (presently G.S.  14-415.23) provides that,
notwithstanding local ordinances forbidding concealed handguns on
recreational facilities, handgun permittees are allowed to secure a handgun
"in a locked vehicle within the trunk, glove box, or other enclosed
compartment or area within or on the motor vehicle." Therefore, handguns
stored in such areas shall not be in violation of this section.



   (5)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted at each entrance to any
property set forth in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2), indicating that carrying a
concealed weapon or possession of a weapon, unless expressly allowed by state
law, is prohibited therein, as well as on the premises thereof. Signs on
buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance by which
the general public can access the building. The city manager or his designee
shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate location
of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks.



   (c)   Open weapons on city recreational facilities, in city
buildings and on city public property. As allowed by G.S.  160A-189, it
shall be unlawful for any person to display weapons (unconcealed) on any city
recreational facilities as defined herein above, in any city building as
defined herein above, on any city public property as defined herein above, on
any other city owned or controlled property or on any street, alley,
right-of-way or sidewalk owned or controlled by the city. As used in this
section, '"weapon" shall mean a rifle, pistol, shotgun, bowie knife, dirk,
dagger, sling shot, loaded cane, metallic knuckles, razor, shurikin, stun
gun, or other dangerous or deadly item of like kind. This prohibition shall
not apply to the following persons:



   (1)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of the
United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting
under orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;



   (2)   Civil officers of the United States while in the discharge of
their official duties;



   (3)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the national guard
when called into actual service;



   (4)   Sworn law enforcement officers.



   (d)   Seizure of weapons. The chief of police or any member of the
police department is hereby authorized to seize and hold any firearm or
mechanism involved in a violation of this section, and to hold such property,
subject to release only upon an order of a court of appropriate jurisdiction.



   (e)   Punishment. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance
with chapter 1 of the Marion City Code.



   (f)   Exception. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, the chief of police may, in his discretion, issue a permit
authorizing the display and discharge of certain weapons in connection with
organized training and certification programs, or competitions conducted by
bona fide civic groups or entities. All such permits must be in writing, with
such terms and conditions as the chief of police may require, provided that
all permits must contain provisions that clearly absolve and release the city
from any and all liability related to the event.



(Ord. No. O-11-11-01-1, § 2, 11-1-11; Ord. No. O-13-11-19-2, § 2, 11-19-13)



   State Law References: Statewide uniformity of local regulation, G.S. 
14-409.40; permit to carry concealed handgun; scope of permit, G.S. 
14-415.11; statewide uniformity, G.S.  14-415.23; firearms, G.S.  160A-189;
pellet guns, G.S.  160A-190; carrying concealed weapons, G.S.  14-269.



Sec. 11-17. Consumption of alcoholic beverages.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic
beverage as defined by G.S. section 18B-101 on any property owned or
controlled by the city or upon any public vehicular area; provided, that this
section shall not apply to the premises of those establishments that have an
"on-premises" ABC permit as prescribed under G.S. section 18B-1001.



   (b)   Such public vehicular area shall mean and include any drive,
driveway, road, roadway, street, sidewalk, alley, parking area or other space
open for the purpose of vehicular traffic or operation upon the grounds or
premises of:



   (1)   Any public or private hospital, college, school or church or
any institution maintained and supported by the State of North Carolina,
McDowell County or the City of Marion.



   (2)   Any service station, car wash, supermarket, store, restaurant,
amusement center, lounge, shopping center or office building or any other
business or municipal establishment or groups of such establishments
providing parking space for customers, patrons, employees or the public;
provided, that this section shall not apply to the premises of those
establishments that have an "on-premises" ABC permit as prescribed under G.S.
section 18B-1001.



   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be unlawful for
any person to consume any alcoholic beverage within the premises of a
sidewalk cafe; permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 of the City
Code and for which a valid ABC permit exists.



   (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be unlawful for
any person to possess or consume any locally or regionally produced craft
beer or wine within the area designated for such possession or consumption as
part of specially designated City of Marion or Marion Business Association
sponsored parades, concerts, festivals and events of the City of Marion, or
at other events approved by the City Council to take place on public streets,
sidewalks, alleys, properties or sidewalks, for which a public assembly
alcohol permit has been approved subject to the provisions of Chapter 12,
Parks and Recreation, Article III, Festivals and Events, of the City Code.



(Ord. No. O-16-03-01-1, § 2, 3-1-16)



Sec. 11-18.  Use of tobacco products in city-owned buildings, vehicles,
parks and in certain locations around city facilities prohibited.



   (a)   Smoking or the use of any tobacco product is prohibited in the
following locations:



   (1)   Inside all buildings or structures owned or leased by the city.



   (2)   In any vehicle owned or leased by the city.



   (3)   On the following grounds and locations:



   a.   On all sidewalks in front of any building or structure owned or
leased by the city.



   b.   Within a thirty (30) foot radius of any public entrance to any
building or structure owned or leased by the city.



   c.   Within a ten (10) foot radius of any non-public entrance to any
building or structure owned or leased by the city.



   d.   Within any park or greenway owned or leased by the city,
including but not limited to the Community Building Park, the Community
Building Splash Pad, the North Main Street Gazebo Park, the South Main Street
Gazebo Park, the West Marion Community Park, the Cross Mill Community Park,
the Eastfield Community Park, the Clinchfield Community Park, the Catawba
River Greenway and the Historic Depot Courtyard.



   e.   Under the Historic Marion Tailgate Market Shade Shelter.



   f.   At any other location designated and posted as a "no smoking
area" by the city.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to deposit any portion of a
cigarette, cigar, smoking device, or any refuse related to smoking on
property, sidewalks, streets, alleys and rights-of-way owned, leased or
maintained by the city, except in a receptacle designated for that purpose.



   (c)   It shall be a defense to any violation under this section that
the violation occurred on private property.



(Ord. No. O-10-05-04-2,  2, 5-4-10)



Sec. 11-19. Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity.



   (a)    Definition. For purposes of this section, "public place"
means any area generally accessible to the public for common usage and
access, including any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, park,
playground, driveway, parking lot or public vehicular area, the doorways and
entrance-ways, stairway, hall, courtyard, passageway or common area to any
building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on any
of those places or any property owned by the city.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about
in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the intent
to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina Controlled
Substances Act, G.S. Chapter 90, Article 5. To establish the intent to
violate the aforementioned statutes, it must be shown that:



   (1)   Such person is at a location frequented by persons who use,
possess or sell drugs; and



   (2)   At least two (2) of the following circumstances exist:



   a.   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop
passersby, or repeatedly attempting to engage passersby in conversation; or



   b.   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles; or



   c.   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons;
or



   d.   Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful
drug-related activity; or



   e.   Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, or by courier, money or objects; or



   f.   Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a
law enforcement officer.



   (c)    Punishment. Any person who violates this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.



(Ord. of 3-8-94)



   Editors Note: An ordinance of Mar. 8, 1994, did not specifically amend
the Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of such ordinance
as  11-19 was at the discretion of the editor.



Sec. 11-20. False alarms.



   (a)    Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Alarm system means any electronic or mechanical device which transmits
an electronic alarm signal or recorded message to the city or county
communications center or other receiving station indicating an actual or
attempted unauthorized entry into a building, indicating the commission or
attempted commission of a crime in or about a building or indicating a
possible fire or chemical or gas contamination of a building. For purposes of
this definition, the term "other receiving station" means any person or
business that receives an electronic alarm signal or recorded message and
transmits information regarding such signal or message to the city police or
fire departments or to the county communications center.



   Alarm system owner means any person, corporation, partnership,
governmental or education entity owning or leasing an alarm system.



   Audible alarm system means any alarm owned by an alarm system owner
that, by sound of a whistle, bell, buzzer, siren or other noise generator,
alerts those inside or outside a home, building or vehicle, and in the near
vicinity, of a break-in, robbery, possible fire or chemical or gas
contamination, but does not transmit a signal by telephone or other
communications device.



   False alarm means activation of an alarm system that elicits a response
by the police or fire departments when no situation requiring such a response
does, in fact, exist. This includes accidental, avoidable and unnecessary
alarm activation due to user error, equipment malfunction, improper or
unsuited equipment, but does not include alarm activation caused by violent
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to control by the alarm user including disruption of the telephone
circuits, an area power failure, or failure of the equipment at the receiving
station.



   (b)    Penalties for excessive false alarms. There shall be a fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per false alarm for the fourth and each subsequent
false alarm received by the city police or fire department per calendar year.
For purposes of this section, a false alarm is defined as any signal
communicated by any means to solicit police or fire response, when the signal
originated due to defective or poorly operating equipment or the alarm was
otherwise sent accidentally.



   (c)    Continuous sounding audible alarms. If an audible alarm
system is activated and the sound does not cease after fifteen (15) minutes,
then the city police or fire department may use any reasonable means to
silence the alarm.



(Ord. No. O-06-11-07-1,  2, 11-7-06) 



Chapter 12
PARKS AND RECREATION*



__________



*   Cross References: Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
Ch. 15; zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: and recreation, G.S. § 160A-350 et seq.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 12-1--12-25



   Art. II. Tennis Facilities, §§ 12-26--12-50



   Art. III. Festivals and Events, §§ 12-51--12-60



   Art. IV. Hazardous Recreational Activities, §§ 12-61--12-67



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 12-1. Hours of operation of community building tennis and basketball
courts.



   No persons shall be on the community building tennis or basketball
courts between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. local time.



of 5-7-91, § 1; Ord. No. O-07-10-23-1, § 1, 10-23-07)



   Editors Note: ordinance of May 7, 1991, did not specifically amend the
Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 of such ordinance as § 12-1 was at the
discretion of the editor.



   Cross References: facilities, § 12-26 et seq.



Sec. 12-2. Hours of operation for other city park facilities.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any city owned or
maintained park facility other than the community building tennis courts or
basketball courts at any time between sunset and sunrise for any purpose
without written consent from the city manager. Persons renting the basement
of the community building are exempted from this requirement, to the extent
authorized by their approved rental application.



(Ord. No. O-04-08-03-2, § 2, 8-3-04; Ord. No. O-07-10-23-1, § 1, 10-23-07)



Sec. 12-3. Registered sex offenders prohibited from entering parks or
recreational facilities.



   (a)    For purposes of this section the following definitions shall
apply:



   (1)   Registered sex offender. An individual who is registered by
any state or federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on
any state or federal registered sex offender listing, including, but not
limited to, the sex offender registry established in G.S. § 14-27A.



   (2)   Public park. Any publicly owned, leased, operated or
maintained land or buildings which are designated by the City of Marion as a
park or recreational facility.



   (b)    No registered sex offender shall enter into or upon any
public park operated by the City of Marion. Each entry into a public park,
regardless of the time period between such entries, shall constitute a
separate offense under this section.



   (c)    The city manager or his or her designee shall post this
regulation at the main entrance of each park within thirty (30) days of
passage of this section.



(Ord. No. O-08-09-02-1, § 1, 9-2-08)



Secs. 12-4--12-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
TENNIS FACILITIES*



__________



*   Cross References: of operation for community building tennis courts,
§ 12-1.



__________



Sec. 12-26. Playing time restricted.



   Any person using the tennis facilities at the community building will
restrict play to one (1) hour when others are waiting to play.



of 6-16-87, § 1)



Sec. 12-26.1. Prohibitions on certain activities.



   No objects with wheels shall be allowed on the tennis courts, except
for wheelchairs. No games of any sort other than tennis are allowed to be
played on the tennis court.



(Ord. No. O-05-05-17-1, § 2, 5-17-05)



Sec. 12-27. Limitations on commercial activities and tournaments.



   No person shall participate in any money making activities at the
tennis courts or at the community building without the approval of the city
council. No person shall give tennis lessons for a fee nor shall any
tournament play take place on these facilities without the consent of the
city council.



of 6-16-87, § 2)



Sec. 12-28. Disorderly conduct prohibited.



   No person shall swear, fight or consume alcoholic beverages on the
community building grounds or the tennis courts.



of 6-16-87, § 3)



Sec. 12-29. Reserved.



   Editors Note: 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted Jan. 15,
2008, deleted § 12-29, which pertained to penalties and derived from an
ordinance adopted June 16, 1987.



Secs. 12-30--12-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
FESTIVALS AND EVENTS



Sec. 12-51. Specially designated city or MBA sponsored events; activities
prohibited.



   (a)   Purpose. Specially designated City of Marion or Marion
Business Association (hereafter referred to as "MBA") sponsored parades,
concerts and festivals and events of the City of Marion (hereafter jointly
referenced as "city events") are events that attract a large number of people
and which continue for variable time periods. Due to the congestion and the
duration of such events, the city enacts this article to promote the public
health, safety and welfare, and to provide orderly recreation at city events
to which these provisions are made to apply. The city believes that pistols
or other projectiles, such as silly string, and the throwing of Frisbees and
balls could create undue risk of injury to person and damage property.



   Additionally, the city desires to permit and regulate the vendors
appearing at the events to protect the public safety. City events frequently
feature organized activities, live entertainment, food concessions and many
authorized exhibitors who display and offer for sale artwork, crafts, food
and related items. The MBA or the appropriate city department, depending on
the event, issues permits to persons desiring to place or maintain booths or
concession stands and the City of Marion issues itinerant business licenses
to peddlers or roving-type vendors. The exhibition or offering for sale of
merchandise or food and beverages by unauthorized vendors poses a threat to
the public safety and welfare, interferes with planned traffic flow and the
maintenance of order, frequently violates the city zoning code and detracts
from the authorized exhibits and concessions.



   (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply during the times
listed on an approved City of Marion application permit for parades,
festivals, concerts, picket lines, group demonstrations, and other events, or
on the rain dates, if necessary, to cover all of the period of time
encompassed by the event, provided that no event shall extend beyond 12:00
midnight without the approval of the city council.



   The area and boundaries of any city event to which these provisions
shall be made to apply shall be determined by the appropriate city department
or the MBA as designated by the city manager or his or her designee,
depending on the event, and shall include any public street, sidewalk or
other publicly owned area that is within or constitutes the boundary of that
event.



   (c)   Unlawful to operate bicycle or other wheeled vehicle. It shall
be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle, tricycle, unicycle, moped,
skateboard or any other wheeled vehicle, roller skates or roller blades (all
hereafter referred to as "wheeled vehicle") on or within the boundaries of
any city event to which these provisions have been made to apply. For
purposes of this section, "operate" shall mean the use, putting into action,
or causing to function of a wheeled vehicle by a person mounted thereon. This
section shall not apply to wheelchairs, baby strollers, or baby carriages.



   (d)   Unlawful to throw balls, shoot projectiles, etc. except as
otherwise permitted herein as part of a permitted or approved activity. It
shall be unlawful for any person to shoot projectiles, toss or throw a ball,
Frisbee, model airplane or similar object on or within the boundaries of any
city event to which these provisions have been made to apply.



   (e)   Unlawful to use fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person
to purchase, sell, deal in, transport, possess, receive, use or cause to be
used or discharged, any fireworks on or within the boundaries of any city
event. For the purpose of this section, "fireworks" shall include all devices
that are legal or illegal in the State of North Carolina, including items
that explode and nonexploding items that produce heat, smoke, noise, light or
movement. This section shall not apply to fireworks displays conducted by a
licensed professional pyrotechnician contracted by the city or the MBA as
part of a city event.



   (f)   Unlawful to conduct outside sales. It shall be unlawful for
any person to exhibit, display, offer for sale or to sell any merchandise or
other item, any service, food or beverage from any outside location
(hereafter referred to as "outside sales") on public in or within one hundred
(100) feet of the boundaries of a city event, without the issuance of a
permit or permission by the City of Marion or the Marion MBA. Any person
issued a permit to conduct outside sales shall display the permit issued by
the City of Marion in a conspicuous place at the location of the outside
sales.



   (g)   City exhibit permits. Upon the request of a law enforcement
officer, a city employee or a member of the Marion MBA, any person shall
produce or exhibit any permit from the MBA or the City of Marion for outside
sales or permitted activities at a city event so that the city may ensure
compliance with this section. The permit may include limits on hours of
display issued by the MBA and the City of Marion.



   (h)   Failure to cease activities. It shall be unlawful for a person
on or within the boundaries of a city event to which these provisions have
been made to apply, to fail to obey the command of a law enforcement officer
to:



      (1)   Cease the operation of a wheeled vehicle;



      (2)   Cease the shooting or throwing of a ball, Frisbee, model
plane, or other projectile; or



      (3)   Cease exhibiting, displaying, offering for sale or
selling any merchandise, service, food or beverage, on public property in or
within one hundred (100) feet of  the boundaries of the city event without a
valid permit or written permission from the MBA or the City of Marion.



   (i)   Exception. This section shall not apply to the operation of a
wheelchair for the benefit of the handicapped or to the operation of any
wheeled vehicle or the throwing or tossing of any ball, Frisbee or other
object if the otherwise prohibited activity is part of an authorized exhibit,
activity or display. The director of the MBA or his or her designee or the
city manager or his or her designee as it relates to the city event shall
have the authority to specify the conditions under which wheeled vehicles may
be operated and balls, Frisbees, or objects may be thrown or tossed for the
protection of the public.



   (j)   Animals at city events. Pursuant to section 3-4 of the City
Code, which requires animal owners to keep their dog or cat under restraint,
animals, except leashed dogs, or cats or dogs carried by their owners, are
prohibited at city events. This section shall not apply to animals in a
petting zoo or animal rides if the otherwise prohibited animals are part of
an authorized exhibit, activity or display. Dogs or cats designated under
section 3-5 of the City Code as "fierce, dangerous, or vicious" are not
permitted within the boundaries of the festival unless they are securely
muzzled.



   (k)   Alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold,
distributed, possessed or consumed on public streets, sidewalks, alleys,
properties or parking lots at specially designated City of Marion or MBA
sponsored parades, concerts and festivals and events of the City of Marion,
or at other events approved by the City Council to take place on public
streets, sidewalks, alleys, properties or sidewalks (hereafter jointly
referenced as “special events"), unless the following conditions are met:



      (1)   A public assembly alcohol permit (hereinafter referred
to as “permit”) has been approved by the City Manager or his designee
making provisions for the sale, distribution, possession and consumption of
locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine on public streets,
sidewalks, alleys, properties or parking lots at the special event, to the
extent permitted by such permit.



         a.   Permits issued in accordance with this section are
effective for the time period and event specified.



         b.   Permits issued pursuant to this section shall not
be transferrable or assignable.



         c.   Permits issued pursuant to this section may be
issued to a non-profit organization, civic club, unit of local government or
to a business possessing necessary State permits for the sale and/or
distribution of beer or wine. The non-profit organization, civic club, unit
of local government or business receiving such permit is hereinafter referred
to as “vendor.”



         d.   Permits issued in accordance with this section must
be approved at least ten (10) days in advance of the scheduled event by the
City Manager or his designee. The City Manager or his or her designee is
authorized to request such information from the vendor that will allow for a
determination to be made regarding the issuance of the permit.



         e.   A fee shall be levied for each permit issued
pursuant to this section in accordance with the City's adopted fee schedule.



      (2)   Locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine can
only be possessed, consumed, sold, or distributed in such area as approved by
the City Manager or his designee, which area is to be conspicuously marked by
the vendor.



         a.   The vendor must provide colored wrist bands or
other identification devices, approved by Police Chief or his or her
designee, to be used by the wearer or bearer to purchase or receive locally
or regionally produced craft beer or wine. New colored wrist bands or
different identification devices shall be used on succeeding days of
multi-day events. Before issuing a wrist band or identification device, the
vendor is responsible for determining if the person to be issued a wrist band
or identification device is of the legal age to possess alcoholic beverages.



         b.   It is unlawful for a person authorized to purchase
or possess an alcoholic beverage as set out herein to pass on an alcoholic
beverage to any other person not wearing an authorized wristband.



         c.   No person shall possess or consume an alcoholic
beverage except as set out herein and only upon wearing the appropriately
colored wristband issued, or possessing the particular identification device
designated, for the day of the special event.



         d.   Alcoholic beverages not obtained or acquired as set
out in this section are not permitted and the possession, consumption, sale
or distribution of such alcoholic beverages is considered a violation of this
article.



         e.   A wristband or other identification device issued
as set out herein is not transferable and can only be worn by the person to
whom such wristband is issued by the vendor.



      (3)   There shall be a reasonable plan approved by the City
Manager for security and crowd control as well as emergency services. The
City Manager may require the vendor to hire an off-duty police officer or
officers to oversee alcohol sales at the event, or in the case of a City or
MBA sponsored special event may provide on duty police officers to oversee
alcohol sales at the special event, and may place any other reasonable
conditions on a permit issued pursuant to this section.



      (4)   The vendor conducting the distribution and/or sale of
locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine shall obtain all applicable
permissions, licenses and permits for such distribution and/or sale. The City
Manager is authorized to require any applications and proofs as he or she may
deem necessary to make a determination on the ability of a vendor to
distribute or sell alcoholic beverages as provided herein.



      (5)   The sale, distribution, possession and consumption of
locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine within the public area
shall be in full compliance with all state and local laws governing such
matters.



      (6)   In consideration of the granting of permission for the
distribution and/or sale of locally or regionally produced craft beer or
wine, the vendor conducting such distribution and/or sale shall indemnify and
hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees against all loss,
expense or liability of any kind, including attorney fees, caused by or in
any way related to the sale, distribution, possession and consumption of
locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine during the special event.



      (7)   To assure such indemnity, the vendor conducting the
distribution and/or sale of locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine
shall secure and at all times maintain in full force and effect a
comprehensive general liability insurance policy providing liquor liability
protection in the amount of at least $1,000,000. The insurance shall be
issued by a company rated by A.M. Best’s rating service as A - - or better
and shall name the City as an additional insured party. Said policy shall
remain in effect for the entire time period of the special event. Evidence of
such insurance shall be provided to the City Manager at least seven (7) days
before the date scheduled for the special event.



      (8)   For the sale of locally or regionally produced craft
beer or wine only involving off-premises consumption, with no consumption of
the beer or wine sold at the event on public property or in the special event
or in the special event area, the City Manager or his or her designee may
issue the permit with only the requirements listed in subsection (1) and
subsections (4) through (7) being required.



   (l)   Denial or revocation of alcohol permit approved by the City
Manager or his designee for the serving, sale possession or consumption of
locally or regionally produced craft beer or wine on public streets,
sidewalks, alleys, properties or parking lots at a special event.



      (1)   The City Manager or his designee may deny or revoke an
alcohol permit for the serving, sale possession or consumption of locally or
regionally produced craft beer or wine on public streets, sidewalks, alleys,
property or parking lots at a special event if he or she finds that the
granting or continuation of the permit would not be in the public's interest
or if he finds that the vendor has:



         a.   Made a deliberate misrepresentation or provided
false information in the application;



         b.   Operated such public street, alley, sidewalk,
property or parking lot in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or
constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare;



         c.   Failed to keep the street, alley, sidewalk,
property or parking lot clean and free of refuse, unless the City is
responsible for keeping such areas clean and free of refuse during the event;



         d.   Failed to maintain any health, business or other
permit or license required by law;



         e.   Violated any of the terms of this section;



         f.   Failed to obtain or maintain the amount and type of
insurance required herein; or



         g.   Failed to uphold the terms of the permit.



      (2)   Before the denial or revocation of a permit, the City
Manager shall notify the permit holder of his or her intent to deny or revoke
the permit and the reasons therefor and shall afford the permit holder a
reasonable opportunity to be heard on the question of such denial or
revocation. After the hearing, the City Manager shall notify the permit
holder in writing of this decision and the reasons therefor. A decision of
the City Manager to revoke a permit may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (3).



      (3)   The applicant may appeal a denial of a permit to the
City Council by submitting a request in writing to the City Manager within
ten (10) working days after the date of the written denial. Upon receipt of
such appeal, the City Manager shall schedule the appeal to be heard at the
next available Regular City Council Meeting. Upon hearing the appeal, the
City Council may take action to uphold or deny the appeal. The findings and
determination of the City Council shall be final.



   (m)   Enforcement. A violation of this article is a misdemeanor or
infraction as provided by G.S. sections 14-4 and 160A-175. As an alternative
or additional measure of enforcement, any law enforcement officer may issue a
citation for a civil penalty for violation of this section in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00). This authority shall be in addition to any other
authority and shall not preclude in any way any law enforcement officer from
exercising any authority or carrying out the duties of a law enforcement
officer nor preclude the city from any other available legal enforcement
procedure. Enforcement of an unpaid citation may be by issuance of a criminal
summons or by the filing of a complaint to collect the unpaid debt owed to
the city.



(Ord. No. O-05-03-01-1, § 2, 3-1-05; Ord. No. O-17-06-20-7, § 2, 6-20-17)



Secs. 12-52--12-60. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES*



__________



*   Editors Note: No. O-05-12-06-2, adopted Dec. 6, 2005, enacted new
provisions to be designated as Art. III, §§ 12-51--12-57. Inasmuch as there
already exists an Art. III, said new provisions have been redesignated as
Art. IV, §§ 12-61--12-67. Original section designations have been
maintained in the history notes following each section.



__________



Sec. 12-61. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and
welfare of those persons desiring to engage in hazardous recreational
activities within designated areas of the City of Marion. This article is
intended to comply with and supplement the Hazardous Recreation Parks Safety
and Liability Act, G.S. Chapter 99E, Article 3, and shall be interpreted in
accordance therewith.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-51), 12-6-05)



Sec. 12-62. Authority and enactment.



   This article is adopted under the authority and provision of the G.S.
Article 6, Chapter 153A-121.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-52), 12-6-05)



Sec. 12-63. Jurisdiction.



   This article shall apply to the McDowell County Recreation Center
located at 25 Academy Street in the corporate limits of the City of Marion
and any other designated areas as defined by the city council.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-53), 12-6-05)



Sec. 12-64. Definition of terms.



   (a)    Protective equipment shall mean helmets, elbow pads and
kneepads.



   (b)    Helmet shall mean protective headgear that meets or exceeds
standards established by the American National Safety Institute.



   (c)    Hazardous recreational activities shall mean skateboarding,
inline skating or freestyle bicycling.



   (d)    Designated areas shall mean those areas within the City of
Marion specifically set aside for those engaging in hazardous recreational
activities. A list of designated areas shall be maintained by the city clerk
and each designated area shall include a sign clearly identifying such area
for hazardous recreational activities use.



   (e)    Participant shall mean a person, regardless of age, who
engages in a hazardous recreational activity within any designated area.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-54), 12-6-05)



Sec. 12-65. Rules and regulations.



   The city manager shall develop rules and regulations governing the use
of all designated areas; however, the rules and regulations for the skate
park located at the McDowell County Recreation Center at 25 Academy Street in
the corporate limits of the City of Marion shall be developed by the McDowell
County Director of Parks and Recreation, with input from the city. The rules
and regulations shall be posted prominently near the entrances to all
designated areas. Any person may request, at no charge, a written copy of the
current rules and regulations.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-55), 12-6-05)



Sec. 12-66. Duties of participants.



   All persons shall wear protective equipment while engaging in any
hazardous recreational activity within a designated area. All participants
shall comply with all rules and regulations applicable to designated areas.
Specifically, and without limitation, any person riding a skateboard or
similar device within any designated area shall wear elbow pads, kneepads and
a helmet that is properly fitted with chin strap fastened.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-56), 12-6-05)



Sec. 12-67. Violations.



   Any person violating this article shall be subject to penalties
established in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. O-05-12-06-2, § 2(12-57), 12-6-05) 



Chapter 13
PLANNING*



__________



*   Cross References: and building regulations, Ch. 4; cemeteries, Ch. 5;
flood hazard management, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch. 12; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; subdivisions, Ch. 16; trees, Ch.
19; zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: and regulation of development, G.S. § 160A-360
et seq.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 13-1--13-25



   Art. II. Planning and Zoning Board, §§ 13-26--13-50



   Art. III. Downtown Advisory Committee, §§ 13-51--13-55



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Secs. 13-1--13-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD*



__________



*   Cross References: Ch. 2.



__________



Sec. 13-26. Composition; terms; vacancies; compensation; attendance.



   The planning and zoning board, referred to throughout this article as
the board, shall consist of five (5) regular members and up to six (6)
alternate members. All board members shall be residents of the city, and
shall be appointed by the city council. Initial appointments to the board
shall be made as follows: one (1) member for a term of three (3) years; two
(2) members, each for a term of two (2) years; and two (2) members, each for
terms of one (1) year. Two (2) alternate members shall also be appointed to
serve three-year terms. As the terms of these seven (7) members expire, new
appointments for overlapping terms of three (3) years each shall be made.
Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of appointed terms
shall be filled as they occur by the city council for the period of the
unexpired term. Members shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for
any expenses incurred while representing the board. Regular attendance of the
meetings of the board is considered a prerequisite for maintenance of
membership of the board.



of 2-18-86, § 2; Ord. of 8-21-01, § 2)



Sec. 13-27. Officers.



   Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the board shall meet and
elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its regular members, both of
whom shall serve for terms of one (1) year or until re-elected or until their
successors are elected. The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a
municipal officer, or employee of the city, or a member of the board, and who
shall hold office during the term of the chairman and until a successor
secretary shall have been appointed. The board may create and fill other
offices as it may determine.



of 2-18-86, § 3)



Sec. 13-28. Rules; record, meetings; quorum.



   The board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business which
are consistent with this article as well as the general statutes of the state
and shall keep a record of its members' attendance, and of its resolutions,
discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a public
record. The board shall hold at least one (1) meeting monthly, and all of its
meetings shall be open to the public. There shall be a quorum of three (3)
board members for the purpose of taking any official action required by this
article. However, the board shall not perform the duties of a board of
adjustment as authorized by G.S. 160A-388, and section 13-30 of this article
without the presence of four (4) board members.



of 2-18-86, § 3; Ord. O-06-01-17-3, § 3, 01-17-06)



Sec. 13-29. Fiscal policy.



   The expenditures of the board, exclusive of gifts or grants, shall be
within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council, and no
indebtedness for which the city shall be liable shall be contracted or
incurred by such board unless an appropriation is made by the city council
for such purpose as authorized by law and then only to the extent of such
appropriation. The board shall have the right to accept gifts and donations
for the exercise of its functions and may expend the money received from such
gifts and donations in a manner which in the judgment of the board is
consistent with the best interest of the planning program.



of 2-18-86, § 4)



   State Law References: powers of planning agency, G.S. § 160A-363.



Sec. 13-30. Duties.



   The planning and zoning board shall have the power to perform the
following duties:



   (1)   Make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and
surrounding areas;



   (2)   Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the
study area;



   (3)   Prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;



   (4)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and
efficient manner;



   (5)   Advise the city council concerning the use and amendment of
means for carrying out plans;



   (6)   Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement
of various means for carrying out plans that the city council may direct;



   (7)   Perform the duties of a board of adjustment as authorized by
the general statutes section 160A-388; and



   (8)   Perform any other related duties that the city council may
direct.



of 2-18-86, § 5)



   State Law References: to create or designate planning agency, G.S. §
160A-361.



Secs. 13-31--13-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
DOWNTOWN ADVISORY COMMITTEE



Sec. 13-51. Composition; terms; vacancies; compensation; attendance.



   The downtown advisory committee, referred to throughout this article as
the committee, shall consist of nine (9) regular members. All regular
committee members shall be appointed by the city council. Initial
appointments to the committee shall be made as follows: three (3) members for
a term of three (3) years; three (3) members, each for a term of two (2)
years; and three (3) members, each for terms of one (1) year. As the terms of
these nine (9) members expire, new appointments for overlapping terms of
three (3) years each shall be made. Vacancies occurring for reasons other
than expiration of appointed terms shall be filled as they occur by the city
council for the period of the unexpired term. Members shall serve without
pay, but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the
committee, with the approval of the city manager. Regular attendance of the
meetings of the committee is considered a prerequisite for maintenance of
membership of the committee. The city council may appoint ex officio members
at its discretion to include, but not be limited to the mayor or a city
council member, the city manager, the Marion Downtown Business Association
Executive Director, a McDowell County representative and a Chamber of
Commerce representative. The city planner shall be designated as the downtown
advisory committee/city staff liaison, to coordinate information gathering
from other staff and agencies and meeting scheduling and agendas.



(Ord. No. O-05-02-15-01, § 2, 2-15-05)



Sec. 13-52. Officers.



   Within thirty (30) days after appointment, the committee shall meet and
elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its regular members, both of
whom shall serve for terms of one (1) year or until reelected or until their
successors are elected. The committee may create and fill other offices as it
may determine.



(Ord. No. O-05-02-15-01, § 2, 2-15-05)



Sec. 13-53. Rules; records; meetings.



   The committee shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
which are consistent with this article as well as the general statutes of the
state and shall keep a record of its members' attendance, and of its
resolutions, discussions and recommendations, which record shall be a public
record.



(Ord. No. O-05-02-15-01, § 2, 2-15-05)



Sec. 13-54. Fiscal policy.



   The expenditures of the committee, exclusive of gifts or grants, shall
be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council, and
no indebtedness for which the city shall be liable shall be contracted or
incurred by such committee unless an appropriation is made by the city
council for such purpose as authorized by law and then only to the extent of
such appropriation. The downtown advisory committee shall not expend any
funds without the approval of the city, to ensure that funds are spent in
accordance with the goals of the city council. The committee is authorized to
accept gifts and donations for the exercise of its functions and may expend
the money received from such gifts and donations in a manner, which in the
judgment of the committee is consistent with the roles of the downtown
advisory committee, with the approval of the city.



(Ord. No. O-05-02-15-01, § 2, 2-15-05)



Sec. 13-55. Duties.



   The downtown advisory committee shall have the power to perform the
following duties:



   (1)   Make studies of the downtown area within its jurisdiction and
surrounding areas;



   (2)   Determine objectives to be sought in the design, promotion and
economic restructuring of the downtown area;



   (3)   Prepare and recommend plans for achieving these objectives;



   (4)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and
efficient manner;



   (5)   Advise the city council on issues concerning downtown Marion
and make recommendations on projects and programs pertaining to downtown;



   (6)   Perform any other related duties in the downtown that council
may direct.



(Ord. No. O-05-02-15-01, § 1, 2-15-05)



Chapter 14
POLICE*



__________



*   Cross References: Administration, Ch. 2; civil emergencies, Ch. 6;
offenses, Ch. 11.



   State Law References: Municipal law enforcement, G.S.  160A-281 et seq.



__________



Art. I. In General,  14-1--14-25



Art. II. Personnel,  14-26--14-50



Art. III. Operations,  14-51--14-70



Art. IV. Reserve Police Force,  14-71--14-79



ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL



Secs. 14-1--14-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
PERSONNEL



Sec. 14-26. Personnel complement.



   The normal personnel complement of the department shall consist of the
chief of police and such other personnel as may be required as established by
the chief of police and directed by city council.



(Code 1982,  3-1011)



   State Law References: Authorization to appoint chief of police and
employ other police officers, G.S.  160A-281.



Sec. 14-27. Responsibilities and duties of chief of police.



   The chief of police has the overall responsibility for the operation
and administration of the department. These duties shall consist of, but are
not limited to:



   (1)   Assignment of personnel;



   (2)   Hiring and firing of personnel;



   (3)   Overall operational control;



   (4)   Administration including reports and communications;



   (5)   Maintenance and accountability of department vehicles and
equipment;



   (6)   Promotion, demotion and disciplinary actions of department
personnel; and



   (7)   Any other duties and responsibilities as directed by the city
manager.



(Code 1982,  3-1012; Ord. of 8-18-92,  1)



Sec. 14-28. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. O-10-06-15-5, adopted June 15,
2010, deleted section 14-28, which pertained to residency requirements for
the chief of police.



Sec. 14-29. Salary basis.



   Personnel of the police department are employed by the city on a salary
basis after filing an application and meeting the requirements set forth by
the North Carolina Criminal Justice Education and Training Standards
Commission. Final approval rests with the chief of police and the
requirements of the department.



(Code 1982,  3-1016)



Sec. 14-30. Employment requirements.



   Individuals seeking employment with the department shall complete the
standard application form for employment with the city. In addition, forms
and requirements as set forth in general statutes section 17C, must be
completed and met prior to any consideration for employment.



(Code 1982,  3-1017)



Sec. 14-31. Demotions and pay increases.



   (a)    Demotions shall be made at the discretion of the chief of
police for inefficiency, attitude, violation of policy and any other
considerations that may be detrimental to the department and the city.



   (b)    Pay increases shall be made upon the recommendation of the
chief of police in accordance with the city pay plan.



(Code 1982,  3-1019)



Sec. 14-32. Reservation of right to terminate employment.



   The city, through the chief of police, retains the right to terminate
and discharge any employee for inefficiency, insubordination, malfeasance,
immoral conduct and any other circumstances which would interfere with the
orderly enforcement of the law, or prove detrimental to the department or the
city.



(Code 1982,  3-1021)



Sec. 14-33. Training.



   From time to time interdepartmental training classes and outside
training classes at the local technical institutes or at other locations will
be scheduled. These classes are scheduled for the benefit of all officers and
the department. Schedules will be posted well in advance of classes and all
personnel concerned will be notified. All training classes are mandatory
attendance unless otherwise excused by the chief of police.



(Code 1982,  3-1023)



Secs. 14-34--14-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
OPERATIONS



Sec. 14-51. Generally.



   Operations of the department include the routine patrol of police
vehicles, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of
crimes of any category, traffic control through issuance of parking tickets,
arrests, court appearances, filing reports, foot patrols, security of
business establishments, communications and numerous other procedures for law
enforcement and providing for public safety.



(Code 1982,  3-1031)



Sec. 14-52. Officers' and civilian employees' personal responsibilities.



   All officers and employees will conduct themselves as gentlemen or
ladies at all times and keep their personal affairs in such a manner so as
not to embarrass the department or the city.



(Code 1982,  3-1034)



Sec. 14-53. Unlocking of vehicles.



   Police Department officers and employees are authorized to unlock
vehicles upon request within the City Limits, subject to the following
provisions:



   (a)   The Police Department shall unlock a vehicle the first time
free of charge.  A $25.00 fee shall be charged by the City the second time
that a vehicle is unlocked by the Police Department.  A $50.00 fee shall be
charged by the City the third and subsequent times that a vehicle is unlocked
by the Police Department.  An invoice for fees charged under this section
shall be issued to the person requesting the unlocking service.



   (b)   If the fees listed under subsection (a) above are not paid
within thirty (30) days after the date the unlocking service is provided, a
$25.00 late payment fee shall be assessed.



   (c)   Any payment made on fees listed in this section shall first be
applied to any outstanding late payment fees and then to the original fee
itself.



   (d)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, fees shall not be
charged for unlocking services provided for any of the following emergency
situations:



   (1)   The vehicle’s engine is running.



   (2)   Children or animals are locked inside of the vehicle.



   (3)   A locksmith is unavailable to respond within one (1) hour.



   (4)   Any other emergency situation deemed necessary by the shift
supervisor.



   (e)   Prior to any unlocking service being provided by the Police
Department, the person requesting the service shall be required to sign a
waiver, releasing the City from any claims and liability related to damages
caused to the vehicle by the unlocking service.



(Ord. No. O-15-03-17-2, § 2, 3-17-15)



Secs. 14-54--14-70. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV
RESERVE POLICE FORCE*



__________



*   State Law References: Authorization to provide for organization of
auxiliary police department, G.S.  160A-282.



__________



Sec. 14-71. Established.



   A reserve police force is hereby established to be a volunteer
organization composed of not more than ten (10) members, separate and
distinct from the police department of the city, but to be headed by the
chief of police.



(Code 1982,  3-1041)



Sec. 14-72. Chief of police to have control.



   The chief of police shall have complete authority, control and command,
subject to the provisions of this article, over the reserve police force. He
may appoint as members thereof, subject to approval by the mayor and city
council, any persons he may deem to be qualified, and he may reject any
applications for membership. He shall provide for the training of candidates
for membership, and for the further training of members.



(Code 1982,  3-1042)



Sec. 14-73. Membership requirements.



   No person shall be deemed a member of the reserve police force until he
has been registered as such with the North Carolina Criminal Justice
Education and Training Standards Commission and in the roster to be kept by
the chief of police, and until he has taken his oath that he will observe and
obey the Constitution of the United States, the constitution of this state,
and the laws of this nation, this state and the city, and he will carry out
the duties of a member of the reserve police force of this city to the best
of his ability. Persons wishing to apply for membership may do so by
completing the standard application for employment form and must meet all
standards as set forth by the North Carolina Criminal Justice Education and
Training Standards Commission.



(Code 1982,  3-1043)



Sec. 14-74. Duties.



   (a)    The duties of the reserve police force, subject at all times
to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to
assist the regular members of the police department of the city in the
enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace. The chief may by order
establish rules and regulations to govern the reserve police force, fix the
specific duties of its members, and provide for the maintenance of
discipline. He may change such orders from time to time, and he may command
members of the reserve force to obey the instructions of regular police
officers in carrying out their duties.



   (b)    Each reserve officer shall be required to work a minimum of
twelve (12) hours per month. The chief of police may prescribe other duties
than those mentioned in this article to be performed by the reserve police
force not inconsistent with the provisions hereof.



(Code 1982,  3-1044)



Sec. 14-75. Identification.



   One (1) complete uniform and identification card and such other
insignia or evidence of identity as the chief may prescribe shall be issued
to each member, who must carry the card and other identification at all times
while on duty, and he must surrender them upon the termination of his
membership.



(Code 1982,  3-1045)



Sec. 14-76. Termination of employment; resignation.



   The membership of any person may be terminated by the chief of police
at any time, and any member may resign from the reserve police force at any
time, but it shall be his duty to notify the chief of police of his
resignation.



(Code 1982,  3-1046)



Sec. 14-77. Carrying of firearms.



   No member of the reserve police force shall while on duty carry or use
any firearms except upon the express written order of the chief of police. No
member shall carry firearms until and unless said member has received
training in the use of firearms.



(Code 1982,  3-1047)



Sec. 14-78. Summary expulsion order.



   In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law
under cover of the performance of his duties as a member of the reserve
police force, and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the
chief shall subject any member to summary expulsion and the fact thereof may
be published at the order of the chief.



(Code 1982,  3-1051)



Sec. 14-79. Impersonating an officer.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display a reserve
police force identification card or insignia or otherwise deceitfully
represent himself to be connected with that force, unless he is in fact a
member thereof.



(Code 1982,  3-1052)



   State Law References: Impersonation of a law enforcement or other
public officer, G.S.  14-277. 



Chapter 14.5
SIGNS*



__________



*   Cross References: and building regulations, Ch. 4; sign regulations,
§§ 21-7.6, 21-7.7.



   State Law References: than official signs prohibited, G.S. § 136-32;
billboard obstructing view at entrance to school, church or public
institution unlawful, G.S. § 136-99; Outdoor Advertising Control Act, G.S.
§ 136-126 et seq.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 14.5-1--14.5-25



   Art. II. Reserved



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 14.5-1. Maintenance required.



   All signs located within the city shall be maintained in good condition
and appearance by the owners of such signs. Upon written notice from the
building inspector, the owner of any sign in need of repair, shall see that
such sign is repaired or removed within ten (10) days of such notice.



of 6-7-83, §§ 1--4; Ord. of 9-18-89, § 5)



Sec. 14.5-2. Fees and construction inspection charge.



   (a)    Sign permit fees for signs constructed or located inside the
city limits shall be the same as building permit fees listed in the schedule
of fees and charges maintained in the city clerk's office.



   (b)    There shall be an inspection charge for the construction,
erection or attachment to a building of any sign. Size and location of signs
shall be in accordance with city ordinances. The inspection charge shall be
in an amount determined from time to time by the city council and listed in
the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the city clerk's office.



   (c)    No permit or fee will be required for nonilluminated "For
Sale" or "For Rent" signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.



of 9-18-89, § 5)



Secs. 14.5-3--14.5-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
RESERVED*



__________



*   Editors Note: ordinance of June 22, 1993, repealed an ordinance of
June 20, 1989, formerly set out herein as §§ 14.5-26--14.5-34,
14.5-46--14.5-53, 14.5-65--14.5-70, 14.5-82 and 14.5-83. Prior to repeal,
such provisions had pertained to off-premises sign control.



__________ 



Chapter 15
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES*



__________



*   Cross References: Restriction on certain animals in public places, 
3-16; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; cemeteries, Ch. 5; parks and
recreation, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 13; subdivisions, Ch. 16; zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: Streets and highways in and around
municipalities, G.S.  136-66.1 et seq.



__________



   Art. I. In General,  15-1--15-15



   Art. II. Streets,  15-16--15-130



   Div. 1. Generally,  15-16--15-25



   Div. 2. Acceptance,  15-26--15-40



   Div. 3. Right-of-Way Use,  15-41--15-60



   Div. 4. Improvements,  15-61--15-85



   Div. 5. Sanitation,  15-86--15-110



   Div. 6. Utility Poles,  15-111--15-130



   Art. III. Sidewalks,  15-131--15-155



   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 15-131--15-140



   Div. 2. Sidewalk Cafes, §§ 15-141--15-155



   Art. IV. Parades and Demonstrations,  15-156--15-163



ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL



Sec. 15-1. Unlawful to damage streets.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, or run, or cause to be
dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon
any type of permanently paved street of the city which shall be liable in any
way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure
any dirt street in the same manner.



(Code 1982,  4-1030)



   State Law References: Restrictions as to fire equipment, G.S.  20-122;
weight restrictions, G.S.  20-121.



Sec. 15-2. House moving.



   No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public
streets or sidewalks without a permit issued by the chief of police and the
deposit of a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) to cover damage done to such street or sidewalk or to any property
of any person.



(Code 1982,  4-1031)



   Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4.



   State Law References: Professional housemoving, G.S.  20-356 et seq.



Sec. 15-3. Damaging municipal property prohibited.



   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint upon or deface any
bridge, culvert, ditch and drain, sign, sign post, street light, traffic
signal, bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and
sidewalks except employees of the city in performance of their duties.



(Code 1982,  4-1032)



   State Law References: Willful and wanton injury to real property,
G.S.  14-127; injuring public buildings and facilities, G.S.  14-132;
injuring bridges, G.S.  14-146.



Sec. 15-4. Building and house numbers.



   (a)    All houses and other primary buildings located within the
city limits shall have displayed on the front of the house or building a
number or numbers assigned by the City of Marion to be used with the name of
the street in front of the house or building to designate the address of the
property on which it is located.



   (b)    Said numbers shall be attached to the front of the house or
building and shall be of a size sufficient to be seen from the street in
front of the property.



   (c)    The owner of the property shall be responsible for the
installation of said house and/or building numbers.



   (d)    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to
comply with this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or by
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.



(Ord. of 3-5-91,  1--4)



   Editors Note: An ordinance of March 5, 1991,  1--4, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as  15-4 was at the
discretion of the editor.



Sec. 15-5. Drainage pipes.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
install any storm drainage pipe on any public property, street or street
right-of-way within the city without first having received a written permit
issued by the public works director.



   (b)    The public works director shall determine the size and type
of pipe to be installed.



   (c)    The cost of said permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00).



(Ord. of 5-18-99)



Secs. 15-6--15-15. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
STREETS*



__________



*   State Law References: Streets and highways in and around
municipalities, G.S.  136-66.1 et seq.; city's authority and control over
public streets and ways of public passage, G.S.  160A-296.



__________



DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY



Secs. 15-16--15-25. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.
ACCEPTANCE*



__________



*   Cross References: Subdivisions, Ch. 16.



__________



Sec. 15-26. Policy for acceptance of streets.



   The policy of the city for the acceptance of streets dedicated for
public use and the policy for improving all streets shall be as prescribed in
this article.



(Code 1982,  4-1001)



Sec. 15-27. Requirements for acceptance of new streets.



   No street, alley or other public way dedicated for public use within
the city will be accepted by the city as a public street and no maintenance
or improvement will be authorized thereon unless the following requirements
have been complied with.



   (1)   Prior to opening any street, alley or other public way, the
property owner, owners or developer shall submit a preliminary plan to the
council for their approval. Such preliminary plan shall show the location of
the proposed street, alley or other public way, the right-of-way width, all
adjacent property owners, water courses and such other information as the
council may require.



   (2)   Minimum standards for new streets, extensions or existing
streets or alleys for which approval is required shall be as follows:



   a.   A minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet dedicated for
street purposes. In addition, the council may require a right-of-way width
greater than fifty (50) feet if such street is to be used as a major
thoroughfare or where greater widths are required by a major street plan.



   b.   A minimum right-of-way of twenty (20) feet for all service
alleys.



   c.   Streets shall conform to the general street plan or major
thoroughfare plan of the city as to location.



   d.   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles
and no street shall intersect at less than sixty (60) degrees.



   e.   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
minimum radius of twenty (20) feet. At an angle of intersection of less than
seventy-five (75) degrees a greater radius may be required. Where a street
intersects a highway, the design standards of the state highway commission
shall apply.



   (3)   If the street plan is approved, the owner, owners, or
developer shall be required to make the following improvements at no cost to
the city prior to the city accepting such street or alley as a public street.



   a.   The right-of-way shall be cleared and graded to its final grade
for the full width of the right-of-way. Grades shall not as far as practical
exceed five (5) percent.



   b.   Streets shall be crowned and adequate street drainage provided
in accordance with the street improvement construction specifications of the
city.



   c.   Top soil, gravel or other suitable base course material shall
be put in place for a minimum width of thirty (30) feet, which shall be the
minimum width for an improved street. Additional improved street widths may
be required for major thoroughfares by the council. Provided, the improved
width of alleys need not exceed twenty (20) feet.



   d.   Storm sewer drainage facilities, including drainage, pipe
inlets and other necessary incidentals as may be required by city
specifications.



   e.   Curb and gutter as required by city specifications.



   f.   Street surfacing according to city specifications for a width
of thirty (30) feet.



   (4)   When the requirements of this section have been met to the
satisfaction of the council and the public works director, the council may by
resolution accept such street or alley for public use.



(Code 1982,  4-1002)



   Cross References: Design standards for streets,  16-52.



Secs. 15-28--15-40. Reserved.



DIVISION 3.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE*



__________



*   State Law References: Openings, structures, pipes, trees and issuance
of permits, G.S.  136-93.



__________



Sec. 15-41. Purpose.



   The purpose of this division is to provide for the proper management of
the public rights-of-way in order to preserve the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of Marion. Specifically, this division is intended to provide
for the reasonable regulation of the excavation and construction by private
owners, utilities, contractors, and other entities within the public
rights-of-way and the time, place, and manner in which such excavation and
construction occurs.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-42. Definitions.



   For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   Utility. A company that owns and provides services to customers through
utility facilities located in the right-of-way. This definition shall include
the City of Marion for purposes of the city's ownership of water, wastewater,
and stormwater utility facilities.



   Utility facility. A pole, tower, water main or line, sanitary sewer
pipe or line, stormwater pipe or structure, gas pipe or gas line,
telecommunications line or equipment, power line, conduit, or any like
structure.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-43. Permit required.



   All excavation and construction within public rights-of-way within the
Marion city limits shall require a permit issued by the city upon application
of the property owner, licensed contractor, or utility performing the work.
Excavation and construction includes, but is not limited to, the
installation, repair, and replacement of driveways, sidewalks, all public and
other utilities, and other projects involving construction activities over,
upon, or beneath the public rights-of-way. Excavations and construction
extending for a linear distance of one-half mile or greater shall require the
approval of the city council, except in the case of franchise utilities
exempted by franchise agreements.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-44. Emergencies.



   In an emergency, excavation or construction may commence without a
permit provided the person or entity performing the work has made a
reasonable effort to inform the city and any utility whose facilities might
be involved and shall make written application for a permit at the earliest
practical moment. For purposes of this section, an emergency situation shall
not include any new construction.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-45. Fees.



   Fees shall be paid for all permits, such fees to be determined from
time to time by the Marion city council. Franchise utilities exempted by
franchise agreement and initial installations of public improvements within
new subdivisions shall not be required to pay permit fees. In lieu of fees
being charged, the city council may elect to allow the provision of alternate
sources of public benefit to the city and/or local governmental, educational
or non-profit organizations.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-46. Rules and regulations.



   The city shall also establish standard specifications and details for
the making of cuts, for related matters involving excavation and construction
within the public rights-of-way, and requirements for backfilling of
excavations and restoration of pavements or surfacing.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-47. Above-ground structures.



   New or expanded above-ground utility facilities (other than poles and
facilities located on poles) such as pedestals, terminals, cross boxes,
interfaces, remote terminals, and other items of industry standard
nomenclature ("above-ground structure") that are part of a utility's
distribution system (i.e., does not include facilities or devices that
primarily serve individual properties) may be located in the right-of-way
only upon issuance of a permit in accordance with the standards set forth
below. Above-ground structures shall not interfere with the operation and
maintenance of existing utilities, facilities, roadways, or walkways within
the public right-of-way. If at any time the city determines that an
above-ground structure is at a location that has a higher than average
accident potential, it may require the structure to be relocated at the
utility's expense.



   In determining whether to issue a permit for a new or expanded
above-ground structure in the right-of-way, the city shall consider the
following:



   (a)   the technical need for the structure and the need to locate
the structure at the proposed location;



   (b)   whether the structure would create an unacceptable sight
obstruction or other safety hazard; and



   (c)   whether a location outside of the right-of-way is reasonably
available and whether the utility has made reasonable efforts to secure such
a location. This subsection shall not apply to expansions of existing
equipment already located in the right-of-way.



   In approving a permit for a new or expanded above-ground structure, the
city may impose reasonable screening, appearance, and other conditions to
minimize the impact of the structure. In the event that screening,
appearance, or other conditions are not adequate to minimize the impact of
the structure, the permit may be denied.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-48. Indemnification of city.



   Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in section 15-43 agrees,
as a condition of the issuance of such permit to indemnify and hold harmless
the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for
bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of
the person's operations, excluding only the liability of the city for its
sole negligence except in connection with general supervision of work
performed by such person.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-49. Restoration of excavation to original condition.



   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of
the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making such
excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling such excavation or
opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed
prior to the excavation or opening, and such refilling shall be done in
accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the public works
director. Any person neglecting, refusing, or failing to comply with any
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof, and where
such neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the public
works director, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-50. Leaving excavations unprotected.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit to do any
excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or
near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing
and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in
or around such dangerous condition, sufficient to warn the public of such
excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from
injuries on account of such excavation.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-51. Supervision and control.



   All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places
of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the public works
director, whose duty it shall be to inspect such work from time to time
during the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a
final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is
restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or
work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment
are removed therefrom. Any person refusing or failing to comply with any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof. When such
failure or refusal is continued after notice from the public works director,
every day's continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Code 1982,  4-1026; Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Sec. 15-52. Disposition of fees.



   All fees collected under the provisions of this division shall be paid
into the city's general fund.



(Ord. No. O-12-03-06-2,  2, 3-6-12)



Secs. 15-53--15-60. Reserved.



DIVISION 4.
IMPROVEMENTS



Sec. 15-61. Petition for street improvements.



   Except as authorized by the Charter, the city will not consider paving
or otherwise improving any street or alley unless a petition is presented to
the council on forms provided by the city, signed by a majority of the
property owners who represent a majority of the lineal footage on the street
proposed to be improved, requesting that the total cost of such improvements
be assessed against abutting property owners.



(Code 1982,  4-1003)



   Charter References: Assessments for street and sidewalk improvements,
petition unnecessary,  5.1.



Sec. 15-62. Itemization of street improvement cost.



   (a)    Street improvements for all streets which shall be included
in the property owners' petition, the total cost of which shall be assessed
against the abutting property owners, shall include the following:



   (1)   Storm sewer drainage facilities, including drainage pipe
thirty (30) inches or less in diameter, inlets and other necessary
incidentals as may be required by city specifications;



   (2)   Curb and gutter as required by city specifications;



   (3)   Grading for a width of thirty (30) feet on those streets which
were opened prior to the effective date of this article and which need to be
graded prior to surfacing;



   (4)   Base course material for a width of thirty (30) feet if
existing base course is not adequate in accordance with city specifications;



   (5)   Street surfacing according to city specifications for a width
of thirty (30) feet.



   (b)    The improvement costs for street widths in excess of thirty
(30) feet, the cost of required drainage facilities which are larger in size
than required in this article, and the total cost of all improvements at
street intersections shall not be assessed against abutting property owners
and shall be paid for by the city.



(Code 1982,  4-1004)



Sec. 15-63. Street improvement project procedure.



   (a)    Upon the receipt of a petition for street improvements, the
city clerk shall examine the petition and certify as to its sufficiency to
the council. No petition shall be considered for street improvements where
streets have been opened after the effective date of the article from which
this section derives in violation of section 15-27. In addition, no petition
shall be considered for a street less than one (1) normal block in length.



   (b)    If the petition from the property owners is found to be
sufficient, the council shall direct the city public works director to
estimate the total cost of the street project in accordance with street
specifications, to determine the total cost per foot of property frontage and
the total cost to the city for intersections and other improvements the cost
of which is to be borne by the city.



   (c)    When cost estimates are received, the council shall consider
the availability of funds for street improvements, the degree of development
along the street proposed to be improved and may approve such street
improvement project as they deem best. The city will pay twenty-five (25)
percent of the cost of improvements and the property owners, when property
abuts the street improvements, shall be assessed for seventy-five (75)
percent of the cost.



   (d)    When a street improvement project is approved, the property
owners abutting such improvement shall be notified of the total estimated
cost per foot of frontage and further notified that each owner has the
opportunity to pay his proportionate share in cash in advance.



   (e)    The street improvement assessment procedure as authorized in
general statutes section 160A, article 10 shall be followed and assessments
shall be made against the properties abutting upon such improvement according
to an equal rate per front foot. Property owners who have made a cash deposit
in advance as authorized in this section shall be credited for such payments
on the assessment rolls. In accordance with the requirements of the general
statutes, property owners not paying assessments in cash in advance shall pay
their assessments in five (5) equal annual installments which shall bear
interest at a rate to be determined by the council.



   (f)    If the actual cost of improvements is less than the estimated
cost, such excess shall be refunded to property owners. In event the actual
cost exceeds the estimated cost the property owners will be assessed for this
amount or may pay such amount in cash in the manner provided by law.



(Code 1982,  4-1005; Ord. of 2-21-89)



   State Law References: Petition for street or sidewalk improvements,
G.S.  160A-217.



Sec. 15-64. Installation of utilities.



   The council prior to approving any project or authorizing any street
improvement shall determine if water and sewer facilities have been installed
within that portion of the street located between curbs. If such facilities
have not been installed or if facilities are inadequate and will have to be
replaced, the council shall postpone the street improvement project pending
the installation of such facilities.



(Code 1982,  4-1007)



   Cross References: Water and sewerage, Ch. 20.



Sec. 15-65. Responsibility of property owners.



   (a)    Property owners along streets which are surfaced and have
curb and gutter are responsible for replacing any driveway or walkway within
the street right-of-way as a result of new street construction improvements.
Driveway entrances and aprons at the curb line will be constructed by the
city at the location designated by the property owner and the cost thereof
will be included in the total cost assessed for street improvements.



   (b)    Property owners shall be responsible for seeding, landscaping
or otherwise improving the area between curbs and the property line as they
may desire, provided no walls or other permanent structures are located
within the street right-of-way.



   (c)    Drainage pipes and other material on the right-of-way at the
time of construction which were purchased by the property owner will be
removed and placed on the lot of the owner for his disposition. The city will
haul away such items if requested by the owner and with the owner's
permission during construction.



(Code 1982,  4-1008)



Sec. 15-66. Construction according to specifications; supervision.



   All street grading, base course preparation, storm drainage, surfacing,
curb and gutter, and other improvements shall be constructed in accordance
with the written specifications of the city which have been approved by the
council. All work shall be done under the supervision of the public works
director.



(Code 1982,  4-1009)



Sec. 15-67. Opening and improving streets without petition.



   When in the opinion of the council a new street should be opened and
improved and no petition is filed asking for the assessment of the cost
thereof, and when the council is of the opinion that the public benefit will
be greater than the benefit to abutting property owners, the council may
direct that such improvement be made and the entire cost thereof paid by the
city, or assessed in accordance with the procedure provided in Article V of
the city Charter.



(Code 1982,  4-1010)



Sec. 15-68. Resurfacing improvements.



   Whenever it is necessary to resurface any street which has been
surfaced under the policy established in this article, the city will
undertake such resurfacing when funds are appropriated, and the city shall
bear the entire cost of such work.



(Code 1982,  4-1011)



Sec. 15-69. Planting and protection of trees.



   Citizens may plant trees in front of their lots and around their lots
on the sidewalks under the supervision of the public works director, provided
they shall not plant any that are detrimental to the city. No trees shall be
planted in the streets or gutters. No person shall cut or damage any tree
upon the sidewalks of the city without the permission of the public works
director or shall dig up or injure any tree or shall tack or post any
advertisement upon said tree in the city.



(Code 1982,  8-5005)



   Cross References: Trees, Ch. 19.



Sec. 15-70. Permit for driveway construction.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across any
public sidewalk, walkway or parkway or into any street or cut any curb for
such purpose without first having obtained a permit therefore.



(Ord. of 5-20-86,  1)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 15-71. Application for driveway permit.



   Application for a driveway construction permit shall be made to the
inspection department and shall state among other things the location, grade
and dimensions of the proposed driveway and the purpose for which it is
desired. If the proposed driveway complies with the provisions of this
article, the building inspector shall issue a permit therefor. If the
proposed driveway is to connect to a street maintained by the state
department of transportation, there must also be a permit from the state
department of transportation authorizing such connection.



(Ord. of 5-20-86,  1)



Sec. 15-72. Driveway standards for businesses.



   (a)    No driveway for a commercial or business establishment shall
exceed thirty-six (36) feet in width at the driveway opening or throat of the
driveway toward the property away from the street.



   (b)    No driveway for a commercial or business establishment shall
be less than twelve (12) feet wide at the driveway opening or throat of the
driveway towards the property away from the street.



   (c)    All radii connecting the driveway to the curb shall be as
specified for business and commercial buildings by the building inspector.
The radii shall be not less than two and one-half (2 ) feet nor greater than
twenty (20) feet.



   (d)    Not more than three (3) driveways shall be permitted to
service one (1) business or commercial installation from one (1) street and
then only if the two (2) driveways are at least fifty (50) feet apart.



   (e)    Any business or commercial establishment located at the
intersection of two (2) or more streets and which desires a driveway into two
(2) intersecting streets shall construct the driveways so as to comply with
the minimum requirements established by the building inspector.



   (f)    No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further
than the face of the curb and under no circumstance shall such driveway apron
extend into the gutter area.



   (g)    At all business or commercial driveway entrances a white
line, not less than two and one-half (2 ) inches in width, shall be
maintained along the entire width of the driveway or ramp to clearly define
the sidewalk area on the property side of the sidewalk.



(Ord. of 5-20-86,  1)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 15-73. Standards for residential driveways.



   (a)    No driveway for a residence shall exceed twenty-five (25)
feet in width at the outer or street edge of the driveway nor twenty (20)
feet wide at the driveway opening or throat of the driveway toward the
property, away from the street.



   (b)    No driveway for a residence shall be less than fifteen (15)
feet in width at outer or street edge of the driveway nor ten (10) feet wide
at the driveway opening or throat of the driveway towards the property, away
from the street.



   (c)    Residences shall not have more than two (2) driveways on the
same street and then only if the two (2) driveways are at least twenty (20)
feet apart.



   (d)    Driveways for residences shall comply with section 15-72.



   (e)    All radii of curves of driveways where the same meets the
curb shall comply with the requirements of the building inspector.



(Ord. of 5-20-86,  1)



Sec. 15-74. Driveway construction.



   All driveway entrances within the city shall be constructed by the
city. The owner and/or tenant, requesting such driveway entrance, shall be
responsible to pay, in advance, such amount as determined by the public works
director, to cover the total cost for materials, equipment, and labor, for
construction and/or removal and replacement of such driveway entrance. Any
person(s) objecting to the amount charged shall have the right of appeal to
the city council, prior to construction.



(Ord. of 5-19-98(1),  1)



Secs. 15-75--15-85. Reserved.



DIVISION 5.
SANITATION*



__________



*   Cross References: Health and sanitation, Ch. 9.



__________



Sec. 15-86. Dumping trash prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any street
or sidewalk, or upon any private property, except with written permission of
the owner or occupant of such private property, any trash, refuse, garbage,
building material, cans, bottles, broken glass, paper, or any type of litter.



(Code 1982,  6-2011)



   State Law References: Littering, G.S.  14-399; dumping litter, G.S. 
14-399.1.



Sec. 15-87. Littering from vehicle prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or a passenger in a
vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place
within the city or upon private property.



(Code 1982,  6-2012)



   Cross References: Traffic, Ch. 18.



Sec. 15-88. Penalty.



   Any person found guilty of violating sections 15-86 and 15-87 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
the first offense and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and
subsequent offenses.



(Code 1982,  6-2013)



Sec. 15-89. Public areas adjacent to businesses--Trash control.



   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any
commercial establishment or premises which maintains any paved or unpaved
areas for the use of the public, either for parking or as access area and
incident to the carrying on of the principal business of any such commercial
establishment or premises and which parking or access areas abut or lie
within ten (10) feet of any public street or other public way, shall keep and
maintain such areas clean and free from trash, litter, rubbish and any
materials liable to be blown, deposited or cast upon such street or other
public way.



(Code 1982,  6-2014)



Sec. 15-90. Same--Receptacles required.



   Suitable receptacles shall be provided in all parking or access areas
within the meaning of section 15-89. Such receptacles shall be plainly marked
and constructed to prevent scattering of any trash, litter, rubbish or other
material deposited therein.



(Code 1982,  6-2015)



   State Law References: Regulation of trash and garbage, G.S.  160A-192;
regulation of the placing of trash, refuse and garbage within municipal
limits, G.S.  160A-303.1.



Sec. 15-91. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  15-91, which pertained to penalties and derived
from  6-2016 of the 1982 Code.



Sec. 15-92. Acts and conditions requiring special street cleaning or repair
prohibited.



   (a)    Any act, neglect or omission or any condition caused or
allowed to continue, which creates or results in causing a condition in or
upon any public street, sidewalk or storm drain which requires special
cleaning or repair of such street, sidewalk or storm drain is hereby
prohibited. Prohibited acts, negligence, omissions and conditions which
result in requiring special cleaning or repair shall include but shall not be
limited to:



   (1)   The hauling of dirt, debris, materials removed from the sites
of construction or reconstruction of buildings or structures, or waste
materials of any kind, in such manner that any portion of such dirt, debris
or materials is spilled, lost, dropped or left upon the streets or sidewalks;



   (2)   The depositing or leaving upon the streets or sidewalks of
mud, dirt or any other material as a result of the use of trucks,
construction equipment or machinery, regardless of whether such materials are
spilled, lost or dropped in transit or are deposited upon the surface of the
street or public property by the tires or wheels of such trucks, construction
equipment or machinery; and



   (3)   The grading of lots, land or driveways at elevations higher
than street or sidewalk level, or any other acts, negligence or conditions
created or allowed to exist upon such property which results in mud, dirt,
soil, gravel, debris or other materials being washed onto city streets or
sidewalks or into the city storm drainage system.



   (b)    Special cleaning or repair of streets, sidewalks and the
storm drainage system be deemed to be required when their condition is such
that the public health, safety, welfare or public use of the same is
threatened, limited or impaired; the use and enjoyment of property abutting
such streets or sidewalks is diminished or limited; or substantial damage is
caused to the streets, sidewalks or drainage facilities or to such abutting
property. The words special cleaning or repair as used in this section shall
include resurfacing, restoration of gravel and similar repairs made necessary
by prohibited acts, negligence or conditions.



(Code 1982,  6-2017)



Sec. 15-93. City to perform special cleaning and repair; computation of costs.



   (a)    The public works department will clean and repair all
streets, sidewalks and storm drains as and when special cleaning or repair is
required by conditions defined in section 15-92.



   (b)    The public works department will keep records of the costs of
all such specially required cleaning and repair, which may be computed on the
basis of established per mile and per hour cost of the use of city equipment,
plus labor and materials, including water, likewise computed at cost to the
city.



(Code 1982,  6-2018)



Sec. 15-94. Penalty; payment of costs.



   (a)    Any person who violates section 15-92 or 15-93 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the
provisions of section 1-10.



   (b)    Any person whose act, negligence, omission, or who, by
permitting a condition to continue, whether done or neglected directly or
through an agent, servant or employee, causes additional expense to the city
for necessary special street, sidewalk or storm drain cleaning or repair
shall reimburse the city for its expense within thirty (30) days after
receipt of an itemized statement of expense submitted by the city, and upon
failure to reimburse the city within such period of thirty (30) days, shall
incur and be liable to the city for a civil penalty of two hundred dollars
($200.00), in addition to such expense.



   (c)    The public works department shall send to any person
responsible for additional expense to the city an itemized statement of the
expense incurred and a request for reimbursement. The city attorney is
authorized to bring suit in the name of the city to recover any such unpaid
penalties.



(Code 1982,  6-2019)



Secs. 15-95--15-110. Reserved.



DIVISION 6.
UTILITY POLES



Sec. 15-111. Erection of poles limited to single line.



   No permit shall be issued for the erection of poles on any street where
there exists a line of poles on such street for the purpose of supporting
electric, telephone, cable television or telegraph wires.



(Code 1982,  4-1033)



Sec. 15-112. Accommodation of wires on preexisting line of poles.



   Whenever any electric, telephone, telegraph or cable television company
shall desire to place a line or wires along any particular street upon which
it does not have a line of poles, but upon which such street there exists a
line of poles owned by another company, then such companies may maintain
their wires upon the same poles. If an agreement cannot be reached between
the companies owning the poles and the companies desiring to place wires
thereon, then the said companies may submit the question of compensation to
three (3) disinterested persons for arbitration or they may submit the same
to the council for determination. This section shall apply to poles owned by
the city, as well as poles owned by companies operating under franchises from
the city.



(Code 1982,  4-1034)



Sec. 15-113. Care and inspection of poles.



   It shall be the duty of the owners of all poles supporting electric,
telephone, telegraph wires or cable television to keep such poles in a safe
condition, and, for that purpose, inspect the same once every three (3)
months.



(Code 1982,  4-1035)



Secs. 15-114--15-130. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
SIDEWALKS*



__________



*   Cross References: Driving within a sidewalk area prohibited,  18-61;
riding bicycles on sidewalks,  18-195.



__________



DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY



Sec. 15-131. Improvements.



   Petitions for street improvements may include requests for sidewalk
improvements in accordance with city specifications or sidewalk improvements
may be petitioned only. Such sidewalk improvements may be constructed as part
of the street improvement project and in the same manner, except that one
hundred (100) percent of the total cost of sidewalk improvements exclusive of
the cost at intersections shall be assessed against the property owner.



(Code 1982, § 4-1006; Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



   Charter References: Petition unnecessary for sidewalk improvements, §
5.1.



Sec. 15-132. Construction.



   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any person of any
brick, wood, or other material without a written permit from the city. Nor
shall any permanent structure be installed in a city sidewalk without
permission from city council.



(Code 1982, § 4-1029; Ord. No. O-05-06-21-04, § 3, 6-21-05; Ord. No.
O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-133. Assembly on sidewalk.



   All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so
as to obstruct any sidewalk or street, and all persons so collecting and
standing shall disperse and move upon the demand of any police officer.



(Code 1982, § 6-2001; Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



   State Law References: Standing, sitting or lying upon highways or
streets prohibited, G.S. § 20-174.1; regulation of mass gatherings, G.S. §
130A-251 et seq.



Sec. 15-134. Sidewalk display of merchandise prohibited; exceptions.



   (a)    No person shall place for display or sale any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind upon any of the sidewalks of the city, except in the
central business district, as defined in the zoning chapter for the city and
then only upon the following conditions:



   (1)   Goods, wares or merchandise may only be placed directly in
front of the businesses fronting on the street by the owners or occupants of
such businesses.



   (2)   All materials, tables, racks or other items must be removed
from the sidewalk at the close of each business day, with the following
exceptions:



      a.   Tables and chairs used by a restaurant or coffee shop or
other business establishment serving food or non-alcoholic beverages may
remain on the sidewalk at all times, subject to the other provisions of this
section, unless the business owner is instructed to remove said tables and
chairs by the city. Such tables and chairs shall be for the exclusive use of
patrons of the business providing the tables and chairs, and in no case shall
alcoholic beverages be served to or consumed by any persons using said tables
and chairs.



      b.   Tables and chairs used by a sidewalk café permitted
pursuant to Division 2 of this Chapter.



   (3)   No goods, wares, merchandise, tables, racks, or other items
for sale or containing items for sale may be placed within seven (7) feet of
the face of curbline in front of the building, with the following exceptions:



      a.   Tables and chairs for use by a restaurant or other
business for the purpose of seating customers and serving food or
non-alcoholic beverages may be placed on the sidewalk within seven (7) feet
of the face of the curbline in front of the building so long as the City
Manager or his or her designee approves the location and placement of the
tables and chairs. The City Manager or his or her designee shall, upon
application, grant approval of table and chair placement for the purposes
above described once it is determined and agreed upon that the tables and
chairs do not pose a safety hazard or adversely impact parking areas.
Furthermore, if parking patterns change or safety hazards emerge, the City
Manager or his or her designee reserves the power to withdraw permission for
certain or all table(s) or chair(s) placement.



      b.   Tables and chairs used by a sidewalk café permitted
pursuant to Division 2 of this Chapter.



   (4)   Prior to placing any goods, wares, merchandise or any items on
the sidewalk, the merchant owning or occupying the business shall provide the
city manager with a signed, notarized statement accepting total and complete
responsibility for any accidents or other problems relating to the items
placed on the sidewalk in front of his or her business. The statement shall
include the beginning and ending date of the time covered by the statement.



   (b)    This section shall not prohibit the city council from
authorizing sidewalk sales in the central business district or street fairs
and festivals which allow vendors and craftspeople to display wares in
streets which are blocked off from vehicular traffic.



(Code 1982, § 6-2002; Ord. of 10-3-89, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-8-01, § 2; Ord.
of 5-22-01, § 2; Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 15-135. Placing objects on streets and sidewalks.



   No brick, stone or wood or other substance obstructing the free passage
of persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of the
alley ways, streets or other routes of the city, nor shall any person place
on or in any of the streets, sidewalks or alley ways of the city any boxes,
crates, casks, or barrels of any description, or any other obstruction of any
kind, provided that any person erecting a building may with permission place
building material for immediate use on the streets in such a way as to not
interfere with the usual traffic.



(Code 1982, § 6-2003; Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



   State Law References: Placing glass or injurious obstruction upon
highway prohibited, G.S. § 136-91; city's duty to keep public streets free
from unnecessary obstructions, G.S. § 160A-296(a)(2); city's authority to
prohibit placing trash on streets, G.S. § 160A-303.1.



Sec. 15-136. Construction near sidewalk.



   Before building or remodeling at any place where such building or
remodeling is in close proximity to the sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be
blocked off or an overhead covered passage way shall be constructed so as to
leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage.



(Code 1982, § 6-2004; Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-137. Structures and appurtenances over sidewalks.



   No person shall erect over any sidewalk or street any part of a
building except marquees and signs which are approved by the building
inspector. Awnings may be attached to buildings provided they are supported
upon metallic frames and at least eight (8) feet above the level of the
sidewalk. Reconstruction of porches and balconies of historic significance
shall be permitted to extend ten (10) feet over the sidewalk and eight (8)
feet above the sidewalk, provided that the structure is five (5) feet from
the vehicular travel way. Reconstruction shall be permitted only if evidence
of historic features exists in photos and when features are noted in the U.S.
Department of Interior description of "Historic and Architectural Resources
in Downtown Marion". Reconstruction of historic features shall be comparable
to original construction.



(Code 1982, § 6-2005; Ord. No. O-05-06-21-04, § 2, 6-21-05; Ord. No.
O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-138. Salespeople to remain on sidewalk; motorists not to stop.



   (a)    Persons selling newspapers and other commodities shall be
prohibited from selling such items within fifty (50) feet of any street
intersection and all persons selling such items shall remain on the sidewalk
while selling such items and not venture into the street.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful for any motorist to stop a vehicle in a
traveled portion of any street for the purpose of purchasing newspapers and
other commodities.



(Code 1982, § 6-2006; Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 15-139. Signs and banners across street prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hang, suspend or otherwise place
any sign or banner over and across any of the streets of the city. This
section shall not apply to Christmas decorations approved by the city manager.



(Code 1982, § 6-2007; Ord. of 10-7-86, § 1; Ord. of 8-18-98, § 1; Ord. No.
O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-140. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted § 15-140, which pertained to penalties and derived
from an ordinance adopted Oct. 7, 1986.



DIVISION 2.
SIDEWALK CAFES



Sec. 15-141. Definition.



   Sidewalk cafe means any group of tables and chairs, and its authorized
decorative and accessory devices situated and maintained upon the public
sidewalk for use in connection with the consumption of food and beverages
sold to the public from or in an adjoining indoor restaurant which is located
within the City of Marion Central Business District, as indicated on the
Official Zoning Map of the City.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-142. General.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary,
sidewalk cafes or sidewalk dining shall be permitted in the Central Business
District as indicated on the Official Zoning Map of the City and shall be
subject to such regulations as are set forth in this division.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-143. Permit required.



   No restaurant owner may operate a sidewalk cafe without first obtaining
a permit from the City Manager in accordance with the requirements of this
division. As used in this section, the term City Manager includes his or her
authorized representative(s).



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-144. Application.



   Any restaurant owner desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe shall prepare
and file an application with the City Manager which shall contain the
following information:



   (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the restaurant
desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe.



   (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the restaurant
operator.



   (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.



   (d)   The hours of operation of the restaurant and the proposed
hours of operation of the sidewalk cafe.



   (e)   A drawing or site plan clearly delineating the defined area of
sidewalk or pedestrian way to be used for the sidewalk cafe, and the section
to be kept clear for pedestrian and fire lane use, and depicting the proposed
placement of tables, chairs, barricades, umbrellas, trash receptacles, and
other furnishings on the sidewalk or pedestrian way.  The dimensions of
proposed tables and the number of tables and chairs proposed must be
specified on the application.



   (f)   Documentation of comprehensive general liability and products
and completed operations coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00, insuring
against personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and including the
City as an additional party insured and insuring the City against any
liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this division.  Such
insurance policy shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be
canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days' advance
written notice to the City.  The permit holder shall continuously maintain
the insurance required by this section and shall continuously provide the
City with evidence of the insurance required by this section.



   (g)   Copies of all permits and licenses showing all required
approvals by the County Health Department and any other applicable regulatory
agencies.



   (h)   Copies of all applicable State ABC permits pertaining to the
location for which a sidewalk café is requested.



   (i)   Execution of a statement on the permit application wherein the
applicant holds harmless and indemnifies the City from any claims or causes
of action arising out of or related to the permitted activity, including, but
not limited to, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the
North Carolina State Building Code and all other health and safety laws and
regulations.



   (j)   A sworn statement certifying that the restaurant operator has
not violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the possession,
sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled
substances for the three years preceding the date of the application.



   (k)   Payment of an application fee, as set by the City Fee
Schedule, to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application
and issuing the permit shall be submitted with the application.



   (l)   Other information deemed necessary by the City Manager.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-145. Operational requirements.



   Operation of a sidewalk café shall conform to the following
requirements:



   (a)    There shall be a five- (5) foot-wide unobstructed contiguous
walkway within the public sidewalk area for use by pedestrians, and
handicapped accessibility shall be provided as required by law. The outdoor
activity shall not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic.



   (b)   The sidewalk cafe must be associated with an operating
restaurant such that it is under the same management and shares the same food
preparation facilities, restroom facilities, and other customer convenience
facilities as the restaurant. The sidewalk cafe must be operated under the
same name as the restaurant and may not be open or operated at any time when
the restaurant is not open for business.



   (c)   The operation of the sidewalk cafe must be clearly incidental
to the associated restaurant business. The number of tables and chairs and
the seating capacity allowed for the sidewalk cafe shall be set in the permit
approval by the City Manager or his/her designee.  At no time may the number
of tables and chairs in the sidewalk café exceed the number approved in the
sidewalk café permit.



   (d)   The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings as shown
in the drawing submitted with the site plan must be done in such a manner
that at least five (5) feet of unobstructed space remains on the sidewalk or
pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. No fire exits or lanes may be
blocked and such must remain clear at all times. The pedestrian passage may
not be used for the display of merchandise or for portable signs otherwise
authorized pursuant to Chapter 21 Zoning, Division 4 Sign Regulations, of the
Marion City Code.



   (e)   The premises of the sidewalk café must be clearly defined at
all times during the hours of business operation, using a means of separation
between the sidewalk and the premises of the sidewalk café, as approved by
the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (f)   The restaurant seeking to operate the sidewalk cafe must front
on and open onto the sidewalk proposed for the sidewalk cafe, or be situated
below sidewalk level with direct access to the sidewalk by means of an
open-air stairwell. The placement of tables, chairs, and other furnishings
may not extend beyond the sidewalk or pedestrian way property frontage of the
associated restaurant.



   (g)   All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs,
umbrellas and planters, shall be movable and suitable for outdoor use.
Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base weight of not less than sixty
(60) pounds.  At any time outdoor dining furniture is in disrepair, the
restaurant operator shall repair or replace the furniture within fourteen
(14) days after notice is provided by the City.



   (h)   Except as elsewhere permitted by the Code, the operation or
furnishing of the sidewalk cafe shall involve no permanent alteration to or
encroachment upon any street, sidewalk, or pedestrian way or to the exterior
of the associated restaurant, unless approval is given by the City Manager or
his or her designee.



   (i)   Amplified sound equipment shall not permitted within the area
of the sidewalk café.



   (j)   At all times the permittee must comply with all other local,
state or federal laws, ordinances and regulations, including but not limited
to health, safety and welfare rules, laws and regulations and the City of
Marion Noise Ordinance.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



   State law reference— Local regulation of places of amusement, G.S.
160A-181.



   State law reference— Noise regulation, G.S. 160A-184.



Sec. 15-146. Alcoholic beverages.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, alcoholic beverages
may be served in approved sidewalk cafes provided that the following
requirements are met:



   (a)   The sidewalk cafe shall be part of a restaurant which shall
otherwise be authorized, permitted or licensed under the state law and this
Code to serve and sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.



   (b)   The sidewalk cafe must be included as part of the premises for
which an ABC permit is issued pursuant to state law, for the purpose of
applying and enforcing state laws regarding the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages.



   (c)   Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the
sidewalk cafe, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages from the
premises.



   (d)   The restaurant operator shall not have violated any law,
regulation or ordinance relating to the possession, sale, transportation or
consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances for the three
years preceding the commencement of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the
sidewalk cafe.



   (e)   No outdoor bar is allowed within the sidewalk cafe, nor shall
outdoor preparation of alcoholic beverages be permitted except that
unfortified wine may be decanted or beer poured at a table along with food.



(Ord. O-17-02-07-01, § 2, 2-7-17)



Sec. 15-147. Days and hours of operation.



   The hours of operation of a sidewalk cafe may be the particular
restaurant's normal operating business hours Monday through Saturday and
after 12:00 noon on Sundays.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-148. Trash.



   (a)   The sidewalk cafe permittee shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary manner all areas where the furniture is located, including
maintaining appropriate trash receptacles, sweeping on a daily basis the full
right-of-way where the furniture is located and immediately cleaning and
washing any liquid, food, debris, broken glass and other trash from the
right-of-way.



   (b)   Overnight storage of trash and refuse for the sidewalk cafe
shall not be permitted within the outdoor dining area or on adjacent sidewalk
areas, and the permittee shall remove all trash and litter as it accumulates.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-149. Terms and transfer.



   (a)   Upon successfully completing an application, upon meeting all
of the requirements in this Chapter and the City Code and upon the payment of
any permit fees set in the City Fee Schedule, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall issue permits and/or execute encroachment and hold harmless
agreements to allow sidewalk cafes.



   (b)   If a permittee discontinues the restaurant operation or the
sidewalk cafe, no refund of the permit fee shall be made. Permits issued
pursuant to this section shall not be transferable or assignable. Permits may
prohibit operation of sidewalk cafes during special events and contain other
conditions and restrictions as may be necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-150. Denial.



   (a)   Any applicant denied a permit under this division shall
receive a statement, in writing, outlining the reasons for denial of the
permit.



   (b)   Any applicant denied a permit to operate a sidewalk café
shall receive a written statement outlining the grounds on which the denial
was based.  The applicant may appeal the denial of the permit to the City
Council within fifteen (15) working days after the date of the written
denial, and the City Council may take such action as it shall find
necessary.  The findings and determination of the City Council shall
constitute final action by the city.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-151. Revocation/suspension.



   (a)   The City specifically retains the right to revoke or suspend a
sidewalk cafe permit any time it deems such revocation to be in the best
interest of the public health, safety or welfare, or where the permittee has
failed to comply with applicable City requirements or is found to have
provided false or misleading information in the permit application.  Any
such permit revocation or suspension shall be provided in writing to the
business by the City Manager or his/her designee.



   (b)   Such decision of the City Manager or his/her designee may be
appealed to the City Council by written notice thereof filed with the City
Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice of
suspension or revocation. The City Council may take action as it shall find
necessary.  The findings and determination of the City Council shall
constitute final action by the City.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Sec. 15-152.  Penalties.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the requirements
of this division or of the permit issued under this division.



   (a)   Such violations shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as
provided by G.S. Section 14-4.



   (b)   Unless otherwise provided within the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Marion or in state law, persons violating the provisions of this
division shall be assessed a civil penalty as provided in Chapter 1 of the
Marion City Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-06-3, § 3, 1-6-15)



Secs. 15-153--15-155. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV
PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS*



__________



*   Cross References: Drivers in a procession,  18-62.



   State Law References: Demonstrations or assemblies of persons kneeling
or lying down in public buildings, G.S.  14-132.1; picketing or parading
with intent to obstruct justice, G.S.  14-225.1; local authorities may
regulate processions and assemblages, G.S.  20-169; standing, sitting or
lying upon highways or streets prohibited, G.S.  20-174.1; regulation of
mass gatherings, G.S.  130A-251.



__________



Sec. 15-156. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Block means that portion of any street lying between its intersections
with other streets.



   Group demonstration means any assembly together or concert of action
between or among two (2) or more persons for the purpose of protesting any
matter or of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or
on behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of
attracting attention of such assembly.



   Parade means any assemblage of two (2) or more persons participating in
or operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or
procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parks, or other public grounds or places.



   Picket line means any two (2) or more persons formed together for the
purpose of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or on
behalf of any organization or class of persons.



(Code 1982,  6-2021)



   Cross References: Definitions and rules of construction generally, 
1-3.



Sec. 15-157. Permit required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate
in any parade, picket line, or group demonstration in or upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the city unless a permit
therefor has been issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of
this article.



(Code 1982,  6-2022)



   Cross References: Licenses, permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 15-158. Requirements for issuance of permit.



   The city manager is authorized to issue permits as required in section
15-157, and in the issuance thereof he shall:



   (1)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not less
than twelve (12) hours in advance of such parade, picket line, or group
demonstration. Such application shall be on a form prescribed by the city
manager, shall require the application to be signed by the adult applicant or
applicants, shall require that the adult applicant show the proposed time,
place, purpose and size of such parade, picket line or group demonstration.



   (2)   Refuse to issue such permit when the activity or purpose
stated in the application would violate any ordinance of the city or statute
of the state, or when the activity or purpose would constitute a clear and
present danger to the public health or safety or would hinder or prevent the
orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the streets, alleys,
or sidewalks;



   (3)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and
the permit shall designate the adult person in charge of the activity. Such
adult person shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, or group
demonstration and shall carry such permit with him at that time. Such permit
shall not be valid in the possession of any other person;



   (4)   The permit may:



   a.   Set the starting time, duration, speed of travel, and space
between persons or vehicles in the parade, picket line, or group
demonstration;



   b.   Prescribe the portions or areas of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or other public places to be used; and



   c.   Impose such other reasonable requirements as the city manager
may prescribe for the control and free movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or for the health, safety and property rights of the participants
and the general public.



   (5)   Among other considerations, he shall consider and find as a
requisite to issuance that the activity:



   a.   Will not require excessive diversion of the police from other
necessary duties;



   b.   Will not interfere with the right of property owners in the
area to enjoy peaceful and lawful occupancy and use of their property;



   c.   Can be conducted without unreasonable interference with normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area;



   d.   Will not prevent normal police and fire protection to the
public; and



   e.   Will not be likely to cause injury to persons or property, to
provoke disorderly conduct or to create a public disturbance.



(Code 1982,  6-2023; Ord. No. O-05-03-01-2,  2, 3-1-05)



Sec. 15-159. Revocation of permit.



   The city manager shall revoke any permit granted for a parade, picket
line, or group demonstration for any of the following causes:



   (1)   The violation by any participant of section 15-158;



   (2)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(Code 1982,  6-2025)



Sec. 15-160. Interference prohibited.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade,
picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a
permit duly issued by the city manager.



(Code 1982,  6-2026)



Sec. 15-161. Regulation of picketing.



   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following
regulations:



   (1)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic;



   (2)   Not more than ten (10) pickets promoting the same objective
shall be permitted to use either of the two (2) sidewalks within a single
block at any one (1) time;



   (3)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding two (2) feet in width and two (2) feet in length promoting the
objective for which the picketing is done, provided the words used are not
derogatory or defamatory in nature;



   (4)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not
march closer together than fifteen (15) feet, except in passing one another.
Pickets shall not be allowed to walk more than five (5) feet from the curb
line and shall be in continuous motion.



(Code 1982,  6-2027)



Sec. 15-162. Prohibited activities.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (1)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any weapon
or article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or
flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon;



   (2)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal,
whether leashed or unleashed.



(Code 1982,  6-2024)



   State Law References: Weapons at parades prohibited, G.S.  14-277.2.



Sec. 15-163. Exceptions.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:



   (1)   Funeral processions;



   (2)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Code 1982,  6-2028) 



Chapter 16
SUBDIVISIONS*



__________



*   Editors Note: 4 of Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, adopted Jan. 17, 2006,
amended ch. 16 is its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 16
pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for
amendatory history.



   Cross References: and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and
protection, Ch. 7; flood hazard management, Ch. 8; standards for subdivision
proposals, § 8-54; planning, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and public places,
Ch. 15; acceptance of streets, § 15-26 et seq.; water and sewerage, Ch. 20;
zoning, Ch. 21.



   State Law References: to regulate subdivisions, G.S. § 160A-371.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 16-1--16-30



   Art. II. Procedures for Securing Approval of Subdivisions, §§
16-31--16-50



   Art. III. Design Standards, §§ 16-51--16-80



   Art. IV. Hillside Subdivisions, §§ 16-81--16-100



   Art. V. Exceptions and Variances, §§ 16-101--16-120



   Art. VI. Penalties, §§ 16-121--16-135



   Art. VII. Amendments, § 16-136



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 16-1. Authority to regulate subdivisions.



   This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by G.S. 160A-371.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-2. Title.



   This chapter shall be known or cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of
the City of Marion, North Carolina," and is referred to throughout this
chapter as "subdivision regulations."



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-3. Jurisdiction.



   These subdivision regulations shall govern all subdivision of land
lying within the corporate limits of the city as now or hereafter established.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-4. Purpose.



   The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to:



   (1)   Establish procedures and standards for the development and
subdivision of real estate within the corporate limits of the city in an
effort to ensure proper legal description, identification, monumentation and
recordation of real estate boundaries;



   (2)   Promote the orderly layout and appropriate use of land;



   (3)   Provide safe, convenient and economic circulation of vehicular
traffic;



   (4)   Provide adequate building sites which are readily accessible
to emergency vehicles;



   (5)   Ensure the proper installation of streets and utilities;



   (6)   Promote the eventual elimination of unsafe or unsanitary
conditions because of undue concentrations of population; and



   (7)   Help conserve and protect the physical and economic resources
of the city.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-5. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Alley means a strip or parcel of land that is publicly or privately
owned, is at least twenty (20) feet in width between property lines and is
set aside for public vehicular right-of-way to adjoining properties.



   Building includes the word structure.



   Building setback line means a line delineating the minimum distance
between the property line and a building or a lot within which no building or
other structure shall be placed.



   Dedication means a gift by the owner of a right to the use of land for
a specified purpose. Because a transfer of property rights is entailed,
dedication must be made by written instrument, and is completed with an
acceptance.



   Easement means a grant or privilege extended by the property owner for
the use of a strip of land without loss of ownership for specified purposes
to the public, a corporation or a person.



   Lot means a parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other
officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot
frontage, lot area, yard parking area, and other open space provisions of
this chapter and of the city zoning ordinance.



   Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection. The shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered
the front of the lot and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be
considered the side of the lot.



   Lot, double frontage means a continuous through lot which is accessible
from both streets upon which it fronts.



   Lot, record of means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county
prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, or a
lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section
derives.



   Lot, through or double frontage lot means a lot other than a corner lot
with frontage on more than one (1) street. Through lots abutting two (2)
streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.



   Minor subdivision means the division of land involving no new public or
private streets or roads, right-of-way dedications, easements, or utility
extensions are required, where the entire tract to be subdivided is ten (10)
acres or less in size, where five (5) or fewer lots are created by the
subdivision, and all of the newly created lots conform to the minimum lot
size, lot frontage and dimensional requirements of the Marion Zoning
Ordinance and the Marion Subdivision Ordinance.



   Major subdivision: All subdivisions shall be considered major except
for those defined as minor subdivisions.



   Monument means a column or shaft of stone, concrete, or concrete and
metal, employed to designate a fixed point, buried vertically in the earth,
designed for maximum permanency, exployed by a surveyor to mark corners, and
of a design and composition approved by the state board of registration for
engineers and land surveyors.



   Official maps or plans means any maps or plans officially adopted by
the city council as a guide to the development of the city.



   Open space means an area, land and water, generally lacking in manmade
structures and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state.



   Plan means any documented and approved program of recommended action,
policy, intention, etc., which sets forth goals and objectives along with
criteria, standards and implementing procedures necessary for effectively
guiding and controlling decisions relative to facilitating development and
growth management.



   Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be or has been
subdivided.



   Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
traffic.



   Street, collector means a street designed to carry medium volumes of
vehicular traffic, provide access to the major street system and collect the
vehicular traffic from the intersecting minor streets.



   Street, cul-de-sac means a street designed to have one (1) end
permanently closed, the closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.



   Street, major means a street designed primarily to carry heavy volumes
of local vehicular traffic.



   Street, marginal access means a minor service street which parallels
and is immediately adjacent to a major street or highway, and which provides
access to abutting property.



   Street, minor means a street, the principal purpose of which is to
provide vehicular access to the property abutting it.



   Subdivider means any person, partnership, association, estate, trust,
or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to
divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined in this section,
including any authorized agent of the subdivider.



   Subdivision shall include all divisions of a tract or parcel of land
into two (2) or more lots, building sites or other divisions when any one or
more of those divisions is created, for the purpose whether immediate or
future, of sale or building development, and shall include all divisions of
land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing
streets; provided, however, that the following shall not be included within
this definition nor be subject to these subdivision regulations.



   (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city as required
by this chapter;



   (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;



   (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors;
and



   (4)   The division of a tract of land in single ownership whose
entire area is no greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3)
lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved, and where the
resultant lots are equal to or exceeds the city's requirements, as standards
by this chapter.



   Subdivision administrator means the city planner or other individual(s)
authorized by the city manager to administer this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



   Cross References: and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.



Sec. 16-6. Application.



   Every subdivider of land within the corporate limits of the city shall
submit to the city plats and required information pertaining to the
subdivision which shall conform to the requirements set forth in these
subdivision regulations.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-7. Preliminary plat or minor subdivision approval required.



   No subdivider shall grade, scrape, or otherwise open or extend a street
in a proposed subdivision, or stake out, or lay out lots in such subdivision,
or in any other manner cause construction to begin, before obtaining approval
of the preliminary plat from the city council or, for minor subdivisions,
final plat approval from the subdivision administrator.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-8. Approval of plat to precede sales.



   No subdivider shall transfer or sell with reference to a plat any lot
contained within a subdivision lying within the corporate limits of the city
nor shall the city issue a building permit until such subdivision and plat
have been granted final approval by the city council or the subdivision
administrator in accordance with the procedures set forth in these
subdivision regulations, and such plat shall have been duly recorded by the
register of deeds for the county. See also Section 16-121.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-9. Approval of plat to precede recording.



   The review officer, pursuant to G.S. 47-30.2, shall not certify, nor
shall the clerk of superior court of the county order the register of deeds
to record a plat of a subdivision until approval has been given of the final
plat in accordance with the procedures set forth in these subdivision
regulations, where required, and such approval has been duly evidenced in
writing on the original of the final plat.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-10. Approval of plat to precede acceptance of streets.



   No street within a subdivision shall be accepted or maintained by the
city until the final plat of the subdivision has been approved and duly
recorded by the register of deeds for the county.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-11. Conformity with regulations required for connection with public
services.



   The city will not accept water and sewer mains or permit any utility
connections or provide any public service to any subdivision unless it
conforms to the provisions of these subdivision regulations.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Secs. 16-12--16-30. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
PROCEDURES FOR SECURING APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS



Sec. 16-30. Submission of sketch plan and general information.



   (a)    Whenever any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be
made, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision administrator a simple
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision, together with a sketch vicinity map
showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts,
subdivisions, and roads; the boundaries of the tract and the portion of the
tract to be subdivided; the total acreage to be subdivided; the existing and
proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and adjoining it; the
proposed street and lot layout; the name, address, and telephone number of
the owner; the name, if any, of the proposed subdivision; streets and lots of
adjacent developed or platted properties; and the zoning classification of
the tract and of adjacent properties.



   (b)    This sketch plan will be returned to the subdivider within
three (3) weeks of the submission date with recommended changes that are
needed to bring the proposed subdivision into compliance with this article.



   (c)    All minor subdivisions shall be approved according to section
16-31 all other subdivisions shall be approved according to sections 16-32
through 16-34.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-31. Procedures for review and approval of minor subdivisions.



   Minor subdivisions as defined herein shall be reviewed by the City of
Marion Subdivision Administrator and approved according to the provisions of
this section and the requirements of the Marion Subdivision Regulations and
the Zoning Ordinance. The minor subdivision review procedure may not be used
a second time within three (3) years on any property less than one thousand
five hundred (1,500) feet from the original property boundaries by anyone who
owned, had an option on, or any legal interest in the original minor
subdivision at the time the subdivision received final plat approval. Prior
to final plat approval, the applicants shall submit and provide the following
information to the subdivision administrator:



   (a)   Evidence that the proposed subdivision meets definition for
minor subdivision in section 16-5, definitions.



   (b)   Three (3) blue line or black line copies and one (1) mylar
copy of the surveyed final plat of the tracts to be subdivided, indicating
the acreage of each tract to be subdivided, completed by a licensed and
registered land surveyor currently licensed and registered in the State of
North Carolina,



   (c)   Conformance to the minimum lot size, lot frontage and
dimensional requirements of this chapter and the zoning ordinance



   (d)   Evidence from the Marion Public Works Department that each
proposed lot has existing access to public water and public sewer.



   The subdivision administrator is hereby authorized to approve the minor
subdivisions upon finding that said subdivision meets the requirements of the
Marion Subdivision Regulations. The subdivision administrator shall certify
the approval of the minor subdivision and the approved plat shall be signed
by subdivision administrator. The applicant shall have the approved final
plat recorded by the Register of Deeds of McDowell County within (30) days of
approval.



   Certificate of Approval for Recording Plat. I certify that the final
plat shown hereon complies with the City of Marion Subdivision Regulation and
is approved by the City of Marion for recording in the McDowell County
Register of Deeds Office.



________



   Subdivision Administrator, City of Marion



   Date:________



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-32. Submission of preliminary plat.



   (a)    After recommendations of the sketch plan have been complied
with, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision administrator three (3)
black or blueline prints of the proposed subdivision. The preliminary plat
shall depict or contain the following information:



   (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision;



   (2)   A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the
proposed subdivision and the surrounding area;



   (3)   The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be
subdivided, distinctly and accurately represented, with all bearings and
distances shown;



   (4)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;



   (5)   North arrow and declination;



   (6)   The plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary
sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric
service, illustrating connections to existing system. Plans for water supply
and sewerage disposal must be accompanied by letters of preliminary approval
by the appropriate county and state authorities. Plans must show line sizes,
the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes, pumps, force mains and
gate valves, and shall include profiles based upon mean sea level datum for
sanitary sewers and storm drains;



   (7)   Proposed street names. All streets must be designated public
or private;



   (8)   The zoning classification of the tract to be subdivided and of
adjoining properties;



   (9)   Site calculations to include acreage in total tract to be
subdivided, total number of parcels created and the linear feet of the
proposed streets;



   (10)   Proposed minimum building setback lines;



   (11)   The names of owners and adjoining properties and any
adjoining subdivisions on record;



   (12)   Any proposed right-of-way, utility or other easements, their
location, width, and purposes;



   (13)   Proposed streets, existing and platted streets on adjoining
properties and in the proposed subdivision, rights-of-way, pavement widths,
and approximate grades;



   (14)   Existing and proposed property lines, both on the tract to be
subdivided and on adjoining properties; building and other structures; water
courses; railroads; bridges; culverts; storm drains, both on the land to be
subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining; corporate lines; township
boundaries; and county lines.



   (15)   Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate
dimensions;



   (16)   Date of plat preparation;



   (17)   The name of the township, county, and state in which the
subdivision is located;



   (18)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner,
mortgagee, registered surveyor, land planner, architect, landscape architect
and professional engineer responsible for the subdivision and the official
seal of the registered land surveyor and professional engineer;



   (19)   Any other information considered by the city manager and the
city council to be pertinent to the review of the preliminary plat.



   (b)    Before acting on the preliminary plat, the city council may
request a report from any person or agency directly concerned with the
proposed development. Such report shall certify compliance with or note
deviations from the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable
plans, policies, ordinances or standards and include comments on other
factors which bear upon the public interest.



   (c)    The city council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat within a period of forty-five (45) days of the date of submission. If
conditional approval or if disapproval is given, the reasons for such action
shall be stated in writing and reference shall be made to the specific
section of this chapter with which the preliminary plat does not comply.



   (d)    Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a
period not to exceed one (1) year.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-33. Submission of a final plat.



   (a)    Whenever the provisions of these regulations have been
complied with and before the expiration date of the approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision
administrator for review by the city council a minimum of three (3) black or
bluelined prints of the final plat. The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. The final plat shall
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to develop and record at the time; provided, however,
that such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter.



   (b)    The city council shall approve or disapprove the final plat
within forty-five (45) days from the time of its receipt by the city manager.



   (c)    Action of the city council shall be noted in writing.



   (d)    The approval of the final plat by the city council shall not
be deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the city of the
dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line, or other
public facility shown upon the plat.



   (e)    Within thirty (30) days after the final plat has been
approved by the city council, the subdivider shall cause the plat to be
recorded with the register of deeds for the county.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-34. Forms for final certification.



   The following certificates shall be lettered or rubber stamped on the
final plat in such a manner to insure that such certificates will be legible
on any prints made there from:



   (1)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.



   I (We) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property
shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of
subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish minimum building lines, and
dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to public or
private use as noted. Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is
within the platting jurisdiction of the City of Marion, North Carolina.



 

 
____


 
Owner


____
 
____


Date
 
Owner



 



   (2)   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy (prepared in accordance
with G.S. 47-30, as amended-example shown below).



   I, ________, certify that this plat was drawn from (an actual survey
made by me) (deed description recorded in book ________, page ________, book
________, page ________) (other; that the error of closure as calculated by
latitudes and departures is 1:________; that the boundaries not surveyed are
shown as broken lines from information found in book ________ page ________;
that this plat was prepared in accordance with the provisions with G.S. 47-30
as amended.) Witness my hand and seal this the ________ day of ________,
A.D., 20 ________.



(Seal or Stamp)



 

 
____


 
Registered N.C. Surveyor


 
____


 
Registration No.



 



   (3)   Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation of
Streets, Utilities and Other Required Improvements.



   I hereby certify (1) that streets, utilities, and other required
improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the
City of Marion's specifications and standards in the subdivision entitled
________, or, (2) that a guarantee of the installation of the required
improvements in an amount satisfactory to the City of Marion has been
received.



 

 
____


 
Public Works Director


____
 
____


Date
 
City Manager



 



   (4)   Certificate of Approval for Recording Plat.



   I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found
to comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Marion, North Carolina, and
that this plat has been approved by the Marion City Council for recording in
the office of the Register of Deeds for McDowell County.



 

____
 
____


Date
 
City Clerk



 



(Seal)



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-35. Adoption of moratoria on development approvals.



   Per G.S. 160A-381, the city council may adopt temporary moratoria on
any City of Marion development approval required by law. See applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City of Marion and G.S. 160A-381.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Secs. 16-36--16-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
DESIGN STANDARDS



Sec. 16-51. Compliance.



   All subdivisions established after the adoption of the ordinance from
which this section derives, with the exception of those subdivisions meeting
the requirements of a hillside subdivision as defined in this chapter, shall
be developed in accordance with the minimum design standards set forth in
this article, the zoning ordinance of the City of Marion and any other
applicable plans, policies, ordinances or standards.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-52. Streets.



   (a)    Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width
of all streets shall be in conformity with official plans and maps of the
city and with existing plans of the city council, including the major
thoroughfare plan.



   (b)    Continuation of adjoining street system. The street layout
shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area.



   (c)    Access to adjacent properties. Where, in the judgment of the
city council, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining
property, streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such
property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided.



   (d)    Private streets. There shall be no private streets or reserve
strips platted in any subdivision.



   (e)    Street names. The names of new streets shall not duplicate or
be phonetically similar to existing street names. New streets which are in
alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the assigned name of the
street.



   (f)    Street right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way
widths shall be in accordance with the following:



   (1)   Highways.... 80--100 feet.



   (2)   Major streets . . . . . 80 feet.



   (3)   Collector streets . . . . . 50 feet.



   (4)   Minor streets . . . . . 50 feet.



   (5)   Marginal access streets . . . . . 50 feet.



   (6)   Cul-de-sacs . . . . . 100 feet.



   (g)    Street pavement widths. Pavement width back to back of curb
shall not be less than the following:



   (1)   Major streets . . . . . 55 feet.



   (2)   Collector streets . . . . . 28 feet.



   (3)   Minor streets . . . . . 28 feet.



   (4)   Marginal access streets . . . . . 28 feet.



   (5)   Cul-de-sacs . . . . . 80 feet.



   (h)    Street grades. Street grades shall be as follows:



   (1)   Street grades shall not be more than fifteen (15) percent nor
less than one-half of one (1) percent.



   (2)   Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed five (5)
percent for a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the
centerline of such intersection.



   (i)    Intersections. Street intersections shall be laid out as
follows:



   (1)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles
and no street shall intersect at less than sixty (60) degrees.



   (2)   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
minimum radius of twenty (20) feet. At an angle of intersection of less than
seventy-five (75) degrees a greater radius may be required. Where a street
intersects a highway, the design standards of the state highway commission
shall apply.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



   Cross References: for acceptance of new streets, § 15-27.



Sec. 16-53. Street improvements.



   The following requirements shall apply to all streets within the
corporate limits of the city.



   (1)   Grading. All streets shall be graded to their full width.
Finished grade, cross section and profile shall be approved by the city
council.



   (2)   Paving. Road base and paving shall be installed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and city specifications and standards.



   (3)   Curb and gutter. Combination curb and gutter shall be
installed in accordance with city specifications and standards.



   (4)   Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac shall not exceed eight hundred (800)
feet in length and shall be provided with a turnaround having a roadway
diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least
one hundred (100) feet. Temporary turnarounds shall be paved in accordance
with the city's specifications and standards. All streets must be through
streets unless approved otherwise by the city council.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-54. Alleys.



   Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for other than
residential purposes. Alleys are prohibited in residential blocks unless such
are approved by the city council. All dead-end alleys shall be provided with
a turnaround. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with city
specifications and standards and shall have a right-of-way width of twenty
(20) feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-55. Lots.



   All lots shall front upon a public street. Double frontage shall be
avoided. Lots shall comply with the following requirements:



   (1)   Area. All lots shall have a minimum area as required by the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Marion.



   (2)   Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be
substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.



   (3)   Width and depth. All lots shall have a minimum width at the
building line as required by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Marion and a
minimum width at the street line of thirty-five (35) feet. Corner lots shall
have an extra width of fifteen (15) feet to permit adequate setback from side
streets.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-03, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-56. Blocks.



   The maximum and minimum lengths and widths of blocks shall be as
follows:



   (1)   Length. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet nor be less than four hundred (400) feet. If deemed
necessary by the city council a pedestrian crosswalk of at least ten (10)
feet in width may be required.



   (2)   Width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two (2)
tiers of lots of minimum depth. Blocks may be one (1) lot in depth where
single-tier lots are required to separate residential development from
through vehicular traffic or nonresidential uses.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-57. Sidewalks.



   Sidewalks shall be constructed on such streets the city council
considers sidewalks to be necessary. Sidewalks, if constructed, shall be
within the street right-of-way and installed in accordance with city
specifications and standards.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-58. Subdivision corner ties and monuments.



   Prior to the approval of the final plat, permanent reference points
shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements:



   (1)   Subdivision corner tie. At least one (1) corner of the
subdivision shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily
discernible reference marker. If a corner is within two thousand (2,000) feet
of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station or state grid system coordinated
monument or city limit marker, then this corner shall be marked with a
monument so designed by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on
the map with a statement identifying this station or monument. When such a
monument or station is not available, the tie shall be made to some pertinent
and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical object or
structure.



   (2)   Monument. Within each block of a subdivision at least two (2)
monuments designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. The
surveyor shall employ additional monuments if and when required. All
monuments shall be constructed of concrete and be at least four (4) inches in
diameter or square and not less than three (3) feet in length. Each monument
shall have imbedded in the top and attached by a suitable means a metal plate
of noncorrosive materials and marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's
registration number, the month and year it was installed, and the word
monument or control corner. A monument shall be set at least thirty (30)
inches in the ground with at least six (6) inches exposed above the ground
unless this requirement is impractical.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-59. Property markers.



   A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than
three-fourths inches in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length
shall be set at all corners, expoint curve, point of intersection, property
corner, point of tangency and reference point unless a monument has already
been placed at such points. Additional markers shall be placed at other
points as required.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-60. Utilities.



   Storm sewers, waterlines and sanitary sewers shall be designed by a
registered engineer and shall be approved by the city manager and public
works director. Sanitary sewers and water mains shall be installed in
accordance with city specifications and standards. No private water and
sewerage systems will be accepted by the city unless they are installed
according to city specifications and standards.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-61. Guarantee of improvements.



   Where the required streets, utilities or other improvements have not
been completed prior to the submission of the final plat for approval, the
subdivider may guarantee the installation of the improvements in one (1) of
the following methods:



   (1)   Filing a performance or surety bond in an amount equal to one
hundred and twenty five (125) percent of the cost to complete the remaining
required improvements as determined by cost estimates; or



   (2)   Depositing or placing in escrow a certified check or cash in
an amount equal to one hundred and twenty five (125) percent to complete the
remaining required improvements as determined by cost estimates.



   Portions of the improvement guarantee may be released by the city as
work progresses.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-62. Building setback lines.



   The minimum setback from property lines shall be as provided in the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Marion:



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 01-17-06)



Sec. 16-63. Easements.



   Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows:



   (1)   Utility easements. Utility easements centered on rear or side
lot lines shall be provided where deemed necessary by the city council and
shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in width.



   (2)   Crosswalk easements. A crosswalk easement of at least eight
(8) feet in width shall be provided if required by the city council.



   (3)   Watercourse and drainage easement. Where a subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be
provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Secs. 16-64--16-80. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS



Sec. 16-81. Definition.



   For the purpose of this article, the term "hillside subdivision" means
land proposed to be subdivided which has a fifteen (15) percent slope, an
average difference in elevation of more than fifteen (15) feet in a
horizontal distance of one hundred (100) feet, or more. Any block frontage
shall be considered a hillside subdivision if the slope of thirty (30)
percent or more of its length equals or exceeds fifteen (15) percent. All
provisions of this article as set forth herein shall apply to hillside
subdivisions.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



   Cross References: and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.



Sec. 16-82. Street design.



   (a)    Widths. Within the corporate limits of the city, minor
streets shall have a right-of-way of at least fifty (50) feet except that a
right-of-way of forty (40) feet will be permitted if:



   (1)   The average cross slope of the hillside is forty (40) percent
or more; or



   (2)   The street is permanently dead-ended; or



   (3)   Lots front on only one (1) side of the street and the cross
slope is twenty-six (26) percent or more.



   (b)    Cul-de-sacs. The required turnaround on a dead-end street in
a hillside subdivision shall have a roadway diameter of not less than sixty
(60) feet. If the street length does not exceed three hundred (300) feet and
if construction difficulties will not permit a turnaround, the use of a Y or
hammerhead turning space may be acceptable if approved by the city council.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-83. Pavement widths.



   Where the average cross slope is twenty-six (26) percent or greater,
pavement widths may be reduced by the city council as follows:



   (1)   Where the average cross slope is between twenty-six (26)
percent and forty (40) percent the minimum pavement width may be reduced to
twenty (20) feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-84. Lots.



   (a)    Where the average cross slope is between fifteen (15) percent
and twenty-five (25) percent, design requirements for lots are as follows:



   (1)   The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area
will be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. Not less than eighty (80)
percent of the lots shall have an area of twelve thousand seven hundred
(12,700) feet and no lot shall have an area of less than nine thousand
(9,000) square feet.



   (2)   Minimum lot frontage will be seventy (70) feet except a
minimum frontage of forty-five (45) feet may be permitted at the end of a
cul-de-sac.



   (3)   Minimum average lot width will be seventy (70) feet.



   (b)    When the average cross slope is between twenty-six (26)
percent and forty (40) percent, design requirements for lots are as follows:



   (1)   The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area
will be twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. Not less than eighty (80)
percent of the lots shall have a minimum area of twenty-eight thousand
(28,000) square feet and no lot shall have an area of less than fourteen
thousand (14,000) square feet.



   (2)   Minimum lot frontage will be one hundred (100) feet except a
minimum frontage of fifty-five (55) feet may be permitted at the end of a
cul-de-sac. The city council may approve panhandle lots in exceptional cases
where it is impractical to serve an isolated lot by a public street. The
frontage of a panhandle lot shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25)
feet providing an access strip between two (2) regular lots to the isolated
building site. The area of such strip shall be excluded in computing the lot
area and width, and the length of such strip shall not exceed three hundred
(300) feet.



   (3)   Minimum average lot width will be one hundred (100) feet.



   (c)    When the average cross slope is greater than forty (40)
percent, design requirements for lots are as follows:



   (1)   The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area
will be one (1) acre. Not less than eighty (80) percent of the lots shall
have a minimum area of forty-eight thousand (48,000) square feet and no lot
shall have an area less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.



   (2)   Minimum lot frontage will be one hundred forty (140) feet
except a minimum frontage of seventy (70) feet may be permitted at the end of
a cul-de-sac. In exceptional cases, panhandle lots may be permitted as
provided for in section 16-55.



   (3)   Minimum average lot width will be one hundred thirty (130)
feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-85. Front setback.



   Within the city limits, setback requirements for hillside subdivisions
shall conform to the requirements of section 16-62.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 01-17-06)



Secs. 16-86--16-100. Reserved.



ARTICLE V.
EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES



Sec. 16-101. Modification of standards and requirements.



   The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
city council in the case of a plan or program for a complete group
development which in the judgment of the city council provides adequate
public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air,
and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which
also provides such covenants or other legal provisions that will assure
conformity to and achievement of the plan.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06)



Sec. 16-102. Variances.



   Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the
site, strict adherence to the provisions of the regulations of this chapter
would cause an unnecessary hardship, the city council may authorize a
variance, following notice and a quasi-judicial hearing, if such variance can
be made without destroying the intent of the subdivision regulations. Any
variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes
of the city council and the reasoning on which the departure was justified
set forth.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 01-17-06)



Secs. 16-103--16-120. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI.
PENALTIES



Sec. 16-121. Penalties.



   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land
located within the jurisdiction of the city, thereafter subdivides such land
in violation of the subdivision regulations or transfers or sells such land
by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a
subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved in accordance
with the subdivision regulations recorded in the office of the register of
deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the description by metes and
bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring such land shall not exempt the transaction from such
penalties. The city, through its city attorney or other official designated
by the city council, may enjoin such transfer or sale by action for
injunction. Building permits required pursuant to G.S. 160A-417 may be denied
for lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies,
the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or
to prevent any illegal act or conduct. See also Chapter 1 of the Marion City
Code.



   The provision of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent
from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to an
approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet been properly
approved under the subdivision regulations or recorded with the register of
deeds, provided such is done in compliance with G.S. 160A-375, as amended.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 4, 01-17-06)



Secs. 16-122--16-135. Reserved.



ARTICLE VII.
AMENDMENTS



Sec. 16-136. Amendments.



   This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city council as
specified in this chapter, but no amendment shall become effective unless it
shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the city council
for review. The city council shall have thirty (30) days within which to
reach a decision. If the city council fails to reach a decision within the
specified time, it shall be deemed to have approved the amendment.



(Ord. No. O-16-01-17-3, § 4, 1-17-06) 



Chapter 17
TAXICABS*



__________



*   Cross References: permits and business regulations, Ch. 10; traffic,
Ch. 18; parking of taxicabs regulated, § 18-235; taxicab stands restricted,
§ 18-236.



   State Law References: fortified wine or spirituous liquor in a for-hire
passenger vehicle, G.S. § 18B-401; age limits for drivers of public
passenger-carrying vehicles, G.S. § 20-10; general municipal powers as to
taxicabs, G.S. §§ 20-37, 160A-304; passenger vehicle registration fees,
G.S. § 20-87; for-hire vehicles to be marked, G.S. § 20-101; financial
responsibility, G.S. § 20-280.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 17-1--17-40



   Art. II. Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity, §§
17-41--17-60



   Art. III. Driver's Permit, §§ 17-61--17-66



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 17-1. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Callbox stand means a place where the city has authorized a holder of a
certificate of public convenience and necessity to install a telephone or
callbox for the taking of calls and the dispatching of taxicabs.



   Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued by the city, authorizing the holder thereof the conduct of a taxicab
business within the city.



   Cruising means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or other
public places of the city in search of, or soliciting prospective passengers
for hire.



   Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips
made by such driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers, and amount of fare.



   Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of the street or
elsewhere in the city which has been designated by the city as reserved
exclusively for the use of taxicabs.



   Owner means a person to whom a certificate of public convenience and
necessity has been issued.



   Rate card means a card issued by the city for display in each taxicab,
which card contains the rates of fares then enforced.



   Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than six (6)
persons and not operated on a fixed route.



   Taxi driver permit means the permission granted by the city to a person
to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city.



   Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the
time of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but it does not
include any time that the taxicab is not in motion due to any cause other
than the request, act or fault of a passenger.



(Code 1982, § 6-1001; Ord. of 11-22-88)



   Cross References: and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.



Sec. 17-2. Compliance with laws by driver.



   Every driver permitted under this chapter shall comply with all city,
state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the city council in
suspending or revoking his permit.



(Code 1982, § 6-1030; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-3. Vehicle license required; inspection.



   Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of
this chapter, it shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the police
department and found to comply with state safety and equipment requirements
and such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the chief
of police and the city manager. When the police department finds that a
vehicle has met the standards as established by the city, the chief of police
shall issue a license to that effect which shall also state the authorized
maximum seating capacity of the vehicle.



(Code 1982, §§ 6-1021, 6-1023; Ord. of 11-22-88)



   Cross References: permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



Sec. 17-4. Periodic inspections; cleanliness.



   (a)    Every vehicle operating under this chapter may be
periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be
established by the chief of police to insure the continuing maintenance of
safe operating condition, but at least once each year. Inspection shall
include:



   (1)   Verification of state safety inspection;



   (2)   Verification of compliance with this Code; and



   (3)   Such other items as required by the chief of police.



   (b)    Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the
chief of police and furnished to the owner.



(Code 1982, § 6-1021; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-5. Identification of cab company.



   Each taxicab shall bear an identifying design approved by the chief of
police.



(Ord. of 11-22-88; Ord. No. O-09-05-19-5, § 2, 5-19-09)



Sec. 17-6. Basis of fare; rate card required.



   (a)    Rates for the use of taxicabs within the city limits of the
City of Marion shall be based upon mileage. Customers using taxicabs shall
pay not more than:



   (1)   Two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for the initiation (drop)
of the meter and twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each one-tenth of a mile of
travel thereafter.



   (2)   There shall be an additional charge of two dollars ($2.00) for
each ten (10) minutes of waiting time or major fraction thereof, when the
customer is out of the taxicab or when waiting is at the request of the
customer.



   (3)   There shall be a charge of fifty cents ($0.50) for each trunk
or piece of heavy baggage handled by the taxicab driver.



   (4)   There shall be an additional charge of seventy-five cents
($0.75) for handling groceries or laundry if the driver is required to leave
the vehicle.



   (5)   Flat rates for additional requested services not listed above
are permitted, as long as such charges are posted inside the taxicab or are
normal and customary fees.



   (b)    The mileage charged to a customer shall be based upon the
odometer reading of the taxicab or other taxicab meter approved by the chief
of police. The owner of the taxi company shall cause each vehicle under his
ownership and in active use for purpose of vehicles for hire to be inspected
for accurate odometer and other approved taxicab meter reading at least
semiannually. The owner must maintain the inspection records for each vehicle
and provide copies of such records to the police department for inspection by
the city and the public. Upon inspection, if any odometers or other approved
taxicab meters are found to be inaccurate the owner shall cause same to be
repaired and appropriate records maintained.



(Code 1982, § 6-1017; Ord. of 11-22-88; Ord. No. O-04-03-07-2, § 2, 3-7-06;
Ord. No. O-15-12-01-1, § 2, 12-1-15)



Sec. 17-7. Rate card and meter to be in view of customer.



   Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card
setting forth the authorized rates of fare, and displayed in such a place as
to be in view of all passengers. Further, the odometer and other approved
taxicab meter in each taxicab shall be kept clear of any obstructions in
order for customers to view the odometers to assure proper mileage charges.



(Code 1982, § 6-1042; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-8. Receipts.



   The driver of any taxicab shall upon the request of any passenger
render to such passenger a receipt on which shall be the name of the owner,
the amount of the charges, and date of transaction.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-9. Passenger solicitation.



   (a)    No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when
sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing
immediately adjacent to the side thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall
remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at
all times when such vehicle is on the public street, except that when
necessary a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than ten (10)
consecutive minutes and provided further that nothing contained in this
section shall prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk
for the purpose of assisting a passenger into or out of such vehicle.



   (b)    No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone
of voice or by sign or any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement
of any person or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting passengers.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-10. Receipt and discharge of passengers.



   Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway except as set out in this section, but shall pull up to the
right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or in the absence of a sidewalk,
pull to the extreme right-hand side of the road and receive or discharge
passengers, except that upon one-way streets passengers may be discharged at
either the right or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence
of a sidewalk.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-11. Cruising prohibited.



   No driver shall cruise in search of passengers.



(Code 1982, § 6-1034; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-12. Passenger regulations.



   (a)    No driver shall permit any second person to occupy or ride in
such taxicab unless the person first employing the taxicab shall consent to
the acceptance of the additional passengers.



   (b)    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a
taxicab as passengers than the authorized maximum seating capacity of the
taxicab as stated in the license for such vehicle issued by the chief of
police. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.



   (c)    No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the
provisions of this chapter to do so.



   (d)    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to permit
any person to ride other than within the passenger compartment of said
vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to ride other than
within the passenger compartment of the vehicle.



(Code 1982, § 6-1035; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-13. Deception of passengers prohibited.



   No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger or
prospective passenger as to his destination or rate of fare to be charged,
nor shall he convey or cause to be conveyed any passenger to a place other
than directed, nor shall he take a longer route to the destination directed
by the passenger than necessary, unless requested to do so by the passenger.
All drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of
passengers as to speed and routes to be taken.



(Code 1982, § 6-1032; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-14. Lost articles to be returned to owner.



   Every driver shall thoroughly search his taxicab at the termination of
each trip for lost articles which may be left in the cab by passengers, and
any articles found shall be immediately returned to its rightful owner, if he
be known; otherwise, it should be deposited with the owner or operator of
cabs and shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, be reported and turned over to
the police department.



(Code 1982, § 6-1033; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-15. Sale of intoxicating beverage and soliciting for prostitution
unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to engage in selling
intoxicating beverages or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use
his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



   Cross References: generally, § 11-5.



Sec. 17-16. Manifest.



   (a)    Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are
recorded trips that are made each day showing time and place or origin and
destination of each trip, and all such completed manifests shall be returned
to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms
for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be
of a character approved by the chief of police.



   (b)    Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity shall retain and preserve all manifests in a safe place for at
least the calendar year next succeeding the current year, and all manifests
shall be available to the police department for examination at any time.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-17. Quality of service.



   All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city shall render an
overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of
certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central
place of business for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs,
and may provide an alternate telephone where calls are to be received during
other than usual business hours. They shall answer all calls received by them
for services inside the city as soon as they can do so, and if such services
cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the
prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered
and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call
anywhere within the city at any time when such holder has available cabs, or
who shall fail or refuse to give overall service shall be deemed a violator
of this article and the certificate granted to such holder may be revoked at
the discretion of the governing body.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-18. Open stands.



   (a)    The city council may establish open stands in such places
upon the streets of the city as it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs.
The city council will not create an open stand without taking into
consideration the needs for such stands by the companies and the convenience
of the general public. The city council may prescribe the number of cabs that
shall occupy such open stands. The board shall not create an open stand where
such stands would tend to create traffic hazards.



   (b)    Open stands shall be used by different drivers on a first
come, first serve basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the
rear and shall advance forward as cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay
within five (5) feet of their cabs. They shall not solicit passengers or
engage in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of
his choice that is parked at an open stand.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-19. Callbox stands.



   (a)    The city council may authorize the holder of a certificate to
establish callbox stands upon private property abutting upon the streets in
such places as in its discretion it deems proper. A holder desiring to
establish a callbox stand shall make written application to the city council.
Upon filing of such application, the police department shall investigate the
effect of such stand on traffic conditions at such place and shall thereafter
submit a written recommendation to the city council. No holder shall obtain a
permit for more than one (1) callbox stand within the downtown business area.



   (b)    A holder operating a callbox stand shall be allowed to have
on duty at such stand a starter or other employee for the purposes of
assisting in loading of passengers, receiving calls, dispatching cabs, and of
the soliciting of passengers, at such stand. The words "at such stand" shall
mean that part of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to and of equal length to
the width of such callbox stand. It shall be unlawful for any such starter or
other employee to go beyond the area designated in this section for the
purpose of soliciting passengers or assisting them in boarding such cabs.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-20. Reserved.



   Editors Note: 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted Jan. 15,
2008, deleted § 17-20, which pertained to penalties and derived from §
6-1043 of the 1982 Code; and an ordinance adopted Nov. 22, 1988.



Secs. 17-21--17-40. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY



Sec. 17-41. Required.



   No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him
to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without
having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from
the city council.



(Code 1982, § 6-1002; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-42. Application.



   An application for a certificate shall be filed with the city clerk
upon forms provided by the city. Such application shall be verified under
oath and shall contain the following information:



   (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



   (2)   Financial status of the applicant, including all unpaid
judgments against the applicant and the nature of transactions or acts giving
rise to such judgment;



   (3)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers;



   (4)   Any facts which the applicant believes tends to prove that
public convenience or necessity require the granting of a certificate;



   (5)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the
applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals;



   (6)   The identification to designate the vehicles of the applicant;



   (7)   Proof of financial responsibility;



   (8)   Such further information as the city council may require.



(Code 1982, § 6-1003; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-43. Public hearing on application.



   Upon the receipt of an application, the city council shall fix as soon
as reasonably possible, a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice
of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom
certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore
issued. Due notice shall also be given the general public by publishing a
notice of such hearing in a newspaper having general circulation within the
city. Any interested person may file with the city council a memorandum in
support of or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-44. Issuance.



   (a)    A criminal records background check is required for
applicants for a certificate under this article, in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare. Such background check shall be conducted
by the police department in conformity with state law. The result of the
background check can determine the suitability of the applicant.



   (b)    If the city council finds that further taxicab service in the
city is required by the public convenience and necessity and the applicant is
fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to
the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the city council,
that the applicant has filed proof of financial responsibility as required by
state law, and that the background check shows that the applicant will not
threaten the public health, safety or welfare, the city council shall direct
the city clerk to issue a certificate stating the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under such certificate, and the
date of issuance. Otherwise, the applicant shall be denied.



   (c)    In making the above findings, the city council shall take
into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether
existing transportation is adequate to meet the public needs, the probable
effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, the character,
experience and responsibility of the applicant, and the results of the
criminal background check.



   The city clerk shall not issue a permit required by this article to any
person who, as a result of the investigation and background check:



   (1)   Appears to be of unsatisfactory character or a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare; or



   (2)   As a result of the criminal background check, is deemed by the
city council to be unfit to conduct the activities for which the license is
applied.



(Code 1982, § 6-1005; Ord. of 11-22-88; Ord. No. O-03-02-18-3, § 2, 2-18-03)



Sec. 17-45. License fee.



   No certificate shall be issued or continued in effect unless the holder
thereof has paid an annual license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) each year for
each vehicle authorized under a certificate of public convenience and
necessity. Such license fees shall be for the calendar year ending December
31 and shall be in addition to any other license fee or charges established
by proper authority and applicable to such holder or to vehicles under the
operation and control of the holder.



(Code 1982, § 6-1016; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-46. Transfer.



   No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold,
assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city
council.



(Code 1982, § 6-1010; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-47. Suspension and revocation.



   (a)    A certificate issued under the provisions of this division
may be revoked or suspended by the governing body if the holder thereof has:



   (1)   Violated any of the provisions of this article;



   (2)   Discontinued operation for more than ninety (90) days; or



   (3)   Violated any ordinances of the city or the laws of the United
States or of the state which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder
to offer public transportation.



   (b)    Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given
notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard.



(Code 1982, § 6-1014; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Secs. 17-48--17-60. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
DRIVER'S PERMIT*



__________



*   Cross References: permits and business regulations, Ch. 10.



   State Law References: authority to regulate taxicab operators, G.S. §
20-37.



__________



Sec. 17-61. Required.



   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire from
place to place within the city unless that person shall have first applied to
and secured from the chief of police a driver's permit to drive a taxicab. No
person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be driven at any
time for hire unless the driver of such taxicab shall first obtain and shall
have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of
this article.



(Code 1982, § 6-1027; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-62. Application; fee.



   (a)    An application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be filed
with the chief of police on forms provided by the city, and such application
shall be verified under oath and contain the following information:



   (1)   The name, address, physical condition, and state license
number of the applicant;



   (2)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers;



   (3)   The educational background of the applicant;



   (4)   The concise history of his employment, reaching back for a
period of not less than five (5) years; and



   (5)   The names and addresses of four (4) residents of the city who
have known the applicant for a period of not less than five (5) years and who
will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the
applicant. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a
reputable physician of the city or county certifying that in his opinion the
applicant is not inflicted with any disease or deformity which might make him
an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver.



   (b)    At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay
the city the sum in an amount to be determined from time to time by city
council and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the city
clerk.



(Code 1982, § 6-1028; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-63. Personal appearance before city council.



   If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal
appearance before the city council to offer evidence as to why the
application should be reconsidered.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-63.5. Review of application.



   (a)    Under the authority of G.S. section 160A-304, a criminal
records background check is required for all applicants for a permit to
operate or drive a taxicab under this article, in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. Such criminal records background check shall
include fingerprinting of the applicant and state and national checks to be
conducted by the police department in conformity with state law. The result
of the background check can determine the suitability of the applicant.



   (b)    If, as a result of this background check, the character and
responsibility of the applicant appear to be satisfactory, the police chief
shall issue a permit.



   (c)    The police chief shall not issue a permit required by this
article to any person who, as a result of the investigation and background
check:



   (1)   Appears to be of unsatisfactory character; or



   (2)   As a result of the criminal background check, is deemed by the
police chief to be unfit to drive a taxicab for hire within the city; or



   (3)   Has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors
or narcotic drugs; or



   (4)   Is an excessive user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs;
or



   (5)   Has been convicted of driving while impaired; or



   (6)   Has a driving record which would endanger the public; or



   (7)   As a result of the criminal background check, is deemed by the
police chief council to be unfit to conduct a business for which the license
is applied.



   (d)    Prior to denial or termination of a permit under this article
based upon criminal history records information received from the police
department, the City of Marion shall verify the existence of a record by
either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint
card of the individual to the criminal information and identification section
of the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation for verification that the
criminal history records information belongs to the individual.



(Ord. No. O-03-02-18-4, § 2, 2-18-03; Ord. No. O-06-04-04-3, § 2, 4-4-06)



Sec. 17-64. Issuance; duration; annual fee.



   (a)    Upon approval of an application for taxicab driver's permit,
the city shall issue a permit to the applicant which shall bear the name,
address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. Such permit shall be
in effect for the remainder of the calendar year. A permit for every calendar
year thereafter shall be issued upon the payment of a fee in an amount to be
determined from time to time by the city council and listed in the schedule
of fees and charges maintained by the city clerk, unless the permit for the
preceding year has been revoked. Permits expired for more than thirty (30)
days will not be renewed.



   (b)    Not withstanding other processes, each permittee must provide
the city with an updated application, including a physician's certificate of
health, every five (5) years.



   (c)    The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining all
application information in a current status. Failure to notify the city of
any changes within two (2) weeks of the change shall result in revocation or
suspension for two (2) weeks.



(Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-65. Display.



   Every driver authorized under this article shall post his driver's
permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such
driver is operating a taxicab.



(Code 1982, § 6-1041; Ord. of 11-22-88)



Sec. 17-66. Suspension and revocation.



   At any time after the issuance of a driver's permit under this article,
the city council may suspend such permit for a driver's failure or refusal to
comply with the provisions of this article. The board may also revoke any
driver's permit for failure to comply with the provisions of this article.
However, no permit will be revoked until the driver has received notice and
has had opportunity to present evidence in his behalf.



(Code 1982, § 6-1030; Ord. of 11-22-88) 



Chapter 17.5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS



   Art. I. In General, §§ 17.5-1--17.5-25



   Art. II. Telecommunications Towers, §§ 17.5-26--17.5-88



   Div. 1. General Requirements, §§ 17.5-26--17.5-55



   Div. 2. Standards and Requirements, §§ 17.5-56--17.5-85



   Div. 3. Enforcement, §§ 17.5-86--17.5-88



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Secs. 17.5-1--17.5-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS



DIVISION 1.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 17.5-26. Title.



   This article shall be known as "The Telecommunications Tower Ordinance"
of the City of Marion, North Carolina.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 1)



Sec. 17.5-27. Purpose.



   The city council finds that the construction of telecommunications
towers may cause unusual problems and hazards to the residents and visitors
of the city. The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction of
telecommunications towers to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties
from tower failure and falling ice,to maximize the use of existing and new
towers in order to reduce the number of towers needed, to minimize potential
hazards to low flying law enforcement and medical helicopters, to restrict
towers that adversely detract from the natural beauty of the mountains and
the city by discouraging visual eyesores and to minimize the negative
economic impact on tourism.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 2)



Sec. 17.5-28. Authority and enactment.



   This article is adopted under the authority and provision of G.S.
160A-174.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 3)



Sec. 17.5-29. Jurisdiction.



   This article shall apply to all areas of the city located inside the
planning jurisdiction of the incorporated city.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 4)



Sec. 17.5-30. Definition of terms.



   Adjacent valley floor. The adjacent valley floor is the valley (refer
to the N.C. Ridge Law) nearest by air distance to the major mountain ridge or
peak.



   Antenna. A conductor by which electromagnetic waves are transmitted or
received.



   Balloon test. A test conducted by allowing a large colored balloon to
rise to the same height as the proposed tower. The balloon is viewed from
different locations and distances to mark the range of visibility to
surrounding properties and any adjacent viewsheds.



   Construction. Any new construction, reconstruction, alteration or
expansion requiring a building permit in accordance to the N.C. Building Code.



   Crest. The uppermost line of a mountain or chain of mountains from
which the land falls away on at least two (2) sides to a lower elevation or
elevations.



   Existing vegetative canopy. The existing vegetative plants, trees or
shrubs at the site specific location of the proposed communication tower
site, that will provide natural camouflage, concealment, or otherwise hide
the communication tower after its construction. This vegetative canopy will
also be used to determine the allowable height of the proposed communication
tower.



   Fall area. A circle whose center is the base of a telecommunications
tower and whose radius is equal to the tower's height.



   Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, the
State of North Carolina, and its agencies and political subdivision, or other
legal entity.



   Protected mountain ridges. All mountain ridges in the city whose
elevation is one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet or more and whose
elevation is three hundred (300) or more feet above the elevation of an
adjacent valley floor. The mountain ridge identified as Grant Mountain on the
USGS 7.5 minute East Marion, N.C. topographic map is exempt from this
definition and shall not be considered a protected mountain ridge.



   Resident. Any person residing, doing business or maintaining an office
within the city.



   Ridge. The elongated crest or series of crests at the apex or uppermost
point of intersection between two (2) opposite slopes or sides of a mountain,
and includes all land within one hundred (100) feet below the elevation of
any portion of such line or surface along the crest.



   Structure. Anything constructed or erected, including but not limited
to buildings, that requires location on the land or attachment to something
having permanent location on the land.



   Telecommunications tower (hereinafter known as "tower"). Any tower or
structure erected for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas
designed to transmit or receive signals (e.g., telephonic, radio, television
or microwave).



   Tower height. The vertical distance measured from ground to the upper
most point of the telecommunications tower and any antenna affixed thereto.



   Viewshed. An unobstructed sight of, or the range of one's sight while
traveling, visiting, driving or otherwise using the natural or manmade
resources of the Robert C. Hunter Expressway, a designated scenic corridor.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the viewshed distance is one (1) air mile
from the outermost boundary of the city adjoining the Robert C. Hunter
Expressway.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 5)



Sec. 17.5-31. Enforcement officer.



   The city shall appoint an enforcement officer. The enforcement officer
or his appointee shall administer and enforce all provisions of this article.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 6)



Sec. 17.5-32. Conflict with other laws.



   Whenever the regulations of this article conflict with the requirements
of another state or federal statute, or city ordinance, the more restrictive
standard shall govern.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 19)



Secs. 17.5-33--17.5-55. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 17.5-56. Permits required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other
entity to erect any communication tower without first obtaining a permit from
the enforcement officer. A permit shall be required for the erection of a
replacement tower or the modification of an existing tower. Existing towers
owned by governmental agencies and designed for non-commercial emergency
communications may be replaced with a tower equal in height to the replaced
tower. AM and FM radio towers and towers operated by a federally-licensed
amateur radio station operator shall be excluded from this section and shall
not require a permit prior to construction.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 7)



Sec. 17.5-57. Permit application.



   Tower permit applications are available from the city building
inspector's office or the office of the planning administrator.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 8)



Sec. 17.5-58. Application fee.



   A fee for reviewing tower permit applications shall be established by
the city council.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 9)



Sec. 17.5-59. Application submission and review process.



   (a)    A completed tower permit application and five (5) copies of
all supporting documentation identified in section 17.5-60 shall be submitted
to the enforcement officer for review at least fifteen (15) working days
prior to a regularly scheduled planning board meeting.



   (b)    The enforcement officer shall review the completed tower
permit application for compliance with section 17.5-60. Any application not
containing all information required in section 17.5-60 shall be returned to
the applicant for correction and resubmission. If the enforcement officer
deems it necessary, he may retain, at a reasonable expense to the permit
applicant, one (1) or more professional engineers to assist him in reviewing
any technical requirements.



   (c)    The enforcement officer shall recommend to the planning board
either approval, approval with conditions or disapproval. In making his
recommendation, the enforcement officer may include any appropriate
conditions he deems should be placed on issuing the permit as identified in
section 17.5-62.



   (d)    The planning board shall consider the tower permit
applicationat their next regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the
enforcement officer's recommendation.



   (e)    The planning board shall take formal action to approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the tower permit application within
sixty (60) working days. If the action is to disapprove the tower permit
application, the reasons for such action shall be stated in the minutes and
specific reference shall be made to the requirements not met. If the planning
board fails to act within the specified time period, the application shall be
considered approved or disapproved as recommended by the enforcement officer.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 10)



Sec. 17.5-60. Requirements for site development and preliminary tower design
plans.



   The site development plan and preliminary design plan shall contain the
following information and be part of the tower permit application:



   (1)   The site development plan shall be prepared by a N.C.
registered civil engineer and contain the following:



   a.   The tower applicant's name and property owner's name and their
addresses, scale, north arrow, vicinity map, tax parcel identification
number, and the tower's latitude and longitude coordinates.



   b.   The name, address, signature and seal of the engineer preparing
the site development plan.



   c.   The surveyed boundary lines of the parcel(s) that will contain
the proposed tower and its fall area.



   d.   The name, addresses and tax parcel identification numbers of
all owners of property abutting the subject property.



   e.   All identifiable structures located on the parcel, all private
and public roads, highways, and underground and overhead utilities.



   f.   All existing towers on the property or any towers whose fall
area encroaches onto the property.



   g.   The proposed tower's location, the proposed fall area and the
location of all support structures and guy line anchors.



   h.   The ground elevation of the proposed tower's base, all proposed
support structures, property corners, and a permanent site bench mark. All
elevations shall be determined using the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929.



   i.   The height of the existing vegetative canopy surrounding the
proposed tower.



   (2)   The preliminary tower design plan shall be prepared by a N.C.
registered civil engineer and contain the following:



   a.   The tower permit applicant's name and address, scale, north
arrow, vicinity map and tax parcel identification number.



   b.   The name, address, signature and seal of the engineer preparing
the preliminary tower design plan.



   c.   A plan showing the base of the tower and the foundations for
all guy line anchors and support structures, all proposed buildings and any
other proposed improvements including access roads and utility connections
within and to the proposed site.



   d.   A tower elevation showing the proposed lighting, tower color
and all proposed antennas.



   e.   An elevation of each proposed set of guy line anchors.



   f.   The proposed tower design loads.



   (3)   A map or description showing the service area(s) for the
proposed tower's antenna(s).



   (4)   The applicant shall provide written statements from the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) showing that the proposed tower complies with all permit
regulations administered by that agency or evidence that the proposed tower
is exempt from those regulations.



   (5)   The applicant shall identify all other possible alternatives
considered within the service area for the proposed tower's antenna(s) and
explain why the proposed tower is necessary and why existing towers and
structures (e.g., Duke Power transmission towers) can not accommodate the
proposed antenna(s).



   (6)   The applicant shall identify any variance(s) to the ordinance,
the reason(s) for seeking the variance(s) and any measures that are proposed
to mitigate possible adverse affects of the proposed variance(s).



   (7)   The applicant may be required to conduct a balloon test at the
request of the planning board.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 11)



Sec. 17.5-61. Issuance of permit.



   Following the planning board's recommendation to city council of any
tower permit application not requesting a variance, the enforcement officer
shall issue a tower permit. All tower permit conditions shall appear on the
face of the site development plan. The permit owner shall acknowledge and
agree to permit conditions approved by the city council. If a building permit
is not obtained within twelve (12) months after the tower permit is issued,
the tower permit shall expire. No permit under the state building code shall
be issued until or unless any tower permit required by this chapter is
granted.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 12)



Sec. 17.5-62. Tower approval standards.



   (a)   Any proposed tower shall provide a needed service or benefit
to the residents of the city that cannot otherwise be met.



   (b)   Wireless telecommunications towers (including cellular towers,
digital towers and PCS towers), are permitted uses by right in all M-1
industrial zoning districts pursuant to the regulations set forth in this
section. Telecommunication towers require the issuance of a "conditional use
permit" in all other zoning districts pursuant to the regulations set forth
in this section.



   (c)   Towers shall be sited to contain all ice-fall or debris from
tower failure onsite. The applicant must present to the planning board proof
of either fee simple ownership, a recorded leasehold interest, or an easement
from the record property owner of all property within a radius of one (1)
time the height of the tower.



   (d)   Lighting on towers shall not be permitted except as required
by federal and state regulations.



   (e)   The base of the tower shall be surrounded by a fence or wall
at least eight (8) feet in height unless the tower is constructed entirely on
a building over eight (8) feet in height.



   (f)   The tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate
at least one (1) additional antenna that is at least as large as the largest
proposed antenna.



   (g)   Tower permit approval is conditional subject to the owner(s)
agreeing to allow future co-location of other antenna(s) on the tower to be
permitted as well as on any other tower in co-location County in the
possession of the owner(s).



   (h)   No tower shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height.



   (i)   Colors of towers shall be determined by each site specific
location. Any permitted tower shall be of a color which will best accomplish
its concealment, usually light gray, except when otherwise required by
applicable federal or state regulations.



   (j)   Any tower not in use for one (1) continuous year shall be
removed within one hundred twenty (120) days after the tower owner and the
current property owner have received written notice by the enforcement
officer or the city attorney.



   (k)   Any communication tower proposing to locate within the
viewshed of any protected mountain ridge, protected mountain peak within the
city shall have a height no greater than twenty (20) feet over the existing
vegetative canopy located on that site specific location. If no vegetation
exists on the proposed location then the maximum communication tower height
in that site specific location shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  If possible,
extraordinary measures shall be taken to ensure total and complete
concealment of the communications tower (see section 17.5-30, definition of
"existing vegetative canopy").



   (l)   Reasonable access to the permitted communications tower site
location shall be required. The enforcement officer shall reserve the right
to inspect the site to ensure compliance with this ordinance.



   (m)   A sign identifying the owner(s) and operator(s) of the tower
and an emergency telephone number shall be placed in a clearly visible
location on the premises of the tower.



   (n)   The telecommunications tower must be consistent with the
public health and public safety and shall promote the general welfare of the
city.



   (o)   An applicant must collocate unless there is substantial
evidence that collocation is either infeasible or impossible. The following
is a hierarchy of preferred locations for new towers or new antennas
beginning with the most preferred locations:



   (p)   No wireless communication tower, antenna, their accessory
structures or the required fall zone shall be located in a historic district
or on a historic site, or within one thousand feet of such locations, which
meets Federal, State, or local requirements for historic designation.



(Ord. of 4-20-00, § 13; Ord. No. O-15-11-17-4, § 1, 11-17-15)



Secs. 17.5-63--17.5-85. Reserved.



DIVISION 3.
ENFORCEMENT



Secs. 17.5-86--17.5-88. Reserved.



   Editors Note: 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted Jan. 15,
2008, deleted §§ 17.5-86--17.5-88 which pertained to criminal sanctions,
remedies and appeals and derived from an ordinance adopted Apr. 20, 2000.



Chapter 18
TRAFFIC*



__________



*   Cross References: Riding on fire truck prohibited,  7-15; unlawful to
pass fire truck,  7-18; abandoned vehicles,  9-61 et seq.; littering from
vehicle prohibited,  15-87; taxicabs, Ch. 17.



__________



   Art. I. In General,  18-1--18-25



   Art. II. Traffic Control Devices,  18-26--18-55



   Art. III. Operation of Vehicles,  18-56--18-160



   Div. 1. Generally,  18-56--18-90



   Div. 2. Speed Regulations,  18-91--18-105



   Div. 3. Turning Movements,  18-106--18-125



   Div. 4. One-Way Streets and Alleys,  18-126--18-140



   Div. 5. Special Stops Required,  18-141--18-160



   Art. IV. Pedestrians' Rights and Duties,  18-161--18-185



   Art. V. Regulations for Bicycles and Skateboards,  18-186--18-215



   Art. VI. Stopping, Standing or Parking,  18-216--18-262



   Div. 1. Generally,  18-216--18-255



   Div. 2. Off-Street Parking,  18-256--18-262



   Art. VII. Tax on Motor Vehicles,  18-266



ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL



Sec. 18-1. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   Alley means a thoroughfare through the middle of a block.



   Authorized emergency vehicle means a vehicle of the fire department,
police vehicle, and such ambulance and emergency vehicle of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the chief of police.



   Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over twenty
(20) inches in diameter.



   Block means a portion of any street located between any two (2)
intersections of any two (2) streets or public alleyways next adjacent to
each other.



   Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained, or used
primarily for the transportation of property.



   Controlled-access highway means every highway, street, or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such
points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such highway, street, or roadway.



   Crosswalk means that portion of any street or roadway ordinarily
included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of
sidewalks at intersections. Any portion of a roadway or street distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface
of such street or roadway.



   Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.



   Driver means every person who shall drive or who shall be in actual
physical control of the operation of any vehicle.



   Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.



   Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of the two (2) highways which join one another at or
approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.



   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30)
feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways
shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



   Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle designed to run upon the streets which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle.



   Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in this city.



   Official traffic control device means any sign, signal, marking or
device, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of
the city council for the purpose of regulating, warning, prohibiting or
guiding traffic upon the public streets and thoroughfares of the city.



   Official traffic signal means any device, whether manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, whereby traffic is alternately
directed to stop and to proceed, or to turn, or to proceed with caution.



   Park means the standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or unoccupied,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers or cargo.



   Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.



   Pedestrian means person afoot.



   Police officer means every peace officer of the city, including every
employee of the city authorized and empowered to regulate traffic and to make
arrests for any violations of the provisions of this chapter.



   Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



   Public conveyance means any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad
train for transporting persons for a fare.



   Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the street or
roadway.



   Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed,
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term
roadway as used in this chapter shall refer to any such roadways separately
but not to all such roadways collectively.



   Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within any
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which space shall be so
protected or marked or indicated by visible and adequate markers or signs as
shall be visible at all times while so set apart as a safety zone for
pedestrians.



   Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   Standing means any stopping of any vehicle, whether or not the vehicle
is occupied during such period of stopping.



   Stop. When required means the complete cessation of movement of any
vehicle. When prohibited, means any stopping of any vehicle, except when such
stopping means that it shall be necessary to stop such vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with direction of any police
officer of the city or by reason of any traffic control sign or signal or by
reason of any emergency.



   Street and highway means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic.



   Through highway means every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided in this chapter.



   Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles of all
kinds, conveyances, tractors, bicycles, motorcycles and the like, either
singly or together, while using any street or alleyway for travel, including
the operation of, the loading or unloading of or the parking of any vehicle
upon any of the public streets of the city.



   Traffic bureau means the traffic division of the police department of
this city, or if a traffic division is not established, then such term
whenever used in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to the police
department of this city.



   Traffic schedule means the official list or schedule of the regulations
compiled in accordance with general statutes section 160A-77, maintained in
the office of the town clerk:



   (1)   Designating the location of traffic control devices;



   (2)   Designating areas or zones where regulations are applied to
parking, loading, bus stops, or taxicab stands;



   (3)   Establishing speed limits;



   (4)   Restricting or regulating traffic at certain times on certain
streets, or to certain types, weights or sizes of vehicles;



   (5)   Designating the location of through streets, stop
intersections, yield-right-of-way intersections, waiting lanes, one-way
streets, or truck traffic routes; and



   (6)   Establishing regulations upon vehicle turns at designated
locations.



   Vehicle means every device used in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon any street within the
corporate limits, and for the purposes of this chapter any bicycle shall be
deemed a vehicle.



(Code 1982,  7-1001)



   Cross References: Definitions and rules of construction generally, 
1-3.



Sec. 18-2. Application generally.



   Every person operating, riding, propelling or driving any pushcart,
tractor, trailer, bicycle, buggy, cart or other type of machine or conveyance
or any person riding or driving or leading an animal upon any of the public
streets of the city shall be subject to the provision of this chapter, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.



(Code 1982,  7-1021)



Sec. 18-3. Application to public employees.



   The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles
upon streets shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States government, this state or any other state, or
any county or city. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any
such provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this
chapter or by state statute.



(Code 1982,  7-1022)



Sec. 18-4. Authority of police and fire department officers.



   (a)    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police
department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to
enforce all street traffic laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable
to street traffic.



   (b)    Officers of the police department or such officers as are
assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in
the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



   (c)    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Code 1982,  7-1023)



Sec. 18-5. Obedience to police and fire department officials.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer or fire department official.



(Code 1982,  7-1024)



Sec. 18-6. Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted.



   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties,
applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while
set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance.



(Code 1982,  7-1025)



Sec. 18-7. Provisions for authorized emergency vehicles.



   (a)    The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual suspected
violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions stated in this section.



   (b)    The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



   (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;



   (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



   (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property;



   (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.



   (c)    The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while
in motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may
be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one
(1) lighted lamp displaying a light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such
vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a light visible from in front of
the vehicle.



   (d)    The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.



(Code 1982,  7-1026)



Secs. 18-8--18-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES*



__________



*   State Law References: Vehicle control signs and signals, G.S.  20-158.



__________



Sec. 18-26. Signs as prerequisite to enforcement.



   No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever any particular section in
this chapter does not state that signs are required, such section shall be
effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof.



(Code 1982,  7-1032)



Sec. 18-27. Specifications for traffic control devices.



   All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to state
regulations. All signs and signals required in this chapter for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location. All
traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions
of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices.



(Code 1982,  7-1033)



Sec. 18-28. Obedience to signs required.



   Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated
on any sign, marker or device for the control or direction of traffic erected
or placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when so placed or
erected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed
to apply when the driver of a vehicle is otherwise directed by a police
officer or when an exception is granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle under section 18-7.



(Code 1982,  7-1031)



Sec. 18-29. Traffic control signal legend.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting
the words, "Go", "Caution", or "Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one (1) at a time, or with arrows or lighted figures, the
following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate
and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:



   (1)   Green alone or Go.



   a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either
such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.



   b.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (2)   Yellow alone or Caution when shown following the green or Go
signal.



   a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or stop signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter, remain in or be crossing the intersection
when the red or Stop signal is exhibited.



   b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or Go is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
Walk signal.



   (3)   Red alone or Stop.



   a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or Go is
shown alone; provided, however, that if a sign is not erected prohibiting
turns on red lights, the vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming
to a complete stop. Streets on which right turns on red are allowed are
designated in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is maintained
in the office of the city clerk.



   b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or Go is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
Walk signal.



   (4)   Red with green arrow.



   a.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



   b.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or Go is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian
Walk signal.



   (5)   If an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.



(Code 1982,  7-1034)



Sec. 18-30. Pedestrian control signals.



   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the symbols Walk
(stick figure) or Don't Walk (flashing hand) are in place such signals shall
indicate as follows:



   (1)   Walk (Stick Figure). Pedestrians facing such signals may
proceed across the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.



   (2)   Don't Walk (Flashing Hand). No pedestrian shall start to cross
the highway in the direction of such symbol, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his crossing on the Walk symbol shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety island while the Don't Walk symbol is showing.



(Code 1982,  7-1035)



Sec. 18-31. Flashing signals.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:



   (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall come to a complete stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line
when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. In no event shall such vehicle
be driven into such crosswalk unless and until such entry can be made with
safety to other persons and property at such place.



   (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles
may proceed through such intersection past such signal only with caution.



(Code 1982,  7-1036)



Sec. 18-32. Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings.



   (a)    No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view
of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which
purports to be or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic control
device, sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device, sign or signal.



   (b)    No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (c)    This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (d)    Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over
the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.



(Code 1982,  7-1037)



Sec. 18-33. Interference with official traffic control devices, signs or
signals.



   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device,
sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other
part thereof.



(Code 1982,  7-1038)



Sec. 18-34. Traffic restrictions on play streets.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.



(Code 1982,  7-1039)



Sec. 18-35. Traffic lanes.



   Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.



(Code 1982,  7-1040)



Sec. 18-36. Zone of quiet.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed indicating a zone of quiet, the
person operating a motor vehicle within such zone shall not sound the horn or
any other warning device, except in an emergency.



(Code 1982,  7-1041)



   Cross References: Noise,  9-101.



Sec. 18-37. School zones.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street, or part
thereof, as a school zone, drivers of motor vehicles using such street shall
exercise the greatest care for the protection of children.



(Code 1982,  7-1042)



Sec. 18-38. Yield signs.



   Whenever yield right-of-way signs are used they shall require vehicular
traffic to yield the right-of-way to other intersecting traffic from any
other road or street. Yield right-of-way signs shall be located at the
streets designated in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is
maintained in the office of the city clerk.



(Code 1982,  7-1043)



   State Law References: Erection of yield right-of-way signs, G.S. 
20-158.1.



Sec. 18-39. Fire lanes.



   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, upon any public vehicular area, street, highway or roadway in
any area designated as a fire lane, provided that such areas are marked as
fire lanes and contain adequate signage as specified by the fire chief. This
subsection includes designated fire lanes in shopping center parking lots and
all other public vehicular areas, provided that authorization to enforce such
areas is provided by action of the city council upon a request from the
property owner. However, persons loading or unloading supplies or merchandise
may park temporarily in a fire lane located in a shopping center parking lot
or other public vehicular area as long as the vehicle is not left unattended.
The prima facie rule of evidence created by G.S. section 20-162.1 is
applicable to prosecutions for violation of this section. The owner of a
vehicle parked in violation of this subsection shall be deemed to have
appointed any state, county or municipal law enforcement officer as his agent
for the purpose of arranging for the transportation and safe storage of such
vehicle. No law enforcement officer removing such a vehicle shall be held
criminally or civilly liable in any way for any acts or omissions arising out
of or caused by carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this subsection,
unless the conduct of the officer amounts to wanton misconduct or intentional
wrongdoing.



(Code 1982,  7-1044; Ord. of 3-22-83; Ord. No. O-03-09-02-1,  2, 9-2-03)



   Cross References: Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7.



Secs. 18-40--18-55. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
OPERATION OF VEHICLES



DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY



Sec. 18-56. Emerging from alley, driveway, or building.



   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district
emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1086)



Sec. 18-57. Drivers to leave intersections clear.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.



(Code 1982,  7-1087)



Sec. 18-58. Clinging to vehicles.



   It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, skateboard, sled, rollerskates or any toy vehicle, to attach such
bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled or toy vehicle or himself to any moving
vehicle upon any roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1091)



Sec. 18-59. Driving through funeral procession.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except
vehicles of the fire department, police department, patrols and ambulances
when such vehicles are responding to emergency calls, through a funeral
procession.



(Code 1982,  7-1092)



Sec. 18-60. Backing.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to back such vehicle
into any intersection or over a crosswalk and, in any event or at any place,
to back such vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and unless
such driver shall have given ample warning, either by hand or horn or other
signal, to those who may be behind.



(Code 1982,  7-1093)



Sec. 18-61. Driving within sidewalk area or across curbs.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within or across any sidewalk
area or across any curbs located on a public street within the city except at
a permanent or temporary driveway that has been permitted by the city and for
which a curb cut and approach has been constructed by the city, if a curb is
present next to the property. The term "vehicle" as used in this section
shall include, but not be limited to, bicycles, motorcycles, minibikes,
automobiles, other motor vehicles, and vehicles drawn by animals.



   Exceptions to this section shall apply only in cases where a driver of
a vehicle is ordered to drive across a sidewalk or curb by a police officer
or traffic control device, or in situations where emergency or maintenance
work is undertaken by the city or authorized by the city through the issuance
of a permit by the public works director.



(Code 1982,  7-1094; Ord. No. O-07-02-06-2,  2, 2-6-07; Ord. No.
O-07-07-17-1,  2, 7-17-07)



   Cross References: Sidewalks,  15-131 et seq.



Sec. 18-62. Drivers in a procession.



   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Code 1982,  7-1095)



   Cross References: Parades and demonstrations,  15-156 et seq.



Sec. 18-63. Funeral processions to be identified.



   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the headlights of each vehicle being lighted.



(Code 1982,  7-1096; Ord. of 9-2-86,  1)



Sec. 18-64. Riding on motorcycles.



   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may
ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or
upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator.



(Code 1982,  7-1097)



Sec. 18-65. Controlled access.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.



(Code 1982,  7-1098)



Sec. 18-66. Operating with improper muffler or cut-out open unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any automobile or truck
with the cut-out open or without the same being properly muffled so as to
prevent unnecessary noise.



(Code 1982,  7-1099)



Sec. 18-67. Spinning of wheels.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the city limits in
such a manner to cause the wheels thereof to lose traction with the surface
on which they are driven, or so as to cause the tires to squeal.



(Code 1982,  7-1100)



Sec. 18-68. Boarding or alighting from public conveyance or other vehicles.



   No person shall board, or alight from any public conveyance or other
vehicle while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion.



(Code 1982,  7-1101)



Sec. 18-69. Unlawful riding.



   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle not designated
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty nor to persons riding
within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.



(Code 1982,  7-1102)



Sec. 18-70. Entering, jumping on, or riding vehicles without permission.



   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle,
without the consent of the owner or driver.



(Code 1982,  7-1103)



Sec. 18-71. Persons riding must stay inside.



   No person shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond the
limits of the vehicle in which he is riding, except to give such signals as
are by law required, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle whatsoever.



(Code 1982,  7-1104)



Sec. 18-72. Number of persons in front seat.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any
motor vehicle to permit more than three (3) persons, including driver, to
ride in the front or driver's seat.



(Code 1982,  7-1105)



Sec. 18-73. Summons by police card.



   In cases of violation of any sections of this chapter by drivers or
occupants of vehicles, who have left the vehicle unattended, police cards,
designating the section violated, attached to the vehicle shall constitute
legal summons to appear at court and shall in all respects be as effective as
a personal summons.



(Code 1982,  7-1106)



Sec. 18-74. Railroad train blocking street.



   No railroad employee shall block any of the street crossings of the
city by stopping his train, cars, or engine across any street, for more than
five (5) consecutive minutes.



(Code 1982,  7-1107)



Sec. 18-75. Truck routes; weight restrictions.



   (a)    There exist two (2) highways of the primary state highway
system which are approximately the same distance between two (2) or more
points. It is in the public interest and for the promotion of safety to
designate one (1) of such highways as the truck route between such points,
and to prohibit the use of the other highway by heavy trucks, or other
vehicles of a gross vehicle weight or axle load limit in excess of a maximum.
Based upon an engineering and traffic investigation pursuant to authority
granted by general statutes section 20-116(h), the highways set forth in
article VII of this chapter are designated as the truck route.



   (b)    The sections of highways set forth in article VII of this
chapter shall be designated as the other highways, and that use of such other
highways by all heavy trucks and other vehicles of a axle-load limits in
excess thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds shall be prohibited.



   (c)    When signs are placed giving notice thereof, it shall be
unlawful for any truck exceeding three (3) tons in gross weight to use any
street designated in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is
maintained in the office of the city clerk, unless such vehicle is making
pickups and deliveries to residences on such street.



(Code 1982,  7-1108)



Sec. 18-76. Use of motorcycles, trailbikes and other off-the-road vehicles
limited; muffler required; penalty.



   (a)    The following limitations on the use of motorcycles,
trailbikes and other off-the-road vehicles shall apply to the owners and
operators of such vehicles in the city:



   (1)   Use of motorcycles, trailbikes and other off-the-road vehicles
shall be limited to on the road as allowed by state law and only if legally
licensed and inspected.



   (2)   Use of such vehicles off the road is specifically prohibited
in the city except:



   a.   On property owned, or controlled by the operator, or as
permitted in writing by the owner to the operator; and



   b.   Only at a distance greater than five hundred (500) yards from
the nearest dwelling or business.



   (b)    Any vehicle used as permitted by this section must be
equipped with a functioning factory installed muffler, or its equivalent
before it may be operated in any fashion within the city.



   (c)    Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and
punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1-10.



(Ord. of 1-17-89)



Secs. 18-77--18-90. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.
SPEED REGULATIONS



Sec. 18-91. Speed limit in city limits.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour inside the
municipal corporate limits.



(Code 1982,  7-1051; Ord. No. O-03-08-19-2,  2, 8-19-03)



   State Law References: Speed restriction, G.S.  20-141.



Sec. 18-92. Exceptions.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the
speeds listed below upon the streets or portions of streets of the state
highway system as designated in the traffic schedule, an official copy of
which is maintained in the office of the city clerk.



   (1)   Fifteen (15) miles per hour.



   (2)   Twenty (20) miles per hour.



   (3)   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour.



   (4)   Thirty (30) miles per hour.



   (5)   Forty (40) miles per hour.



   (6)   Forty-five (45) miles per hour.



   (7)   Fifty (50) miles per hour.



   (8)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour.



   (b)    It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the
speeds listed below upon the streets or portions of streets, not a part of
the state highway system, designated in the traffic schedule, an official
copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk.



   (1)   Fifteen (15) miles per hour.



   (2)   Twenty (20) miles per hour.



   (3)   Twenty-five (25) miles per hour.



   (4)   Thirty (30) miles per hour.



   (5)   Forty (40) miles per hour.



   (6)   Forty-five (45) miles per hour.



   (7)   Fifty (50) miles per hour.



   (8)   Fifty-five (55) miles per hour.



(Code 1982,  7-1052)



Secs. 18-93--18-105. Reserved.



DIVISION 3.
TURNING MOVEMENTS



Sec. 18-106. Required position and method of turning at intersections.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:



   (1)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway.



   (2)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of
the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing
to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after
entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the
intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.



   (3)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered.



(Code 1982,  7-1061)



   State Law References: Turning at intersections, G.S.  20-153.



Sec. 18-107. Turning markers.



   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indicators are placed within
an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indicators.



(Code 1982,  7-1062)



Sec. 18-108. Authority to place restricted turn signs.



   The council shall determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs
at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such
turns are permitted. Restrictions on turning movements shall be as specified
in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is maintained in the
office of the city clerk.



(Code 1982,  7-1063)



Sec. 18-109. Obedience to no-turn signs.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of any such sign.



(Code 1982,  7-1064)



Sec. 18-110. Limitations on turning around.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall
not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Code 1982,  7-1065)



Secs. 18-111--18-125. Reserved.



DIVISION 4.
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS



Sec. 18-126. Signs required for one-way streets.



   Whenever any ordinance designates any one-way street or alley there
shall be signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement
of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.



(Code 1982,  7-1071)



   State Law References: One-way traffic, G.S.  20-165.1.



Sec. 18-127. One-way streets and alleys.



   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated
in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is maintained in the
office of the city clerk, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is
prohibited.



(Code 1982,  7-1072)



Sec. 18-128. Through streets designated.



   Those streets and parts of streets designated in the traffic schedule,
an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, are
declared to be through streets for the purpose of this article.



(Code 1982,  7-1081)



Secs. 18-129--18-140. Reserved.



DIVISION 5.
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED



Sec. 18-141. Location of stop signs at through street intersections.



   Whenever any ordinance designates and describes a through street, there
shall be a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through
street or intersecting portion thereof described and designated as such by
any ordinance unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection
of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street
and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at
the approaches of either of said streets.



(Code 1982,  7-1082)



Sec. 18-142. Location of stop signs at nonthrough street intersections.



   The council may determine and designate intersections where particular
hazards exist upon other than through streets and may determine whether
vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is
required. Such places are designated in the traffic schedule, an official
copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk.



(Code 1982,  7-1083)



Sec. 18-143. Signs to bear the word Stop.



   Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word Stop in
letters not less than eight (8) inches in height and such signs shall at
nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination,
or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient
reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located
as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1084)



Sec. 18-144. Vehicles to stop at stop signs.



   When stop signs are erected as authorized in this article at or near
the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no
crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal.



(Code 1982,  7-1085)



Secs. 18-145--18-160. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES



Sec. 18-161. Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals.



   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as declared in
sections 18-29 and 18-30, but at all other places pedestrians shall be
granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this
article.



(Code 1982,  7-1111)



   State Law References: Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals,
G.S.  20-172.



Sec. 18-162. Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalk.



   (a)    When traffic control signals are not in place or not in
operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or
run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for
the driver to yield. A pedestrian's right-of-way in a crosswalk is modified
under the condition and as stated in section 18-165(b).



   (b)    Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.



(Code 1982,  7-1112)



   State Law References: Pedestrians' right-of-way at crosswalks, G.S. 
20-173.



Sec. 18-163. Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(Code 1982,  7-1113)



Sec. 18-164. Crossing at right angles.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a crosswalk.



(Code 1982,  7-1114)



Sec. 18-165. When pedestrian shall yield.



   (a)    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (b)    Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1115)



   State Law References: Crossing at other than crosswalks, G.S.  20-174.



Sec. 18-166. Pedestrians walking along roadways.



   (a)    Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.



   (b)    Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.



(Code 1982,  7-1116)



Sec. 18-167. Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.



   (a)    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.



   (b)    No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or
highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle
while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.



(Code 1982,  7-1117)



Sec. 18-168. Drivers to exercise due care.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article every driver
of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1118)



Sec. 18-169. Obstruction of traffic by sitting or lying upon street or
sidewalk prohibited.



   No person in the city shall stand, sit or lie on any street, road,
sidewalk, alleyway or building entrance adjacent to any street, road,
sidewalk or alleyway if by standing, sitting or lying such person interferes
with free and unobstructed pedestrian movement or motor vehicle traffic.



(Ord. of 9-2-86,  1)



   State Law References: Standing, sitting or lying upon highways or
streets prohibited, G.S.  20-174.1.



Secs. 18-170--18-185. Reserved.



ARTICLE V
REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS*



__________



*   State Law References: North Carolina Bicycle and Bikeway Act of 1974,
G.S.  136-71.6 et seq.



__________



Sec. 18-186. Effect of regulations.



   (a)    The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall
not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of
the provisions of this article.



   (b)    These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever
a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this
article.



(Code 1982,  7-1121)



Sec. 18-187. Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions
of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.



(Code 1982,  7-1122)



Sec. 18-188. Obedience to traffic control devices.



   (a)    Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (b)    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts
from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then
obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Code 1982,  7-1123)



Sec. 18-189. Riding on bicycles.



   (a)    A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (b)    No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one (1)
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



(Code 1982,  7-1124)



Sec. 18-190. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.



   (a)    Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (b)    Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (c)    Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use
the roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1125)



Sec. 18-191. Speed.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Code 1982,  7-1126)



Sec. 18-192. Emerging from alley or driveway.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Code 1982,  7-1127)



Sec. 18-193. Carrying articles.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the
handlebars.



(Code 1982,  7-1128)



Sec. 18-194. Parking.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway, against the curb, upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to obstruct
pedestrian traffic.



(Code 1982,  7-1129)



Sec. 18-195. Riding on sidewalks.



   (a)    No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a
business district.



   (b)    The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when
such signs are in place no person shall disobey them.



   (c)    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



(Code 1982,  7-1130)



   Cross References: Sidewalks generally,  15-131 et seq.



Sec. 18-196. Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.



   (a)    Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the
rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet
to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful
upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.



   (b)    No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with
a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of
at least one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped
with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.



   (c)    Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the brake wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.



(Code 1982,  7-1131)



Sec. 18-197. Skateboards, roller skates and roller blades restricted to play
streets.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any skateboard, roller
skates or roller blades on any public street within the city unless such
street shall be set aside as a play street for specific lengths of time by
the city council.



(Ord. of 10-6-77,  1; Ord. No. O-05-06-21-5,  2, 6-21-05)



Sec. 18-198. Riding skateboards, roller skates or roller blades on certain
sidewalks prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller skates
or roller blades on any sidewalk or portion of sidewalk described below:



   (1)   Rutherford Road



   (2)   Main Street



   (3)   East Court Street



   (4)   West Court Street



   (5)   Old and New West Henderson Streets



   (6)   Burgin Street



   (7)   Railroad Street



   (8)   Madison Street



   (9)   Blue Ridge Street



   (10)   Logan Street



   (11)   Academy Street



   (12)   Depot Street



(Ord. of 10-6-77,  2; Ord. No. O-05-06-21-5,  2, 6-21-05)



Sec. 18-199. Riding skateboards, roller skates or roller blades in downtown
area prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller skate
or roller blades on any sidewalk or portion of sidewalk in the downtown area.
The downtown area shall be described as follows: bounded on the south by the
intersection of South Main and Morgan Streets; on the north by the
intersection of North Main and Logan Streets; on the east by Garden Street;
and on the west by Logan Street and Morgan Street.



(Ord. of 10-6-77,  3; Ord. No. O-05-06-21-5,  2, 6-21-05)



Sec. 18-199.1. Riding skateboards, roller skates or roller blades in public
vehicular areas prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, roller skates
or roller blades in any public vehicular area owned or maintained by a
governmental unit, with the exception of play streets designated under
section 18-197 above. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a
skateboard in any public vehicular area or on any property owned by a private
property owner, where signs are posted stating that the riding of
skateboards, roller skates or roller blades on said property is prohibited.



(Ord. No. O-05-06-21-5,  2, 6-21-05)



Sec. 18-199.2. Possessing or riding skateboard, roller skates or roller
blades on certain city properties prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or ride a skateboard,
roller skates or roller blades on any portion of the following city
properties:



   (1)   City Hall



   (2)   Community Building and Community Building Park, to include the
playground area, basketball court, tennis court, upper and lower parking
lots, all picnic shelter areas and all other portions of the property



   (3)   Gazebo Parking Lot at North Main Street and Brown Drive



   (4)   Depot



   (5)   West Henderson Street Parking Lot



   (6)   South Main Street Parking Lot



   (7)   Logan Street Parking Lot



   (8)   Brown Drive Parking Lot



   (9)   South Garden Street Parking Lot



   (10)   Gazebo Park at South Main and Morgan Streets



   (11)   Fire Department



   (12)   Police Department



(Ord. No. O-05-06-21-5,  2, 6-21-05)



Sec. 18-200. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  18-200, which pertained to penalties and derived
from an ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 1977; and Ord. No. O-05-06-21-5, adopted
June 21, 2005.



Secs. 18-201--18-215. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING*



__________



*   State Law References: Stopping and parking, G.S.  20-161 et seq.



__________



DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY



Sec. 18-216. Standing or parking close to curb.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the same direction as lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise
provided in this article.



(Code 1982,  7-1141)



Sec. 18-217. Signs or markings indicating angle parking.



   (a)    The council shall determine upon what streets angle parking
shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, which are designated
in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is maintained in the
office of the city clerk.



   (b)    Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any
place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon
the left side of the street.



(Code 1982,  7-1142)



Sec. 18-218. Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.



   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking,
no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb
or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.



(Code 1982,  7-1143)



Sec. 18-219. Lights on parked vehicles.



   (a)    Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any
street within a business or residence district no lights need be displayed
upon such parked vehicle.



   (b)    Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside
of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour
after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one (1) or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway
side visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the
vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear.



   (c)    Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be
depressed or dimmed.



(Code 1982,  7-1144)



   State Law References: Lights on parked vehicles, G.S.  20-134.



Sec. 18-220. Vehicles backed up to curb.



   In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when
actually loading or unloading.



(Code 1982,  7-1145)



Sec. 18-221. Unattended vehicles.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the engine or motor of any
motor vehicle running while the same is standing parked upon the streets.



(Code 1982,  7-1146)



Sec. 18-222. Moving cars from parked positions.



   Parked cars shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are
parked at an angle with the curb, they shall back out at that angle until
they have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they
are most nearly headed in.



(Code 1982,  7-1147)



Sec. 18-223. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in designated places.



   (a)    No person operating a vehicle shall stop, stand, or park,
except in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:



   (1)   On a sidewalk;



   (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



   (3)   Within an intersection;



   (4)   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;



   (5)   On a crosswalk;



   (6)   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



   (7)   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless signs or markings indicate a different length;



   (9)   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;



   (10)   Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance, when properly signposted;



   (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;



   (12)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;



   (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;



   (15)   In the area between the curb/street edge and a public
sidewalk.



   (b)    No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is
unlawful.



   (c)    Exceptions to this section shall apply only in cases where a
driver of a vehicle is ordered to drive across a sidewalk or curb by a police
officer or traffic control device, or in situations where emergency or
maintenance work is undertaken by the city or authorized by the city through
the issuance of a permit by the public works director or where marked parking
spaces are placed on public streets by the city or the North Carolina
Department of Transportation.



(Code 1982,  7-1151; Ord. of 2-4-97,  1; Ord. No. O-07-02-06-1,  2,
2-6-07; Ord. No. O-07-07-17-2,  2, 7-17-07; Ord. No. O-11-09-20-1,  2,
9-20-11)



   State Law References: Parking in front of a private driveway, fire
hydrant, fire station, intersections of curblines or fire lane, G.S.  20-162.



Sec. 18-224. Parking not to obstruct traffic.



   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
(10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



(Code 1982,  7-1152)



Sec. 18-225. Parking in alleys.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(Code 1982,  7-1153)



Sec. 18-226. Standing or parking for certain purposes prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon any
street of the city for the principal purposes of:



   (1)   Displaying for sale;



   (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
made necessary by a bona fide emergency;



   (3)   Storing by garages, dealers or other persons when such storing
is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or
other vehicle; and



   (4)   Storing of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit
has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or
freight from one (1) vehicle to another.



(Code 1982,  7-1154)



Sec. 18-227. Parking adjacent to schools.



   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side
of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this chapter, no
person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.



(Code 1982,  7-1155)



Sec. 18-228. Standing or parking on one-way roadways.



   If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic
restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are erected to permit such standing or parking.



(Code 1982,  7-1156)



Sec. 18-229. No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested
places.



   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.



(Code 1982,  7-1157)



Sec. 18-230. Stopping, standing, or parking for primary purpose of
advertising prohibited.



   No person shall stand or park on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of advertising.



(Code 1982,  7-1158)



Sec. 18-230.1. Obedience to designated parking spaces on streets.



   No single vehicle or combination of hitched vehicles shall park in such
a manner as to occupy more than one (1) designated parking space at a time
nor extend beyond the painted lines of the designated space, except that
travel trailers and/or recreational vehicles may park in marked spaces not to
exceed two (2) hours as long as such vehicles do not impede the flow of
traffic on the street.



(Ord. No. O-07-02-20-2,  2, 2-20-07)



Sec. 18-231. Loading and unloading zones.



   Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated and
described by this article and when signs are in place, erected or installed,
giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or
park any vehicle for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with
the requirements of this article.



(Code 1982,  7-1171)



Sec. 18-232. Passenger loading zones.



   The streets, or parts thereof, described in the traffic schedule, an
official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, and
designated as passenger loading and unloading zones shall be streets where no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle therein during the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, and then only for a period not to exceed ten (10)
minutes.



(Code 1982,  7-1172)



Sec. 18-233. Commercial loading zones.



   The streets, or parts thereof, described in the traffic schedule, an
official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, and
designated as commercial loading and unloading zones shall be streets where
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle therein during the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. for any purpose other than the expeditious unloading
and delivery, or pickup and loading of materials and goods, and then only for
a period not to exceed thirty (30) minutes.



(Code 1982,  7-1173)



Sec. 18-234. Public carrier stops and stands.



   Bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger
common-carrier motor vehicles, designated by appropriate signs, shall be
those places specified as public carrier stops and stands in the traffic
schedule, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city
clerk.



(Code 1982,  7-1174)



Sec. 18-235. Stopping, standing, and parking of busses and taxicabs regulated.



   (a)    The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle
upon any street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated as
provided in this chapter.



   (b)    The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any
street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided in this chapter, except in case of an emergency.



   (c)    The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or
passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with
the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen (18) inches
from the curb, and the bus approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to
unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.



   (d)    The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than a taxicab stand so designated
as provided in this chapter. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.



(Code 1982,  7-1175)



   Cross References: Taxicabs, Ch. 17.



Sec. 18-236. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter
such zone.



(Code 1982,  7-1176)



   Cross References: Taxicabs, Ch. 17.



Sec. 18-237. Application.



   The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this article
or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a
vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.



(Code 1982,  7-1181)



   State Law References: Authority of city to regulate parking of vehicles
on public streets, G.S.  160A-301(a).



Sec. 18-238. Regulations not exclusive.



   The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



(Code 1982,  7-1182)



Sec. 18-239. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets designated in the traffic
schedule, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city
clerk.



(Code 1982,  7-1183)



Sec. 18-240. Parking time limited in particular city block.



   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than the total period of time specified, or
within the hours specified within the same city block upon any of the streets
designated in the traffic schedule, an official copy of which is maintained
in the office of the city clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
a vehicle either at the same place or at two (2) or more places or parking
spaces within the same city block for a combined total parked period in the
same city block, during the regulated hours, in excess of the permitted
period prescribed in this regulation. The phrase "city block" as used in this
section shall mean the portion of a street lying between the nearest crossing
intersectional streets and shall not include other streets running parallel,
at right angles, or otherwise, to the street upon which such vehicle may be
parked.



(Ord. of 5-5-98(2),  1)



   Editors Note: Section 1 of an ordinance adopted May 5, 1998, repealed
the former  18-240 and enacted a new  18-240 as set out herein. The
former  18-240 pertained to parking time limited on certain streets, and
derived from Code 1982,  7-1184.



Sec. 18-241. Parking signs required.



   Whenever by this or any other article any parking time limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited on designated streets there shall be appropriate
signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless
said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.



(Code 1982,  7-1185)



Sec. 18-242. Vehicles not to stop in streets, exceptions.



   No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking
as prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the
approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession
which is given right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the
lowering of railway gates by being given countermanding traffic signals, by
the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some emergency. In
all cases covered by these exceptions such vehicles shall stop so as not to
obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing, or street
intersection if it can be avoided.



(Code 1982,  7-1186)



Sec. 18-243. Chief of police to allow parking in no parking zones for short
periods of time.



   (a)    The chief of police is authorized to allow parking in "No
Parking Zones" for short periods of time for funerals, weddings, receptions
and other events where special circumstances make parking in such areas
desirable for short periods of time.



   (b)    The chief of police shall issue such parking permits in
writing and in advance of the event or special circumstances for which the
parking permit is issued.



(Ord. of 4-22-97,  1, 2)



   Editors Note: An ordinance of Apr. 22, 1997, did not specifically amend
the Code; hence, inclusion of  1 and 2 of such ordinance as  18-243 was at
the discretion of the editor.



Sec. 18-244. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  18-244, which pertained to civil penalties for
parking violations and derived an ordinance adopted Oct. 7, 1997; and Ord.
No. O-06-12-12-3, adopted Dec. 12, 2006.



Secs. 18-245--18-255. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.
OFF-STREET PARKING*



__________



*   Cross References: Off-street parking requirements for lots, App. A, 
702.



__________



Sec. 18-256. Designated off-street parking lots.



   In order to facilitate the parking of motor vehicles in the city, the
following areas are hereby designated as off-street parking lots in the city
where properly licensed motor vehicles may be parked in designated marked-off
spaces subject to the provisions of this section, and any amendments thereto:



   (1)   Lot #1, North Main Street--Beginning at a point on the west
side of North Main Street, said point located forty (40) feet west of the
center of North Main Street and ten (10) feet north from the center of Brown
Drive; thence north running parallel with North Main Street one hundred
twenty-six (126) feet; thence west running parallel with Brown Drive seventy
(70) feet; thence south running parallel with North Main Street one hundred
eighteen (118) feet; thence east running parallel with Brown Drive seventy
(70) feet to the point of beginning.



   (2)   Lot #2, Brown Drive--Beginning at a point on the west side of
North Main Street, said point located one hundred ten (110) feet west of the
center of North Main Street and ten (10) feet north from the center of Brown
Drive; thence north running parallel with North Main Street one hundred
eighteen (118) feet; thence west running parallel with Brown Drive seventy
(70) feet; thence south running parallel with North Main Street one hundred
twenty-nine (129) feet; thence east running parallel with Brown Drive
eighty-three (83) feet to the point of beginning.



   (3)   Lot #3, Henderson Street--Beginning at a point on the south
side of West Henderson Street, said point located two hundred sixty-seven
(267) feet west of the center of South Main Street and thirty-one (31) feet
south of the center of West Henderson Street; thence west two hundred eleven
(211) feet running parallel with West Henderson Street; thence south one
hundred forty-four (144) feet running parallel with South Main Street; thence
east two hundred six (206) feet running parallel with West Henderson Street;
thence north one hundred twenty-four (124) feet running parallel with South
Main Street to the point of beginning.



   (4)   Lot #4, South Main Street--Beginning at a point on the east
side of South Main Street, said point located thirty (30) feet east of the
center of South Main Street and one hundred twenty-seven (127) feet south
from the center of State Street; thence east one hundred forty (140) feet
running parallel with State Street; thence south fifty-six (56) feet running
parallel with South Main Street; thence west one hundred forty (140) feet
running parallel with State Street; thence north fifty-six (56) feet running
parallel with South Main Street to the point of beginning.



   (5)   Lot #5, Railroad Street--Beginning at a point on the south
side of Railroad Street, said point located three hundred fifty-seven (357)
feet west of the center of South Main Street and eighteen (18) feet south
from the center of Railroad Street; thence west one hundred thirty-six (136)
feet running parallel with Railroad Street; thence south one hundred nine
(109) feet running parallel with South Main Street; thence east one hundred
six (106) feet running parallel with Railroad Street; thence north one
hundred sixteen (116) feet running parallel with South Main Street to the
point of beginning.



   (6)   Lot #6, South Logan Street--Beginning at a point on the east
side of South Logan Street, said point located at the intersection of the
rights-of-way of South Logan and West Henderson Streets; thence north one
hundred thirty-three (133) feet running parallel with South Logan Street;
thence east one hundred twenty (120) feet running parallel with West
Henderson Street; thence south one hundred thirty-three (133) feet running
parallel with South Logan Street; thence west one hundred twenty (120) feet
running parallel with West Henderson Street to the point of beginning; and
including a perpetual, nonexclusive right-of-way and easement over a roadway
which is in existence and in use, and which is approximately fifteen (15)
feet in width, located immediately north of said property on South Logan
Street.



   (7)   Lot #7, South Garden Street--Beginning at a point on the east
side of South Garden Street, said point located two hundred sixty-four (264)
feet south of the southeast corner of East Court and South Garden Streets;
thence east one hundred sixty-five (165) feet; thence south eighty (80) feet;
thence west one hundred seventy-three (173) feet; thence north running
parallel with South Garden Street one hundred thirty (130) feet to the point
of beginning.



(Code 1982,  7-1190; Ord. of 9-2-97,  1; Ord. No. O-01-10-02-2,  2,
10-2-01; Ord. No. O-06-03-07-3,  2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. O-06-05-02-2,  2,
5-2-06)



Sec. 18-257. Two-hour parking lots.



   The parking lot described in subsection 18-256(1) is hereby designated
as a two-hour parking lot. No person shall park any motor vehicle and leave
such vehicle parked in the above described two-hour parking lot for a
continuous period of time in excess of two (2) hours.



(Code 1982,  7-1191; Ord. of 9-2-97,  1)



Sec. 18-258. All-day parking lots.



   (a)    The parking lots described in subsections (2) through (6) of
section 18-256 are hereby designated as all-day parking lots. No person shall
park any motor vehicle and leave such vehicle parked in any of the above
described all-day parking lots between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
local time, except for persons residing within two blocks of a particular
parking lot, who may park their personal vehicles in the all-day parking lot
closest to their residence at any time the lot does not carry restrictions of
use in accordance with posted signs if a parking tag or sticker issued by the
city is displayed.



   (b)    The parking lot described in subsection (7) of section 18-256
is hereby designated as an all-day parking lot with restrictions of use at
certain times in accordance with posted signs. No person shall park any motor
vehicle and leave such vehicle parked in the above described all-day parking
lot between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. local time, except for
employees of the McDowell County Emergency Medical Services, who may park
their personal vehicles in this parking lot while on duty at any time the lot
does not carry restrictions of use in accordance with posted signs.



(Code 1982,  7-1192; Ord. of 9-2-97,  1; Ord. No. O-01-10-02-2,  3,
10-2-01; Ord. No. O-06-03-07-3,  3, 3-7-06; Ord. No. O-06-05-02-2,  3,
5-2-06; Ord. No. O-10-04-20-3,  2, 4-20-10)



Sec. 18-259. Reserved parking spaces.



   From time to time one (1) or more parking spaces in the lots described
in section 18-256 may be reserved and designated for the use of one (1)
particular person by the city council.



(Code 1982,  7-1193; Ord. of 9-2-97,  1)



Sec. 18-260. Handicapped parking spaces.



   Certain parking spaces may be designated for use by handicapped persons
only. No person shall park a motor vehicle, which does not have displayed in
the appropriate location on said motor vehicle, a decal, sticker, tag, etc.
issued by the state, signifying that one (1) or more persons in the motor
vehicle are handicapped, in any parking space designated as handicapped
parking.



(Code 1982,  7-1194; Ord. of 9-2-97,  1)



Sec. 18-261. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1, amendment 3 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted
Jan. 15, 2008, deleted  18-261, which pertained to charges and fees and
derived from  7-1195 of the 1982 Code; an ordinance adopted Sept. 2, 1997;
and Ord. No. O-04-03-02-2, adopted Mar. 2, 2004.



Sec. 18-262. Reserved.



   Editors Note: Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 2, 1997,
repealed  18-262 which pertained to parking area at West Henderson and Logan
Streets regulated, and derived from  1--4 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 5,
1986.



ARTICLE VII.
TAX ON MOTOR VEHICLES



Sec. 18-266. Privilege tax.



   (a)   Imposed; scope. Each self propelled motor vehicle licensed by
the state which is resident within the city on January first of each year
shall be subject to an annual privilege tax of $5.00. The tax shall be
imposed for the fiscal year beginning on July first following the January
first date on which the motor vehicle becomes resident in the city. For
purposes of determining whether the vehicle is "resident" within the city,
the provisions of the Machinery Act (G.S.  105-304 and ch. 105, art. 22A)
shall be applicable, and any such motor vehicle which, under the Machinery
Act, would be taxable for ad valorem property taxes shall be subject to the
tax imposed in this section.



   (b)   Administration; enforcement. The county tax collector is
authorized to issue the tax bills for the tax imposed herein and shall
collect the tax imposed herein. The county tax assessor shall have the powers
of listing, assessing, discovery, collection, levy, attachment, garnishment,
release and rebate authorized under the Machinery Act, to the same extent as
such powers and authorities are available for the listing, assessing and
collection of ad valorem taxes under the Machinery Act.



   (c)   Effective date. The privilege tax imposed by this section
shall be effective for the ensuing 2010-2011 fiscal year and for all fiscal
years thereafter.



(Ord. No. O-10-06-15-4, 6-15-10)



Chapter 19
TREES*



__________



*   Editors Note: No. O-09-09-15-7, adopted Sept. 15, 2009, amended ch. 19
in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 19, consisted of §§
19-1--19-5, 19-26--19-32; 19-51--19-53, pertained to the same subject matter
and derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 6, 1987; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,
adopted Jan. 15, 2008; and Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 2, 8-18-09.



   Cross References: from commercial tree trimmers, § 9-31; planning and
protection of trees, § 15-69.



   State Law References: setting on fire of timber, G.S. § 1-539.1(b);
injury to trees, wood, etc., of another; permit required to plant, trim or
remove any tree or shrub on any state road, G.S. § 136-93.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 19-1--19-25



   Art. II. Tree Board, §§ 19-26--19-39



   Art. III. City Arborist, §§ 19-40--19-50



   Art. IV. Management, §§ 19-51--19-54



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 19-1. Purpose.



   (a)    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees on municipally owned public property and
rights-of-way within the city and on municipally owned property wherever
located. In order to protect and conserve trees on public property and
rights-of-way, this chapter provides for the pruning, treatment and removal
of trees and shrubs as is deemed necessary by the city council. This chapter
is also intended to provide for the trimming or removal of trees on public
land when they obscure street lights, interfere with utility lines, or
constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or otherwise endanger
the public health, safety or welfare.



   (b)    Another purpose of this chapter is to encourage the
protection of trees and express the city's intent to use trees to create a
more natural and amenable human environment. This chapter is not intended to
be punitive nor to cause hardship to any person who uses the utmost care and
diligence to protect trees within the city or on city property.



   (c)    This chapter shall further provide for the establishment of
an advisory committee known as the tree board which shall be responsible for
promoting trees and tree care throughout the city and for developing a city
tree plan.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-2. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   City arborist means a citizen, consultant, or staff person skilled and
trained in forestry that assists the city with maintaining a healthy urban
forest.



   Large tree means a large tree growing to over forty (40) feet in height
at maturity, usually deciduous that is planted to provide a canopy cover for
shade.



   Master tree plan means a written document that guides the work of the
urban forestry program.



   Medium tree means a tree growing thirty (30) feet to forty (40) feet in
height at maturity.



   Public tree means trees, shrubs, and bushes now or hereafter growing on
any public street right-of-way or public land within Marion corporate limits.



   Small tree means a small to medium tree, growing fifteen (15) feet to
thirty (30) feet in height at maturity that is planted for aesthetic purposes
such as colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage.



   Street tree means any tree, shrub, and bush on land lying within
rights-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city.



   Urban forest means the collection of shrubs, trees, vegetation, and
associated natural features that make up the city tree canopy and the area
required for its sustainable growth.



   Urban forestry means the planning, establishment, protection, and
management of trees, vegetation, and associated natural features,
individually, in small groups, or under forest conditions within the city.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-3. Permit.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prune, treat, or remove any
street tree or park tree within the city without first filing an application
and procuring a permit from the city manager. The city maintains the right to
review the application and the tree in question in determining whether or not
to issue a permit.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-4. License and bond.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the
city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license shall be
required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in
the pursuit of his public service endeavors. No license shall be issued to
any person until such person shall have filed with the city manager an
insurance policy in the minimum amounts of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00)/three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury
and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage indemnifying the city
or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors
as described in this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-5. Penalty.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or plea of guilty, punished in accordance with the provisions of
section 1-10.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Secs. 19-6--19-25. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
TREE BOARD



Sec. 19-26. Creation and establishment.



   There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city which
shall consist of six (6) members who shall be citizens, and residents of this
city. Such members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
city council. Ex officio members may be appointed as necessary.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-27. Terms of members.



   The term of the six (6) persons to be appointed by the city council
shall be three (3) years except that the terms of two (2) of the members
appointed to the first board shall be for only one (1) year and the term of
two (2) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. If a vacancy
shall occur during the term of any members, his successor shall be appointed
for the unexpired portion for the term.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-28. Compensation.



   Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-29. Duties and responsibilities.



   (a)    It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study,
investigate, counsel, develop, update annually, and administer a written
master tree plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in
other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council
and upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive city tree plan for the city.



   (b)    The tree board, when requested by the city council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.



   (c)    The tree board shall, in addition, serve as an advisory board
to the city council with the following duties and responsibilities:



   (1)   Facilitate the planting, growth and protection of trees within
the city;



   (2)   Foster the communication among the citizens of the city that
would provide the needed protection of trees and to coordinate active
measures to support their health and growth within the city;



   (3)   Conduct a tree inventory of existing trees along streets and
on public property within the city;



   (4)   Investigate available grants, loans or contributions from
other governmental agencies, public or private corporations, or individuals,
and recommend the expenditures of any proceeds toward the accomplishment of
the board's purpose; and



   (5)   Conduct continuing research, planning, and feasibility studies
required to support the purpose stated herein.



   (d)    The tree board shall also be responsible for developing an
official street tree species list comprised of three (3) groups of trees:
small trees, medium trees, and large trees. No other trees other than those
included in the list may be planted as street trees without permission of the
tree board.



   (e)    The tree board will be responsible for establishing
guidelines for the spacing of city trees in accordance with the tree species
size classes in the official street tree species list. These guidelines will
cover spacing between street trees, the distance street trees may be planted
to overhead and underground waterlines, sewer lines, transmission lines, or
other utilities, and any other areas involving the spacing of street trees,
park trees, or city-owned trees.



   (f)    The tree board shall submit an annual report of its
activities and recommendations to the city council and shall submit copies of
its minutes and the proceedings of its regular and special meetings.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-30. Operation.



   The tree board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions,
discussions, findings, and recommendations, which record shall be a public
record. The tree board shall set a regular schedule for meetings, and the
chairman may call a special meeting upon request of a majority of members of
the tree board. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-31. Interference.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the tree board while engaging in and about the planting, cultivation,
mulching, pruning, spraying, or removal of any street trees, park trees, or
trees on public grounds as authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-32. Review of acts and decisions by city council.



   The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order
of the tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make a
final decision.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Secs. 19-33--19-39. Reserved.



ARTICLE III.
CITY ARBORIST



Sec. 19-40. Qualifications of a city arborist.



   A city arborist is a person who, where possible, has over three (3)
years experience in forestry management, is a certified arborist by the
International Society of Arboriculture, municipal specialist, and/or utility
specialist.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-41. Duties of the city arborist.



   The city arborist shall have the following duties:



   (1)   Shall serve as a member or ex officio to provide technical
assistance to the tree board.



   (2)   Assist the city staff and/or paid contractors with proper
pruning practices.



   (3)   Assist the city with maintaining an inventory of public trees.



   (4)   Assist with tree selection and planting to add new trees
and/or replace dead or diseased trees.



   (5)   Provide advice on public trees as part of capital improvement
projects for the city.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Secs. 19-42--19-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
MANAGEMENT



Sec. 19-51. Public trees.



   (a)    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds.



   (b)    The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any
publicly owned tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which
by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas
lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any
injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the
planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the
selection and location of such trees is in accordance with the guidelines for
planting and spacing developed by the tree board. The tree board may reserve
the right to approve any plantings that take place in right-of-way areas.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-52. Tree topping.



   It shall be unlawful as normal practice except as provided in this
section for any person to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on
public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to
stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to
such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec. 19-53. Removal of stumps.



   All stumps of street trees and park trees shall be removed below the
surface of the ground so that the top of the stump will not project above the
surface of the ground.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09)



Sec 19-54. Enforcement.



   Unless otherwise specified, any person, firm, corporation in violation
of compliance with any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
procedures, penalties, and remedies described in section 1-10, code
enforcement of the Marion City Code.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-7, § 1, 9-15-09) 



Chapter 20
WATER AND SEWERAGE*



__________



*   Editors Note: ordinance of February 5, 1991, which was not
specifically amendatory of the Code, has been treated of the Code, has been
treated as amending Ch. 20. Designations are indicated in the history notes
to the affected sections. Provisions relating to water and sewer line
extensions, including application procedure, extension requirements,
specifications and financing are based on policies established by the city
council.



   State Law References: Carolina Drinking Water Act, G.S. § 130A-311 et
seq.; water and air resources, G.S. § 143-211 et seq.; municipal water
systems, G.S. § 160A-311 et seq.



   Cross References: waste, § 9-26 et seq.; installation of utilities in
streets, § 15-64.



__________



   Art. I. In General, §§ 20-1--20-20



   Art. II. Water Distribution, §§ 20-21--20-47



   Art. II.1. Water Conservation, §§ 20-48--20-54



   Art. II.2. Backflow Prevention/Cross Connection Control §§
20-55—20-60.11



   Art. III. Sewer System, §§ 20-61--20-80



   Art. IV. Sewerage and Waste Discharge Standards, §§ 20-81--20-120.3



   Div. 1. General Provisions, §§ 20-81, 20-82



   Div. 2. General Sewer Use Requirements, §§ 20-83--20-91



   Div. 3. Fees, §§ 20-92--20-95



   Div. 4. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance, §§
20-96, 20-97



   Div. 5. Reporting Requirements, §§ 20-98--20-111



   Div. 6. Compliance Monitoring, §§ 20-112--20-114



   Div. 7. Confidential Information, § 20-114.1



   Div. 8. General Provisions, §§ 20-115--20-118



   Div. 9. Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance, § 20-118.1



   Div. 10. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations, §
20-119--20-120.1



   Div. 11. Severability, § 20-120.2



   Div. 12. Conflict, § 20-120.3



   Art. V. Enforcement, §§ 20-121--20-127



ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL



Sec. 20-1. Right to enter premises; availability of information.



   (a)    Whenever it becomes necessary to enter any premises, stores
or dwelling, for the purpose of inspecting water pipes, fixtures, meters,
etc., the public works director or his agent may do so within reasonable
hours. Should the public works director or his agent be refused admittance,
the supply of water shall be cut off until such examination is made and the
required information is obtained, or until repairs and alterations are made.



   (b)    Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.



(Code 1982, § 5-2007; Ord. of 2-21-84, § 3; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 7)



   Cross References: and sampling, § 20-96; confidential information, §
20-98.



Sec. 20-2. Water and sewer extensions; application; approval.



   (a)    Application for and approval of extensions required.



   (1)   Any property owner, or owners, desiring water or sanitary
sewer service shall apply in writing to the council requesting the extension
of water or sanitary sewer service or both. No request for the extension of
services shall be considered unless submitted in writing.



   (2)   The applicant must submit as part of the written application
such information plans or other data as required.



   (3)   When application is made for a water or sewer extension or
both to serve an area or development that is planned as part of a larger
development project or subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at
the time application is made, the owner or owners shall submit plans in
sufficient detail in order to determine the size and type facilities which
will be necessary to serve the entire development or subdivision when
completed.



   (4)   No extension to the water or sanitary sewer system of the city
shall be made and no application shall be approved except in accordance with
the policies established by the city council.



   (b)    Council to establish policies. The council shall establish
such policies and conditions for the extension of water and/or sewer lines as
they deem necessary.



of 2-5-91, Art. IV, §§ 1, 2)



Sec. 20-3. Grease tank required where food is prepared.



   (a)    All restaurants and all other places where food is prepared,
excluding residential units, served by the city sewer system, shall be
required to have a grease tank of not less than one thousand (1,000) gallons'
capacity, which shall be pumped out not less than once every two (2) months
or a twenty-five (25) gallon/fifty (50) pound grease separator.



   (b)    The owner and/or occupant shall be required to keep accurate
records on the dates the grease tank is pumped out or the grease separator is
serviced.



   (c)    The public works director or his designee shall have the
right during regular working hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday) to inspect facilities for compliance with this section.



   (d)    The city council shall have the authority to waive the
requirement for a grease tank or grease separator for bakeries or other
similar establishments with carry out food only and discharging small amounts
of grease to the city sewer system.



of 9-8-92, §§ 1--3; Ord. of 3-17-98, § 1)



Secs. 20-4--20-20. Reserved.



ARTICLE II.
WATER DISTRIBUTION



Sec. 20-21. Service contracts to conform with pertinent provisions.



   All pertinent provisions of this chapter shall govern the terms and
conditions of the contracts under which the city furnishes water service to
any person, or whereby the city makes any water connections or performs any
work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of water service.



(Code 1982, § 5-1001; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 1)



Sec. 20-22. Supervision of water works; enforcement of regulations.



   The water works owned by the city shall be under the supervision of the
mayor and council. The duty of enforcing full compliance with all rules and
regulations governing all connections with the mains, shall be vested in the
council.



(Code 1982, § 5-1002)



Sec. 20-23. System to be controlled by city; fees.



   (a)    The city shall tap the water main for any and all connections
and will extend all service pipes to the curbing where a stop box will be
placed over a stop cock, all of which shall be under the exclusive control of
the city. No person shall be allowed to turn the water on or off at this stop
cock, except authorized city personnel.



   (b)    For this extension of water service pipe and the tapping of
main, the city will charge such fees as are determined by the council and
filed in the clerk's office.



(Code 1982, § 5-1003)



Sec. 20-24. Connection with water main required; time limit.



   Within thirty (30) days after the water main in any street is completed
and ready for use, the owner of every abutting lot whereon water is needed
for human use, shall cause such lot to be connected with such water main;
provided, however, that the owner of the premises shall be notified in
writing by the city of the installation of such water main, and they shall be
allowed thirty (30) days within which to make the required connection or
connections.



(Code 1982, § 5-1004; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 2)



   State Law References: to require connections, G.S. § 160A-317.



Sec. 20-25. Connections to be made by city or under supervision of city.



   The construction of laterals for the connection of the water pipes on
any lot with water pipes in any street, as well as the necessary excavation
therefor, shall be done by the city, or if done by a licensed plumber, shall
be done under the supervision of the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-1005; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 3)



Sec. 20-26. Applications for connections.



   Every application for a water connection shall state the name of the
owner of the lot, the purpose for which the water is to be used, an estimated
amount of water to be used daily, the name of the street on which the lot is
situated, the number of the house, if there is one on the lot, or, if not, a
description of the location of the lot, the number and kind of connections
desired and the character of surface of the abutting street. Every
application shall be signed by the applicant, shall be accompanied by the
proper fee for making connections and shall be filed with the city water
department.



(Code 1982, § 5-1006; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 4)



Sec. 20-27. Location of service pipe extensions specified.



   No service pipe shall be allowed to run across lots, that is, from one
lot to another, but it must be taken from the main in front of the premises
or from some point adjacent thereto, unless specific permission is obtained
from the public works director. The public works director shall have the
power to extend a service pipe to a house not located on a main line. All
additional expenses for such extensions shall be paid by the owner of the
property.



(Code 1982, § 5-1007; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 5)



Sec. 20-28. Right to enter premises.



   Whenever it becomes necessary to enter any premises, stores or
dwellings, for the purpose of inspecting water pipes, fixtures, meters, etc.,
the public works director or his agent may do so within reasonable hours.
Should the public works director or his agent be refused admittance, the
supply of water shall be cut off until such examination is made and the
required information is obtained, or until repairs and alterations are made.



(Code 1982, § 5-1008; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 6)



Sec. 20-29. Separate connections required.



   Every separate habitable building, house, mobile home, apartment,
dwelling unit, separate business, or office (having separate restroom
facilities), shall be separately and independently metered except as
authorized in section 20-29.5. When two (2) or more buildings, apartments,
mobile homes, houses, businesses or other units are connected with the same
lateral, a separate water meter shall be provided for each such building,
apartment, mobile home, house, business or other unit, except as authorized
in sec. 20-29.5. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, offices (within the same
building having shared restroom facilities), commercial and industrial
businesses and storage buildings (under single name, ownership and operation
and on the same lot) may be served by a single water meter. If any buildings
are separated by a public street and/or public alleyway, a separate water
meter will be required for each side of the street or alleyway. A monthly
water and/or sewer service charge will be charged for each water meter
serving an individual customer as defined in this section. All water meters
will be installed at the street right-of-way line. The city will not be
liable or responsible for any water and/or sewer lines located on private
property.



(Code 1982, § 5-1009; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 7; Ord. of 9-21-99, § 1)



Sec. 20-29.5. Exception to requirement for separate water meters.



   (a)    Effective November 1, 1999, master water meters will be
allowed for all shopping centers, mobile home parks, apartments and other
multi-use buildings on single or adjoining lots, under single ownership
and/or management (includes companies, corporations and entities). Townhouse
and condominium developments under the management of a homeowners'
association, where the homeowners' association is responsible for the water
and sewer bill, are also eligible for a master meter. Each separate business,
mobile home, apartment, townhouse, condominium or other unit (having separate
restroom facilities), shall be considered as a separate unit for water and/or
sewer service charges, whether said unit is occupied or not. A monthly
service charge for water for each unit served by the master meter shall be
set in the ordinance adopted by city council setting water and sewer rates,
connection fees, cost recovery charges and other miscellaneous charges. A
monthly service charge for sewer for each unit served by the master meter
shall be set in the ordinance adopted by city council setting water and sewer
rates, connection fees, cost recovery charges and other miscellaneous charges.



   (b)    The owner and/or manager of any facility having a master
water meter shall be responsible for payment of the water and/or sewer bill,
including the monthly water and/or sewer service charges, for all units
served by the master meter.



   (c)    Water service to the master water meter shall be turned off
in the event the water and/or sewer charges, including service charges, is
not paid by the time and date specified by city policy.



   (d)    All meters will be installed at the street right-of-way line.



   (e)    The city will not be liable or responsible for any water
and/or sewer lines located on private property.



of 6-16-92, §§ 1--5; Ord. of 9-21-99, § 1; Ord. No. O-02-10-08-2, § 2,
10-8-02; Ord. No. O-07-01-02-1, § 2, 1-2-07)



Sec. 20-30. Water meters.



   The water meters furnished by the city or connected to the city water
system shall remain property of the city and will be serviced by the water
department of the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-1010; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 8)



Sec. 20-31. Water furnished at metered rates.



   Water shall be furnished to consumers at metered rates only.



(Code 1982, § 5-1021; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 1)



Sec. 20-32. Meters.



   (a)    Every regular consumer of water shall be supplied with a
meter by the city, which meter shall be under the exclusive control of the
public works director, for which the consumer shall deposit an amount as
determined by the council and filed in the clerk's office. This amount shall
be refunded by the city in the event that such consumer discontinues the use
of city water, less all charges which may stand against such consumer.



   (b)    Water meters shall be located at the property line adjacent
to a street or alleyway or at such other location as determined by the public
works director. The person in whose name the service is rendered shall be
responsible for water rents.



(Code 1982, § 5-1022; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 2)



Sec. 20-33. Schedule of water rates.



   The schedule of water rates as set from time to time by the council
shall be kept current and maintained in the office of the clerk.



of 5-17-89; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 3)



Sec. 20-33.1. Billing for sewer service.



   (a)    All persons, firms, and corporations receiving sewer services
provided by the City of Marion shall be billed for such services based on the
number of gallons of water purchased from the city water system as required
by the water meter serving such premises.



   (b)    Premises service by the city sewerage system but not by the
city water system may be billed for sewer service by metering the volume of
water produced by a private well for said premises or such premises may be
billed at a flat rate set by the city council for sewer service for such
premises.



   (c)    A sewer-measuring device may be used for sewer billing
purposes upon approval of the public works director and the city manager. The
persons, firms or corporations requesting the use of a sewer-measuring device
will be required to pay all costs associated with the installation and
maintenance of the equipment. Should the equipment fail for any reason, the
city will base the sewer charges on the number of gallons of water purchased
from the city water system as measured by the water meter serving such
premises.



of 2-5-91, §§ 1--3; Ord. of 5-19-98(2), § 1)



Sec. 20-34. Service charge.



   There is hereby established a monthly water service charge and a
monthly sewer service charge. Said charges will be added to each water and/or
sewer bill to cover a portion of the cost for labor, equipment and materials
for maintenance of the city-owned water and sewer systems, and for meter
reading, billing and collection. The amount of such service charges shall be
as set from time to time by the council and shall be listed in the schedule
of fees and charges maintained in the office of the water department.



of 8-18-87; Ord. of 9-21-99, § 1)



Sec. 20-35. Adjustment of excessive water or sewer bills.



   (a)    When it is discovered by a city employee that an unusually
large amount of water has passed through a customer’s water meter, the
customer shall be notified either in person, by telephone or by letter. If
the excessive usage is the result of a leak or faulty commode, the water bill
will be adjusted for the month such leak or faulty commode was discovered
and/or reported and the following month. Water wasted after that will be the
sole responsibility of the customer. No more than two (2) bills will be
adjusted in any year. For example: If a leak or faulty commode is discovered
and/or reported during a billing for the month of June, that bill for June
and the bill for July may be adjusted. No further adjustments may be made on
that account until August of the following year. No adjustments will be made
to accounts where the dollar value of the increase is twenty percent (20%) or
less of the average monthly amount of the account. The method of adjustment
will be as follows: The customer will be required to pay the equivalent of
his/her average bill plus one-half (1/2) of the difference between the
excessive bill and his/her average bill. Customers served by the city
sewerage system will only be required to pay a sewer service charge on the
average amount of the adjusted bill if the high bill is the result of a leak
where water is not discharged to the city sewer system. In such cases a
statement from a plumber will be required or the sewer service charge will be
adjusted in the same manner as the water charge. Under no circumstances will
a customer be required to pay a water and/or sewer charge more than double
their average water and/or sewer bill when adjusted in accordance with the
procedures listed above.




   (b)    If a water customer has an excessive bill and thinks it is
caused by a faulty meter, he may, by making a deposit with the city, request
that the meter be removed and checked. Said deposit to be set by the city
council. If the meter is found to be in error, the deposit will be refunded
and the bill adjusted based on the percentage of error in the meter. If the
meter is not in error and not defective, the city will keep the deposit to
cover expenses incurred in the investigation.




(Code 1982, § 5-1024; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 4; Ord. of 2-21-95, § 1)



Sec. 20-36. Water billing procedure.



   (a)    Each water meter shall generally be read once every month.



   (b)    Statements based upon such reading shall be rendered and all
accounts shall be due and payable the first day of the month in which the
bill is received. To avoid any confusion, the due date shall be printed on
the bill.



   (c)    Customers who fail to pay the amount charged for either water
or sewerage services by 5:00 p.m. local time, the fifteenth day of the month
in which the statement is received shall be charged a late penalty in the
amount stated in the current ordinance establishing water/sewer rates,
connection fees, cost recovery charges and other miscellaneous charges.
Customers who fail to pay the amount charged for either water or sewerage
services by 5:00 p.m. local time the twenty-fifth day of the month in which
the statement is received shall be charged an additional late penalty in the
amount stated in the current ordinance establishing water/sewer rates,
connection fees, cost recovery charges and other miscellaneous charges and
water service to the premises shall be turned off.



   (d)    Delinquent accounts where the water has been turned off shall
not have such services restored until such delinquent account, including all
penalties, has been paid in full.



(Code 1982, § 5-1025; Ord. of 5-3-88, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 5;
Ord. No. O-09-07-21-2, § 2, 7-21-09)



Sec. 20-37. Deposit required.



   (a)    Each user of water supplied by the Marion water system shall
deposit with city water department an amount determined by the council as a
water deposit. This amount shall remain on deposit in the city treasury as a
guarantee for water and/or sewer rents. In the event that such customer fails
to pay the water and/or sewer rents, then the city shall apply such deposit
towards liquidation of amount due by said customer, and the water supply to
his premises shall be disconnected and shall be resumed only after all water
and/or sewer rents, including all penalties are paid in full.



   (b)    The deposit shall be made in the name of the owner or tenant
of the premises to be supplied with water and/or sewer service. The owner or
tenant must provide two (2) means of identification when requesting service.
The monthly statement for water and/or sewer service shall be mailed to the
person making the deposit and that person shall be responsible for payment of
all water and/or sewer statements.



   (c)    The city will not accept a deposit or provide water and/or
sewer service to any person, firm or corporation having a past due, unpaid
water and/or sewer bill. In addition, the city will not provide water and/or
sewer service in the name of a different family member, relative or
associate, when it is believed this procedure is being used to avoid paying a
past due water and/or sewer bill.



(Code 1982, § 5-1026; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 6)



Sec. 20-38. Cutting on water after discontinuance.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn the water service
on at any premises, when such service has been turned off by the city for
unpaid water and/or sewer rents.



   (b)    Each customer, from whose premises the supply of water has
been discontinued, shall pay any and all water rents and penalties due, in
accordance with section 20-36(d).



(Code 1982, § 5-1027; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 7)



Sec. 20-39. Requirement for buildings to connect with system before occupancy.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building of any kind
unless such building is connected with the water and sewerage system of the
city, provided connection is possible within a distance of three hundred
(300) feet.



(Code 1982, § 5-1028; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 8)



Sec. 20-40. Unlawful to tamper with meter or any parts thereof.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper with, or in any
way meddle with any water meter box, rim cover thereto, or any part of such
water meter box.



(Code 1982, § 5-1029; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 9)



   State Law References: to water supply misdemeanor, G.S. § 143-152.



Sec. 20-41. Placement of items on top of water meter boxes.



   (a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or
place any item on top of any water meter box.



   (b)    Upon verbal or written notice to the owner and/or occupant of
any premises, any vehicle parked over or any item placed on top of a city
water meter box must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours from the time
of notification.



   (c)    Any person who violates or fails to comply with this
ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned not exceeding thirty
(30) days. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered
to be a separate offense.



of 2-6-90, §§ 1--3)



   Editors Note: ordinance of February 6, 1990, §§ 1--3, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 20-41 was at the
discretion of the editor.



Sec. 20-42. Connections from outside of city.



   The city council shall adopt a policy regarding connection of any water
line or system outside the city, and establish such terms, conditions and
rates as it deems necessary in providing water service outside the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-1011; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. I, § 9)



Sec. 20-43. Water for consumers outside of city.



   Water may be furnished to consumers outside the city at such metered
rates and upon such terms and conditions as may be approved by the council.
All connections as well as all meters, meter boxes and other equipment
necessary for such connections, shall be installed by the city and shall be
kept in repair by the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-1030; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 10)



Sec. 20-44. City reserves the right to cut off water.



   The city reserves the right to shut off the water in case of accident,
or for the purpose of making connections, alterations or repairs, and it
shall be the duty of the public works director to give notice to all
consumers within the affected district at least one (1) hour previous to the
shutting off, except in case of emergency.



(Code 1982, § 5-1031; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 11)



Sec. 20-45. Prevention of further water use.



   In cases where the water is turned off for nonpayment of water rent or
other causes, or when, in the opinion of the public works director, the
turning off at the stopcock is not sufficient protection against further use
of water, he may cause the water meter to be withdrawn.



(Code 1982, § 5-1031; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 11)



Sec. 20-46. Only authorized persons to use water from public hydrants.



   No person, except the public works director, or the chief of the fire
department or other authorized persons, shall take water from any public
hydrant, plug, street washer, drain cock, hose pipe or fountain, nor shall
anyone in any way take water for private use, unless such person pays for the
privilege and holds the usual permit from the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-1032; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 12)



Sec. 20-47. Special use of water.



   (a)    Applicants desiring attachments of larger diameter than
prescribed by these rules and regulations for the purpose of controlling a
large quantity of water in a short space of time, shall be required to pay,
on demand, all extra cost of such attachment over that of ordinary service.
They shall be required to pay meter rates.



   (b)    If proprietors of lumber yards, manufacturers, halls, stores,
hotels, or public buildings are regular consumers of water to be used in case
of fire, they shall be permitted to connect with the street main at their
expense and will be allowed the use of water, for fire purposes only.



   (c)    In sprinkling streets in front of stores, each water taker
must confine himself to the front of his premises.



   (d)    All sprinkler systems installed for fire protection and other
purposes must be metered.



   (e)    A contractor or builder desiring the use of water shall be
required to make application to the public works director and to secure a
permit from him specifying the manner in which water shall be supplied.



   (f)    Any person desiring tanks to be filled from fire hydrants
shall pay a fee set by the council. Only qualified firemen shall fill said
tanks; provided, that no fee will be charged fire departments authorized to
fill fire trucks from hydrants for fire fighting and training purposes. The
Marion Fire Department shall be notified prior to water being used from any
fire hydrant by firemen. A record shall be kept on the volume of water used
by each fire department. Said record to be maintained by the Marion Fire
Department and turned in to the water department at the end of each month.



(Code 1982, § 5-1033; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. II, § 13)



ARTICLE II.1
WATER CONSERVATION



Sec. 20-48. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of the
official phases of water supply shortage situations and the implementation of
voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the service
area of the City of Marion in the event a shortage is declared.



of 9-18-07, § 2)



   Editors Note: 2 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 18, 2007, deleted §
20-48 in its entirety and replaced it with the provisions to read as herein
set out. Former § 20-48 pertained to emergency restrictions on use of water
and derived from § 5-1034 of the 1982 Code; and an ordinance adopted Feb. 5,
1991.



Sec. 20-49. Definitions.



   (a)    Water shortage advisory, as the term is used in this article,
shall means that conditions exist which indicate the potential for water
supply shortages.



   (b)    Alert, as the term is used in this article, shall mean:



   (1)   That the raw water supply (stream flow) is consistently below
seasonal averages. If the raw water supply continues to decline, the supply
may not adequately meet normal needs; or



   (2)   That due to mechanical failure or limitations of water
treatment plant capacity, adequate water supplies cannot be maintained and
their conditions may be sufficient to cause a water shortage.



   (c)    Crisis, as the term is used in this article, shall mean:



   (1)   That the raw water level is below the level necessary to meet
normal needs; or



   (2)   That due to mechanical failure or limitations of water
treatment plant capacity, a water shortage is subject to occur.



   (d)    Customer, as the term is used in this article, shall mean any
person using water for any purpose from the City of Marion's water
distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the
case of bulk sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.



   (e)    Emergency, as the term is used in this article, shall mean:



   (1)   That the raw water level is below the level necessary to meet
normal needs, and serious shortages exist; or



   (2)   That due to mechanical failure or limitations of water
treatment plant capacity, a prolonged water shortage is subject to occur.



   (f)    Waste of water, as the term is used in this article,
includes, but is not limited to:



   (1)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other
surface drain; or



   (2)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to
defective plumbing.



   (g)    Water, as the term is used in this article, shall mean water
available to the City of Marion for treatment by virtue of its water rights
or withdrawal permit or any treated water introduced by the city into its
water distribution system, including water offered for sale.



   (h)    Water use classes, as the term is used in this article, shall
be established as follows:



   Class 1: Essential water uses



   Domestic use: Water necessary to sustain human life and the lives of
domestic pets, and to maintain minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation.



   Health care facilities: Patient care and rehabilitation, including
swimming pools used for patient care and rehabilitation.



   Public use:



   Firefighting.



   Certain testing and drills by the fire department if performed in the
interest of public safety and if approved by the city manager.



   Flushing of sewers and hydrants: As needed to ensure public health and
safety and if approved by the city manager.



   Class 2: Socially or economically important uses of water



   All domestic uses other than those included in Classes 1 and 3.



   Home water use including kitchen, bathroom and laundry use.



   Minimal watering of vegetable gardens.



   Watering of trees where necessary to preserve them.



   Commercial, agricultural, industrial and institutional uses.



   Outdoor commercial watering (public or private) using conservation
measures and to the extent that sources of water other than fresh water are
not available to use.



   Irrigation for commercial vegetable gardens and fruit orchards or the
maintenance of livestock.



   Watering by commercial nurseries at a minimum level necessary to
maintain stock.



   Water use by arboretums and public gardens of national, state, or
regional significance where necessary to preserve specimens.



   Use of fresh water at a minimum rate necessary to implement vegetation
following earth-moving, where such vegetation is required by law or
regulation.



   Watering of golf course greens.



   Filling and operation of swimming pools and water parks:



   Residential pools which serve more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units.



   Pools used by health care facilities for patient care and
rehabilitation.



   Pools or water parks operated by a governmental agency.



   Commercial car and truck washes.



   Commercial laundromats.



   Restaurants, clubs and eating places.



   Air conditioning:



   Refilling for startup at the beginning of the cooling season.



   Make-up of water during the cooling season.



   Refilling specifically approved by health officials and the city
manager, where the system has been drained for health protection or repair
purposes.



   Schools, churches, motels/hotels and similar commercial establishments.



   Class 3: Nonessential uses of water



   Ornamental purposes: Fountains, reflecting pools, and artificial
waterfalls.



   Outdoor noncommercial watering (public or private):



   Gardens, lawns, parks, golf courses (except greens), playing fields and
other recreational areas.



   Filling and operation of recreational swimming pools which serve fewer
than twenty-five (25) dwellings.



   Noncommercial washing of motor vehicles.



   Serving water in restaurants, clubs, or eating places except by
specific request.



   Air conditioning: refilling cooling towers after draining except as
specified in Class 1.



   Public use:



   Fire hydrants: any purpose, including use of sprinkler caps and testing
fire apparatus and for fire department drills, except as listed in Class 1.



   Flushing of sewers and hydrants except as listed in Class 1.



(Ord. of 9-18-07, § 2)



Sec. 20-50. Declaration of water shortage advisory.



   The city manager or his designee shall regularly monitor the water
supply and demands upon that supply. Whenever the city manager determines
that a potential shortage of water supply is indicated, such that adequate
potable water supplies cannot be maintained, whether the shortage is caused
by drought, mechanical failure or limitations of water treatment plant
capacity, he or she shall be empowered to declare a water shortage advisory
and call upon all water customers to employ voluntary water conservation
measures (see Addendum) to limit water use (especially Class 3 uses) and
eliminate the waste of water.



(Ord. of 9-18-07, § 2)



Sec. 20-51. Delaration of water shortage alert.



   Whenever the City of Marion finds the raw water supply to be
consistently below seasonal averages, and if the supply continues to decline
it may not be adequate to meet normal needs, the city manager shall be
empowered to declare a water shortage alert.



   The city shall continue to encourage voluntary water conservation
measures defined under the voluntary conservation declaration, and further
shall impose a ban on all Class 3 water uses for the duration of the shortage
until it is declared to have ended by the city manager.



(Ord. of 9-18-07, § 2)



Sec. 20-52. Declaration of a water shortage emergency.



   Whenever the City of Marion finds that raw water supplies are below the
level necessary to meet normal needs and that serious shortages exist, the
city manager shall be empowered to declare a water shortage emergency. Class
1, essential uses, shall be identified as targets for voluntary conservation
initiatives. Also, all Class 2, socially or economically important uses,
shall be banned in addition to the Class 3, nonessential uses. These
restrictions shall continue until the emergency is declared ended by the city
manager.



(Ord. of 9-18-07, § 2)



Sec. 20-53. Shortage water rates.



   Upon the declaration of a water shortage advisory, water shortage alert
or water shortage emergency, the city council of the City of Marion shall
have the power to adopt shortage water rates by ordinance designed to
conserve water supplies. Such rates may provide for, but not be limited to:



   (a)   Higher charges per unit for increasing usafe (increasing block
rates);



   (b)   Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit
rate);



   (c)   Extra charges for use in excess of a specified level (excess
demand surcharge); or



   (d)   Discounts for conserving water beyond specific levels.



(Ord. of 9-18-07, § 2)



Sec. 20-54. Enforcement.



   (a)    The direct or indirect use of water from the City of Marion
distribution system in violation of this article is prohibited. Any water
customer of the City of Marion distribution system that violates or permits
the violation of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five hundred
dollars ($500.00). the $500.00 penalty described in this subsection may be
assessed before or after any notice required by subsection (d) has been
issued.



   (b)    Each violation shall be added to the customer's water bill
and paid in the same manner as current payments to the City of Marion.



   (c)    Each day a violation occurs shall be considered a separate
violation.



   (d)    If a violation is known to have occurred pursuant to this
article, a written notice shall be mailed to the customer of record and to
any other person known to the City of Marion who is responsible for the
violation and its correction, or affixed to the property. The written notice
shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected immediately or
within such specified time as the City of Marion determines is reasonable
under the circumstances. The $500.00 penalty described in subsection (a)
above applies whether or not a notice is issued under this subsection.



   (e)    If the notice is not complied with, the City of Marion may
terminate water service to the customer subject to the following procedure:



   (1)   The city shall give the customer notice by mail that, due to
the violation, water services will be discontinued within a specified time
and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the termination by
requesting in writing a hearing scheduled before the city council within
seven (7) days of receipt of the notice.



   (2)   If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with
the violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before
termination is ordered.



   (3)   The city council shall make findings of fact and order whether
water service should be continued or terminated.



   (f)    A connection fee shall be paid for the reconnection of any
water service restricted or terminated. In the event of subsequent
violations, the reconnection fee shall be doubled for the second violation
and tripled for each additional violation.



(Ord. of 9-18-07, § 2)



ARTICLE II.2
BACKFLOW PREVENTION/CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL



Sec. 20-55. Introduction.



   (a)   This article shall apply to all users connected to the City of
Marion’s potable water distribution system, regardless of whether the user
is located within the city limits or outside of the city limits.



   (b)   This article shall comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water
Act (PL 93-523), the North Carolina Administrative Code (15A NCAC 18C), and
the North Carolina State Building Code (Volume II) as they pertain to cross
connections within the public water supply.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-56. Purpose.



   (a)   The purpose of this article is to establish a Backflow/Cross
Connection Control Program that will:



   (1)   Protect the public potable water supply of the City of Marion
against actual or potential contamination by isolating, within the
consumer’s water system, contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or
back-siphon into the public water system through uncontrolled cross
connections.



   (2)   Eliminate actual and/or potential cross connections and any
other sources of water, used for any purpose whatsoever, which may jeopardize
the City of Marion’s water supply.



   (3)   Provide a continuing inspection program, which will
systematically and effectively control all actual or potential cross
connections that currently exist or that may be installed in the future.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-57. Definitions.



   The following words, terms, and phrases, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:



   Air Gap (AG) – The unobstructed vertical distance through free
atmosphere between the lowest effective opening from any pipe or faucet
conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or other
assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical, physical
separations must be at least twice the effective opening (diameter) of the
water supply outlet, but in no case less than one (1) inch above the
receiving vessel flood rim.



   Approved – Accepted by the authority having jurisdiction as meeting
an applicable standard, specification, requirement, or as suitable for the
proposed use.



   Backflow – The undesirable reversal of flow of a liquid, gas, or
other substance in a potable water distribution piping system as a result of
a cross connection.



   Backflow Prevention Assembly (BPA) – An assembly used to prevent
backflow into a public potable water system. The assembly is required to have
certain parts, such as test cocks and shutoff valves, which are used for
field testing. Assemblies must be able to be tested and repaired in-line. The
type of assembly used should be based on the degree of actual or potential
hazard. The types are:



   (1)   Double Check Valve Assembly (DCVA)



   (2)   Double Check Detector Assembly (DCDA)



   (3)   Pressure Vacuum Breaker (PVB)



   (4)   Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly (RP), which is also known
as Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ).



   (5)   Reduced Pressure Principle Detector Assembly (RPDA)



   Backflow Prevention Device (BPD) – A device generally used to protect
internal plumbing. Backflow Prevention Devices are generally not manufactured
to the standards of Backflow Prevention Assemblies and, in many cases, are
not designed for field testing. Backflow Prevention Devices shall not be
substituted for applications that require Backflow Prevention Assemblies. The
types of Backflow Prevention Devices are:



   (1)   Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker (AVB)



   (2)   Dual Check (DC)



   (3)   Dual Check with Atmospheric Vent (DCV)



   Backpressure – A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by
a pump, elevated tank, boiler, air/steam pressure, or any other means, which
may cause a reversal of flow in the public water system.



   Backsiphonage – A type of backflow where the upstream pressure to a
piping system is reduced to a sub-atmospheric pressure.



   Certified Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester - A person who has proven
his/her competency to test, repair, rebuild, and make reports on backflow
prevention assemblies, as evidenced by certification of successful completion
of the North Carolina Rural Water Association’s backflow prevention
assembly tester training program or an equivalent training program. Certified
backflow prevention assembly testers must be re-certified every two (2) years
through an approved training program.



   Consumer – Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water
from the public water system owned by the City of Marion.



   Consumer’s Water System – Any water system commencing at the point
of delivery and continuing throughout the consumer’s plumbing system,
located on the consumer’s premises, whether supplied by a public potable
water supply or an auxiliary water supply. The system or systems may be
either a potable water system or an industrial piping system.



   Containment – Preventing the impairment of the public potable water
supply by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly at the service
connection.



   Contamination – An impairment of the quality of the water which
creates a potential or actual hazard to the public health through the
introduction of hazardous or toxic substances or through the spread of
disease.



   Cross Connection – A connection or potential connection between any
part of a potable water system and any other environment containing other
substances in a manner that, under any circumstances, would allow such
substances to enter the potable water system. Other substances may be gases,
liquids, solids, chemicals, water products, steam, water from other sources
(potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may change the color or add odor
to the water. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections,
swivel or changeover assemblies, or any other temporary or permanent
connecting arrangement through which backflow may occur are considered to be
cross-connections.



   Hazard, Degree of – The term “degree of hazard” is derived from
the evaluation of conditions within a system which can be classified as
either a “severe” or “moderate” hazard.



   Hazard, Moderate – A degree of hazard that presents foreseeable and
significant potential for pollution, nuisance, aesthetically objectionable,
or other undesirable alterations of the drinking water supply, without
causing the consequence of serious illness or death to the users.



   Hazard, Severe – A degree of hazard that has an actual or potential
threat of contamination that presents an imminent danger to the public health
with consequence of serious illness or death.



   Industrial Piping System, Consumer’s – Any system used by the
consumer for transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid, or
gaseous substance other than an approved water supply. Such a system would
include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and
appurtenances used to produce, convey, or store substances which are or may
be polluted or contaminated.



   Industrial User – A consumer that is classified as a Manufacturing
Industry by the North American Industrial Classification Standard (NAICS),
published by the U.S. Government Census Bureau. More than 50% of the
consumer’s utility usage must be for its manufacturing purposes.



   Isolation – The act of confining a localized hazard within a
consumer’s water system by installing approved backflow prevention
assemblies. Disclaimer: The City of Marion Public Works Department may make
recommendations, upon facility inspection, as to the usages of isolation
devices/assemblies, but does not assume or have responsibility whatsoever for
such installations.



   Point of Delivery – Generally, at the property line of the consumer,
adjacent to the public street where the City of Marion’s mains are located,
or at a point on the consumer’s property where the meter is located.
Specifically, the point where the consumer’s water service is connected to
the City owned water meter. The consumer shall be responsible for all water
piping and control devices located on the consumer’s side of the point of
delivery.



   Potable Water – Water from any source which has been investigated by
the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (NC DENR)
and which has been approved for human consumption.



   Public Potable Water System – Means any publicly or privately owned
water system, operated as a public utility, under a current permit issued by
the NC DENR, for the purpose of supplying water for public consumption and
use. This system includes all sources, facilities, and appurtenances between
the source and the point of delivery such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits,
tanks, receptacles, fixtures, and equipment used to produce, convey, treat,
or store potable water for public consumption or use.



   Split Tap – A water line that is split prior to the point of delivery.



   Water Purveyor – The owner or operator of a public potable water
system, providing an approved water supply to the public.



   Water Supply, Approved – The term “approved water supply” means
any public potable water supply which has been approved by the NC DENR.



   Water Supply, Auxiliary – The term “auxiliary water supply” means
any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s
approved public potable water supply. Auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural sources such
as a well, spring, river, stream, or lake; or reclaimed water, recycled
waters, used waters, or industrial fluids. These waters may be objectionable,
contaminated, or polluted and constitute an unacceptable water source, over
which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.



   Water Supply, Unapproved – The term “unapproved water supply”
means any water supply which has not been approved for human consumption by
the NC DENR.



   Water, Used – The term “used water” means any water that was
originally supplied by a water purveyor from a public water system to a
consumer’s water system, but that has passed through the point of delivery
and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-58. Elimination of cross connections; degree of hazard.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
connect any well or auxiliary water supply to the City of Marion public water
system. When a cross connection is found to exist, the owner, his agent,
occupant, or tenant will be notified in writing to disconnect the cross
connection within the time limit established by the City of Marion. The
degree of protection required and maximum time allowed for compliance will be
based upon the potential degree of hazard to the public water system. The
maximum time limits are as follows:



   (1)   Cross connection with private wells or other auxiliary water
supplies – Immediate disconnection. If it is discovered that any well or
auxiliary water supply is connected to the City of Marion water system, the
owner and/or occupant of the premises shall be advised to immediately
disconnect the well or auxiliary water supply. If the owner or occupant
refuses or fails to have the well or auxiliary water supply disconnected, the
Public Works Director shall have the water meter removed and disconnect any
city owned sewer service to the premises. Prior to services being restored,
the owner and/or occupant shall pay the entire cost for removal and
replacement of the water meter and disconnection and reconnection of the
sewer service.



   (2)   All facilities considered to pose a “Severe” Degree of
Hazard must install a Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly
within sixty (60) days of being notified in writing by the City of Marion.



   (3)   All facilities considered to pose a “Moderate” Degree of
Hazard must install a Double Check Valve Assembly within ninety (90) days of
being notified in writing by the City of Marion.



   (4)   If, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, an imminent
health hazard already exists due to a cross connection at a facility, the
water service at that facility shall be terminated immediately unless an air
gap is immediately provided by the consumer.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-59. Responsibilities.



   (a)   Health Agency. The Health Agency is the North Carolina
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (NC DENR). The NC DENR has
the responsibility for promulgating and enforcing laws, rules, regulations,
and policies to be followed by potable water purveyors in carrying out
effective cross connection control programs. The NC DENR also has the primary
responsibility of insuring that the water purveyor operates the public
potable water system free of actual or potential sanitary hazards, including
unprotected cross connections. The NC DENR has the further responsibility of
insuring that the water purveyor provides an approved water supply at the
service connection to the consumer’s water system and further, that the
purveyor requires the installation, testing, and maintenance of an approved
backflow prevention assembly on the service connection when required.



   (b)   Water Purveyor. The Water Purveyor is the City of Marion. The
City of Marion is primarily responsible for the prevention of contamination
and pollution in the public water system. Such responsibility begins at the
point of origin of the public water supply and includes all of the public
water supply and all of the public water distribution system and ends at the
service connection to the consumer’s water system. In addition, the City of
Marion shall exercise reasonable vigilance to insure that the consumer has
taken the proper steps to protect the public potable water system. To insure
that the proper precautions are taken, the City of Marion Public Works
Department is required to implement an on-going inspection program that will
cover all of the following items for each consumer that has been classified,
by the City of Marion, as posing a “moderate” or “severe” degree of
hazard to the public water system: Determine the actual degree of hazard or
potential hazard to the public potable water system; determine, based on
current regulations and standards, the degree of protection required. When it
is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the
protection of the public potable water system, the Public Works Department
shall require the consumer, at the consumer’s expense, to install an
approved backflow prevention assembly on the consumer’s service line and to
properly maintain and test the assembly as required by this article.



   (c)   Consumer. The Consumer has the primary responsibility of
preventing pollutants and contaminants from entering the Consumer’s water
system and/or the public potable water system. The Consumer’s
responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the public potable water
system and includes all of the Consumer’s water system. When required by
this article, the Consumer shall, at the Consumer’s expense, install,
operate, test, and maintain approved backflow prevention assemblies as
directed by the Public Works Department in accordance with this article. The
Consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to the
assemblies, for a period of three (3) years.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60. Facilities requiring protection.



   (a)   An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on
the service line to any premises that the City of Marion has identified as
having a moderate or severe degree of hazard rating.



   (b)   The following types of facilities or services have been
identified, by the NC DENR and the City of Marion Public Works Department, as
facilities that require the installation of a backflow preventer assembly.
Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly will be required on all
such services according to the degree of hazard present. Other types of
facilities or services not listed below may also be required to install
approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined necessary by the City
of Marion.



 

FACILITY OR SERVICE
 
DEGREE OF HAZARD
 
TYPE OF BPA  REQUIRED




Fire sprinkler systems without a booster pump or chemical additives
 

Moderate

 

DCDA



Connection to tanks, lines, and vessels that handle non-toxic substances
 

Moderate

 

DCDA



Automotive Service Stations and vehicle dealerships
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Restaurants and Bakeries
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Hotels, Motels, B&B’s, Lodges
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Barber Shops, Hair Salons, and Spas
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Grocery Stores and Convenience Stores
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Hardware Stores and Farm & Garden Stores
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Superstores
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Beverage bottling plants with no back pressure
 

Moderate

 

DCVA



Lawn sprinkler systems
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Wastewater Treatment Plants
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Connection to tanks, pumps, lines, etc. that handle sewage, lethal
substances, toxicants, or radioactive substances
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Fire sprinkler systems with a booster pump or chemical additives
 

Severe

 

RPDA



Buildings with 5 or more stories above ground level
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Hospitals, Doctor’s Offices, Dentists Offices, Clinics, and other medical
facilities
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Funeral homes, morgues, mortuaries, and autopsy facilities
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Beverage bottling plants subject to back pressure
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Metal Plating Facilities
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Canneries
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Battery Manufacturers
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Exterminators and Lawn Care Companies
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Chemical Processing Plants
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Dairies
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Film Laboratories
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Car Wash Facilities
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Dye Works
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Laundries
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Swimming Pools
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Industrial Users (see definition)
 

Severe

 

RPZ



Veterinary Offices and Clinics
 

Severe

 

RPZ





 



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.1. Approved backflow prevention assemblies.



   (a)   Only backflow prevention assemblies that have been approved by
the City of Marion for use in its water system shall be used.



   (b)   The Public Works Department shall maintain a list of backflow
prevention assemblies that are approved for use in the City of Marion Water
System.



   (c)   The City of Marion reserves the right to remove any assembly
from or to add any assembly to the list of approved assemblies.



   (d)   All backflow prevention assemblies approved for use in the
City of Marion Water System must have prior approval by the University of
Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research (USCFCCC & HR).



   (e)   Backflow Prevention Assemblies two (2”) inches and smaller
shall have a one quarter (1/4) turn, full port, resilient seated, bronze,
ball valve shut-off.



   (f)   Backflow Prevention Assemblies two and one half (2 ½”)
inches and larger shall have resilient wedge shut-off valves; the backflow
preventer and resilient wedge shut-off valves must be fuse bonded and epoxy
coated.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.2. Ownership of backflow prevention assemblies.



   Ownership, installation, testing, and maintenance of the backflow
prevention assembly shall be the responsibility of the Consumer.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.3. Installation of backflow prevention assemblies.



   (a)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications provided by the City of Marion and shall
meet the requirements set forth by the University of Southern California
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USCFCCC & HR).



   (b)   Installations shall be on the consumer’s side of the water
meter and prior to any line branches. Installations in a ceiling, or other
space that is difficult to access will not be approved.



   (c)   Backflow prevention assemblies must be readily accessible for
in-line maintenance and testing.



   (d)   Backflow Prevention Assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position, unless they have been specifically approved, by the
manufacturer and City of Marion, for vertical installation.



   (e)   Backflow Prevention Assemblies installed above grade shall
have adequate protection from freezing and vandalism. Above grade enclosures
shall conform to ASSE Standard #1060 (Performance Requirements for Outdoor
Enclosures for Backflow Prevention Assemblies). The manufacturer’s
identification plate, test cocks, air-inlet valve bonnet, or relief valve
opening shall not be obstructed with insulation or any other material.



   (f)   Only copper, bronze, PVC, or cement-lined ductile iron pipe is
acceptable for backflow prevention assemblies piping installation. Black
iron/steel pipe will not be accepted.



   (g)   Connections to any of the four (4) test cocks will not be
permitted. Connections include, but are not limited to: hose-bibs, pipe,
wire, gauges, or any other fitting. However, approved freeze protection
devices with external test cocks may be installed on test cock #4.



   (h)   All resilient wedge gate valves and quarter-turn ball valves
must be physically attached to the backflow prevention assembly for operation
at the assembly, not on an outside wall or appurtenance.



   (i)   By-Pass Piping. By-pass piping is not permitted unless it is
equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly of the same type as
the main line assembly. In some instances it may be desirable or necessary to
install two (2) approved backflow preventers in order not to interrupt water
service.



   (j)   Installation of Double Check Valve Assemblies two (2”)
inches and smaller.



   (1)   Installation may be above or below ground. The backflow
preventer shall be installed on the consumer’s private property prior to
the first line branch. Installation of backflow preventers within the utility
right-of-way will not be approved.



   (2)   Double Check Valve Assemblies installed below ground may be
installed in plastic boxes, provided they are not located in driveways,
and/or sidewalks. A traffic grade box with a traffic grade cover is required
in any area subject to potential vehicular traffic. The floor of the
enclosure shall be gravel with a minimum depth of six (6”) inches. The
distance between the lowest point of the backflow preventer to the surface of
the gravel shall be no less than six (6”) inches. Installations in wet
areas will be subject to prior approval and inspection by the City of Marion
Public Works Director.



   (3)   Above ground installations shall conform to installation
specifications for Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies.



   (k)   Installation of Double Check Valve Assemblies two and one half
(2 ½”) inches and larger: installation shall be above ground only.
Installation shall conform to the installation specifications for Reduced
Pressure Principle Assemblies.



   (l)   Installation of Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies.



   (1)   Reduced Principle Assemblies shall be installed above ground
only.



   (2)   The backflow preventer shall be installed on the consumer’s
private property prior to any line branch. Installation of backflow
preventers within the utility right of-way will not be approved.



   (3)   Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies shall be installed in a
location in which no portion of the assembly can become submerged under any
circumstances.



   (4)   Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies installed above ground
inside a building shall be installed a minimum distance of twelve (12”)
inches above the floor, and no higher than four (4’) feet above the floor,
with adequate clearance around the backflow preventer for testing, and/or
repair of the assembly.



   (5)   Whenever a Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly is installed
inside a building, an air-gap drain funnel shall be installed to drain off
the discharge of water from the pressure differential relief valve to the
atmosphere or to a floor drain.



   (6)   Reduced Pressure Principle Assemblies installed above ground
outside shall be installed in an enclosure that conforms to ASSE Standard
#1060 (Performance Requirements for Outdoor Enclosures for Backflow
Prevention Assemblies).



   (7)   Assemblies installed in an above ground enclosure shall
provide a minimum of twelve (12”) inches of clearance between the relief
valve and the finished grade under the relief valve. The enclosure shall
provide adequate drainage.



   (8)   In order to prevent obstruction during the testing and/or
repair of the assembly, additional piping and/or valves shall not be located
within the above ground enclosure.



   (9)   Assemblies installed above ground must be supported to allow
for the weight of the backflow prevention assembly. Support construction can
be cinder block, brick, or steel. Supports must have a proper footing of
concrete for supports to rest upon. Assembly supports must not interfere with
the valves, test cocks, testing, and/or repair of the assembly.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.4. Inspection of backflow prevention assembly installations
required.



   All backflow prevention assembly installations shall be inspected by
the City of Marion Public Works Department prior to initiation of water
service. Water service will not be initiated by the City of Marion until the
installation of the backflow prevention assembly has been approved.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.5. Testing of backflow prevention assemblies required.



   (a)   Frequency: The consumer owning a backflow assembly shall
arrange for the testing of the backflow assembly and shall have the backflow
assembly tested at the following intervals. Testing shall be conducted at the
consumer’s expense.



   (1)   Immediately following installation, then annually thereafter.
Consumers with a backflow assembly that was installed prior to the adoption
of this article shall have their backflow assembly tested within thirty (30)
days of receiving written notification from the City of Marion Public Works
Department, then annually thereafter.



   (2)   Following any repair, overhaul, repiping, or relocation of an
assembly, the consumer shall have the assembly tested to insure that it is in
good operating condition and will prevent backflow.



   (b)   All testing shall be conducted by a Certified Backflow
Prevention Assembly Tester that has been approved by the City of Marion. A
list of Testers approved by the City of Marion will be maintained by the
Public Works Department.



   (c)   All test results shall be submitted to the City of Marion
Public Works Department, on forms approved by the Public Works Department,
within thirty (30) days following the date the assembly was tested.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any consumer to fail to submit, to
the City of Marion Public Works Department, any record which is required by
this article. If the City of Marion Public Works Department determines that a
consumer has failed to submit required test results within the timeframe
required by this article, the Public Works Department will send the consumer
a written notice requesting the submittal of the test results within thirty
(30) days of the written notification. If, after two (2) written
notifications have been sent by the Public Works Department and a minimum of
sixty (60) days have passed since the date of the initial written
notification, the consumer has still not submitted the required test results,
the Public Works Director shall discontinue water service to the consumer by
removing the water meter and shall disconnect any city owned sewer service to
the premises. The services shall not be resumed to the consumer until the
required test results have been received and all reconnection charges have
been paid to the City of Marion.



   (e)   Personnel of the City of Marion’s Public Works Department
will conduct random followup testing of backflow prevention assemblies to
insure proper operation as    indicated by the certified testers.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.6. Repair of backflow prevention assemblies.



   (a)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are
deemed necessary, whether through annual or required testing or routine
inspection by the owner or Public Works Department, these repairs must be
completed, by the Consumer, within a specified time in accordance with the
degree of hazard. In no case shall this time period exceed:



   (1)   Severe Hazard……………………… 60 days



   (2)   Moderate Hazard…………………… 90 days



   (b)   If a Consumer fails or refuses to complete the required
repairs within the specified time,    the Public Works Director shall
discontinue water service to the Consumer by removing the water meter and
shall disconnect any city owned sewer service to the premises. The services
shall not be resumed to the consumer until the required repairs have been
made and all reconnection charges have been paid to the City of Marion.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.7. Existing backflow prevention devices or assemblies found to be
in non-compliance



   All backflow prevention devices or assemblies that were installed prior
to the adoption of this article and that do not meet the current type of
backflow prevention assembly required by Section 20-60 or Section 20-60.1 of
this article and/or the installation requirements of Section 20-60.3 of this
article, but were approved or accepted at the time of original installation
and have been properly maintained, shall be excluded from the requirements of
Section 20-60, Section 20-60.1, and Section 20-60.3 of this article so long
as the City of Marion is assured that the existing backflow preventer will
adequately protect its public water system. Whenever an existing device or
assembly malfunctions, or fails to pass the annual test, and it becomes
necessary to replace the device or assembly, it must be replaced and
installed in a manner consistent with all requirements of this article.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.8. Right of entry.



   Authorized representatives of the City of Marion Public Works
Department shall have the right to enter, upon presentation of proper
credentials and identification, any building, structure, or premises during
normal business hours to perform any duty imposed upon them by this article.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.9. Backflow preventer assembly required for filling covered ground
reservoir or covered elevated storage tank.



   If a covered ground reservoir or covered elevated storage tank is used,
an approved reduced pressure backflow preventer or an approved double check
valve assembly must be used. The backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed in such a manner as to afford adequate protection, shall be easily
accessible, and shall include all necessary pressure gauges and drains for
testing. Gate valves shall be installed in the line at both ends of the
backflow prevention assembly. All materials and equipment must be approved by
the City of Marion in advance of installation.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.10. Air gap required for filling uncovered ground reservoir or
uncovered elevated storage tank.



   If an uncovered ground reservoir or uncovered elevated storage tank is
used, a complete air gap shall be provided between the City of Marion water
supply and the reservoir or elevated tank. The physical break between the
inlet pipe and the top or overflow rim of the reservoir shall be at least
twice the diameter of the inlet pipe.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



Sec. 20-60.11. Failure to comply.



   Failure of a consumer to comply with the regulations imposed by this
article may result in the water meter being removed and water service and
sewer service being discontinued.



(Ord. No. O-13-01-15-2, § 2, 1-15-13)



ARTICLE III.
SEWER SYSTEM



Sec. 20-61. Service contracts to conform with provisions.



   All pertinent provisions of this article shall govern the terms and
conditions of the contracts under which the city furnishes sewer service to
any person, or whereby the city makes any sewer connections or performs any
work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of sewer service.



(Code 1982, § 5-2001; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 1)



Sec. 20-62. Connections outside city limits.



   No sewer connections shall be provided to properties outside the city
limits except by written agreement approved by council.



   Editors Note: provisions of § 20-62 have been included herein at the
request of the city.



Sec. 20-63. Connections to be made in compliance with article.



   No connection of any kind with the sewer system of the city shall be
made by any person after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which
this section derives, except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and after the payment of such charges or fees for such connections as
shall from time to time be required by the council.



(Code 1982, § 5-2033)



Sec. 20-64. Supervision.



   The sewerage system owned by the city shall be under the supervision of
the mayor and council. The duty of enforcing full compliance with all rules
and regulations governing all connections with the mains shall be vested in
the council or their duly authorized agent.



(Code 1982, § 5-2002; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 2)



Sec. 20-65. Sewer connections--To be made within thirty days after mains are
ready for use.



   Within thirty (30) days after the sewer main in any street is completed
and ready for use, if a water main shall also have been installed in such
street, the owner of any abutting lot having thereon improvements for human
occupancy, shall cause a water closet and sink to be installed and to be
connected with such sewer main. All other sewer facilities within such
improvements, if any, are also to be connected with such sewer main;
provided, however, that the owners of the premises shall be notified in
writing by the city of the installation of such water main or the
installation of such sanitary sewer, and they shall be allowed thirty (30)
days within which to make the required connection or connections.



(Code 1982, § 5-2003; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 3)



   State Law References: to require connections, G.S. § 160A-317.



Sec. 20-66. Same--To be made by city or under supervision of city.



   The construction of a lateral for the connection of the sewer on any
lot with the sewer in any street, as well as the necessary excavation
therefor shall be done by the city, or if done by a licensed plumber, it
shall be done under the supervision of the city.



(Code 1982, § 5-2004; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 4)



Sec. 20-67. Application contents.



   Every application for a sewer connection shall state the name of the
owner of the lot, the name of the street on which the lot is situated, the
number of the house, if there is one on the lot, or if not, a description of
the location of the lot, the number and kind of connections desired and the
character of surface of the abutting street. Every application shall be
accompanied by the proper fee, for making the connections and shall be filed
with the water department.



(Code 1982, § 5-2005; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 5)



Sec. 20-68. Service pipe extensions.



   No service pipe shall be allowed to run across lots, that is, from one
lot to another, but it must be taken from the main in front of the premises
or from some point adjacent thereto, unless specific permission is obtained
from the public works director. The public works director or his agent shall
have the power to extend service pipe to houses not located on main line. All
additional expenses for such extensions shall be paid by owner of property.



(Code 1982, § 5-2006; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 6)



Sec. 20-69. Licensed plumber or city to make connections.



   Sewer connections shall be made only by licensed plumbers subject to
inspection by the public works director or his agent. If connection is made
by the city there will be a charge as determined by the council and filed in
the clerk's office.



(Code 1982, § 5-2008; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 8)



Sec. 20-70. Location of connection on main.



   Every sewer connection made directly to a main shall be made at the Y
provided for the lot to be served, but if no such Y has been provided for
such lot, then such connection may be made directly to the main at any
convenient point.



(Code 1982, § 5-2009; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 9)



Sec. 20-71. Separate connections required.



   Every house or building abutting any sewer main shall be separately and
independently connected except in those cases where laterals from such main
have already been laid in macadam or improved streets, without provisions
having been made for such house or building, when the connection may be made
to an existing lateral. If such house or building is on a macadam or improved
street where laterals have not been laid, the connection may be made to any
convenient lateral.



(Code 1982, § 5-2010; Ord. of 2-5-91, Art. III, § 9)



Secs. 20-72--20-80. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV.
SEWERAGE AND WASTE DISCHARGE STANDARDS*



__________



*   Editors Note: 2 of Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, adopted July 15, 2008,
deleted art. IV, which pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of
§§ 20-81--20-103, and derived from an ordinance adopted Apr. 3, 1990.
Section 2 of said ordinance also enacted new provisions to read as herein set
out.



   State Law References: sewage systems, G.S. § 130A-333 et seq.



__________



DIVISION 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 20-81. Purpose and policy.



   (a)    This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Marion, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the city
to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean
Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).



   (b)    The objectives of this article are:



   (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;



   (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into any waters of the State or otherwise be incompatible with the system;



   (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludges from the municipal system;



   (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by
sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



   (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



   (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or
nondischarge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any
other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the issuance of
permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.



   This article shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater
system, as authorized by N.C.G.S. 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The city shall
designate an administrator of the POTW and pretreatment program hereafter
referred to as the POTW director. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
POTW director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
article. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW director may be
delegated by the POTW director to other city personnel. By discharging
wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located
outside the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions
established in this article, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or
orders issued hereunder.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-82. Definitions and abbreviations.



   (a)    Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated:



   Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §1251, et seq.



   Approval authority. The director of the division of water quality of
the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his
designee.



   Authorized representative of the industrial user.



   (1)   If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized
representative shall mean:



   (A)   The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation,
or



   (B)   The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or
having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25) million
dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to
sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.



   (2)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



   (3)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local government
facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility, or their designee.



   (4)   The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible
for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates
or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company,
and the written authorization is submitted to the city.



   (5)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the POTW director prior to
or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.



   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at 20º centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g. mg/l).



   Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a
user to the POTW.



   Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
a user's treatment facility.



   Categorical standards. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
Pretreatment Standard.



   Director. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation
of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter, or his duly authorized representative.



   Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



   Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of
time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.



   Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks, including, but not
limited to, such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



   Indirect discharge or discharge. The discharge or the introduction from
any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged
into the system).



   Industrial user or user. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.



   Interference. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes
or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES or
nondischarge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or
permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the
POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA)(42 U.S.C. §6901, et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act
(MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



   Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) which
applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40
CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405--471.



   National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge
standard. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in section 20-83 of this article and are developed
under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5.



   New source.



   (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c),
provided that:



   (A)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



   (B)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or



   (C)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent
of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.



   (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of subsection (1)(B) or (C) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.



   (3)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source
has commenced if the owner or operator has:



   (A)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:



   1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or



   2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or



   (B)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this definition.



   Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit, or NPDES
permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§1342), or pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from
EPA.



   Nondischarge permit. A disposal system permit issued by the state
pursuant to N.C.G.S. 143-215.1.



   Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other
sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation, of the POTW's NPDES or nondischarge permit, or a
downstream water quality standard.



   Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government
entities.



pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal
of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of
solution.



   Pollutant. Any "waste" as defined in N.C.G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity,
or odor).



   POTW director. The city official designated by the city manager with
the responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this sewer
use ordinance.



   POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.



   Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or
other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



   Pretreatment program. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from nondomestic sources which was developed by the
city in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority
as authorized by N.C.G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.



   Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



   Pretreatment standards. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards, and local limits.



   Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or municipal wastewater system. A
treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. §1292)
which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It
also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this article,
"POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the City, or
in any other way, users of the POTW of the city.



   Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the user's treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the wastewater
disposal system who:



   (1)   Has an average daily process wastewater flow of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) gallons or more, or



   (2)   Contributes more than five (5) percent of any design or
treatment capacity (i.e., allowable pollutant load) of the wastewater
treatment plant receiving the indirect discharge, or



   (3)   Is required to meet a national categorical pretreatment
standard, or



   (4)   Is found by the city, the division of water quality or the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users, on
the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent
quality, or compliance with any pretreatment standards or requirements.



   Significant noncompliance or reportable noncompliance. A status of
noncompliance defined as follows:



   (1)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits.



   (A)   Chronic violations. Sixty-six (66) percent or more of the
measurements exceed (by any magnitude) the same daily maximum limit or the
same average limit in a six-month period.



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations. Thirty-three (33)
percent or more of the measurements equal or exceed the TRC times the limit
(maximum or average) in a six-month period. There are two (2) groups of TRCs:



   For the conventional pollutants: BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease TRC =
1.4



   For all other pollutants TRC = 1.2



   (C)   Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily
maximum) that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through; or
endangered the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the public.



   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.



   (2)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction,
completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days
or more after the schedule date.



   (3)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule,
self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, and periodic compliance reports within thirty (30) days from the due
date.



   (4)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



   (5)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority considers to be significant.



   Slug load or discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in
any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits, or industrial
user permit conditions. This can include, but is not limited to, spills and
other accidental discharges; discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature; a
noncustomary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 20-83 of this
article.



   Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



   Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.



   Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



   Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.



   Wastewater permit. As set forth in section 20-97 of this article.



   Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.



   (b)    [Gender neutral.] This article is gender neutral and the
masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice-versa.



   (c)    [Shall; may.] Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or
discretionary.



   (d)    [Singular; plural.] The use of the singular shall be
construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as
indicated by the context of its use.



   (e)    [Abbreviations.] The following abbreviations when used in
this article, shall have the designated meanings:



   (1)   BOD = Biochemical oxygen demand



   (2)   CFR = Code of Federal Regulations



   (3)   COD = Chemical oxygen demand



   (4)   EPA = Environmental Protection Agency



   (5)   gpd = Gallons per day



   (6)   l = Liter



   (7)   mg = Milligrams



   (8)   mg/l = Milligrams per liter



   (9)   N.C.G.S. = North Carolina General Statutes



   (10)   NPDES = National Pollution Discharge Elimination System



   (11)   O and M = Operation and Maintenance



   (12)   POTW = Publicly owned treatment works



   (13)   RCRA = Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



   (14)   SIC = Standard industrial classification



   (15)   SWDA = Solid Waste Disposal Act



   (16)   TSS = Total suspended solids



   (17)   TKN = Total kjeldahl nitrogen



   (18)   U.S.C = United States Code



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 2.
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 20-83. Prohibited discharge standards.



   (a)    General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (b)    Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:



   (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21.



   (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than one-half ( 1/2) inch in any dimension.



   (3)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.



   (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or wastewater having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or
equipment.



   (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.) in sufficient quantity, (flow or
concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW.



   (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150º F (66º
C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104º F
(40º C).



   (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.



   (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW director in accordance with section 20-91 of this
article.



   (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.



   (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits
issued under section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.



   (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to
the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public
health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to
adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the
receiving waters for any designated uses.



   (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the POTW director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.



   (13)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW director.



   (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l.



   (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.



   (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
POTW director in a wastewater discharge permit.



   (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other
chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with
the municipal wastewater system.



   (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste
according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be
specifically authorized by the POTW director.



   (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to
violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in
15A NCAC 2B .0200.



   (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.



   (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.



   (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or
other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal
wastewater system.



   (23)   At no time, shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in
the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten
(10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in
process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's
pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.



   When the POTW director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the
POTW, any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts which may cause
or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW
director shall:



   1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution
on the POTW in accordance with section 20-115; and



   2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with division 4 of this
article for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-84. National categorical pretreatment standards.



   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter
N, Parts 405--471 and incorporated herein.



   (a)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the POTW director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



   (b)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW
director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



   (c)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (d)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-85. Local limits.



   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user discharging
wastewater containing in excess of the following average discharge limits.



   BOD: 250 mg/l



   TSS: 250 mg/l



   NH3: 25 mg/l



   Arsenic: 0.003 mg/l



   Cadmium: 0.003 mg/l



   Chromium: 0.05 mg/l (total chromium)



   Copper: 0.061 mg/l



   Cyanide: 0.015 mg/l



   Lead: 0.049 mg/l



   Mercury: 0.0003 mg/l



   Nickel: 0.021 mg/l



   Silver: 0.005 mg/l



   Zinc: 0.175 mg/l



   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop
user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW's maximum
allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern
shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW director may impose mass
based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-86. State requirements.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this article.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-87. Right of revision.



   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in
section 20-81 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in
section 20-83 of this article, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-88. Dilution.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the city or state.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-89. Pretreatment of wastewater.



   (a)    Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this article and wastewater permits
issued under section 20-97 of this article and shall achieve compliance with
all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in section 20-83 of this article within the time
limitations as specified by EPA, the state, or the POTW director, whichever
is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
city for review, and shall be approved by the POTW director before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by the POTW director prior to the user's initiation of the changes.



   (b)    Additional pretreatment measures.



   (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW director may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
article.



   (2)   The POTW director may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.



   (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the POTW director, they are necessary for the proper handling
of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW
director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



   (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-90. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.



   (a)    At least once every two (2) years, the POTW director shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control and
prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in section
20-82. All SIUs must be evaluated within one (1) year of being designated an
SIU. The POTW director may require any user to develop, submit for approval,
and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the POTW director may develop such
a plan for any user.



   (b)    All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see sections 20-102 and
20-103.



   (c)    An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



   (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;



   (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



   (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 20-103 of this article;
and



   (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-91. Hauled wastewater.



   (a)    Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the POTW director, and at such times as are
established by the POTW director. Such waste shall not violate division 2 of
this article or any other requirements established by the city. The POTW
director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge
permits.



   (b)    The POTW director shall require haulers of industrial waste
to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW director may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
The POTW director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste.
The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements
of this article.



   (c)    Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at
locations designated by the POTW director. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the POTW director. The POTW director may collect samples of
each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW
director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge.



   (d)    Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 3.
FEES



Sec. 20-92. Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the wastewater disposal system of the city for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the
POTW director and approved by the city board. A copy of these charges and
fees will be made available from the POTW director.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-93. User charges.



   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge,
cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.



   (a)   The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of debt
service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



   (b)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of
flow.



   (c)   The city manager shall review annually the sewage
contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and
maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the city council for
adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary.



   (d)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the
users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume
of flow of the users.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-94. Surcharges.



   The amount of the surcharges will be based upon the volume of flow and
the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater:



   (a)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:



   (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the city; or



   (2)   If required by the city or at the individual dischargers
option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of
wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and
safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance
with plans approved by the city. The metering system shall be installed and
maintained at the user's expense according to arrangements that may be made
with the city.



   (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his water supply from
sources other than the city, the user shall install and maintain at his own
expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the city.



   (b)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.



   (c)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW director or his duly
appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-95. Pretreatment program administration charges.



   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the city may include
charges and fees for:



   (a)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



   (b)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



   (c)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug
load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;



   (d)   Permitting;



   (e)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 4.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE



Sec. 20-96. Wastewater dischargers.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the city. When requested by the
POTW director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The
POTW director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-97. Wastewater permits.



   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing
industrial users who are determined by the POTW director to be significant
industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within one
hundred eighty (180) days of receiving notification of the POTW director's
determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial
user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW director be required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit for nonsignificant industrial users.



   (a)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons
proposing to discharge nondomestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of nondomestic wastewater
shall request from the POTW director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that
a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



   (b)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users required
to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with
the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW director, and
accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of
charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant
industrial user permit within ninety (90) days after notification of the POTW
director's determination in subsection 20-97(a), above. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:



   (1)   Name, address, and location, (if different from the address);



   (2)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes for
pretreatment, the industry as a whole, and any processes for which
categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated;



   (3)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and characteristics
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in division 2 of this article,
any of the priority pollutants (section 307(a) of the Act) which the
applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as determined by a
reliable analytical laboratory, and any other pollutant of concern to the
POTW; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in
40 CFR, Part 136, as amended and as required in Section 5.10 and 5.11;



   (4)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;



   (5)   Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;



   (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of
flow and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;



   (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on
the premises including all materials which are or could be accidentally or
intentionally discharged;



   (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;



   (9)   If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the schedule
shall exceed nine (9) months.



   (B)   No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the POTW director including, at a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW director.



   (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production;



   (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



   (12)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



   (13)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline monitoring
report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H .0908(a), as
outlined in section 20-98 of this article.



   (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director
to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



   (c)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current
authorized representative of the user on file with the control authority
and/or municipality as defined in section 20-82 of this article and contain
the following certification statement:



"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."



   (d)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW director will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



   (1)   The POTW director is authorized to accept applications for the
city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and
evaluation.



   (2)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt the POTW director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



   (e)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



   (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and
an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.



   (2)   If the staff's tentative determination in paragraph (1) above
is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made
in writing:



   (A)   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed
to be limited;



   (B)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



   (C)   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions
which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the
application.



   (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to
paragraphs (1) and (2) above and the general permit conditions of the city
into a significant industrial user permit.



   (f)   Permit synopsis. A fact sheet providing a brief synopsis of
the application shall be prepared by the POTW staff for submission to the
applicant and the approval authority and shall be made available to the
public upon request. The contents of such fact sheets shall include at least
the following information:



   (1)   A sketch and detailed description of the industrial facilities
and pretreatment facilities including the location of all points of discharge
to the POTW and all established compliance monitoring points.



   (2)   A quantitative description of the discharge described in the
application which includes at least the following:



   (A)   The rate or frequency of the proposed discharge; if the
discharge is continuous, the average daily flow;



   (B)   The actual average daily discharge in pounds per day of any
limited pollutant and any pollutant identified in the application as known or
suspected present; and



   (C)   The basis for the pretreatment limitations including the
documentation of any calculations in applying categorical pretreatment
standards.



   (g)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



   (1)   The POTW director shall take final action on all applications
not later than ninety (90) days following receipt of a complete application.



   (2)   The POTW director is authorized to:



   (A)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such
conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance and
N.C.G.S. 143-215.1;



   (B)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time
schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;



   (C)   Modify any permit upon not less than sixty (60) days' notice
and pursuant to section 20-97 of this article;



   (D)   Revoke any permit pursuant to section 20-115 of this article;



   (E)   Suspend a permit pursuant to section 20-115 of this article;



   (F)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW
director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. 143-215.1.



   (h)   Hearings. The local government may conduct hearings in
accordance with its regular hearing procedure.



   (1)   Initial adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose permit is
denied, or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable, a
permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under section 20-116, or one issued
an administrative order under section 20-115 shall have the right to an
adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer designated by the POTW director
upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested,
to the POTW director within thirty (30) days following receipt of the
significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or
administrative order. Unless such written demand is made within the time
specified herein, the action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer
shall make a final decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within
forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The
POTW director shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision by
registered or certified mail.



   (A)   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued
permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the
permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or
until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



   (B)   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit,
the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either
the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual
resolution.



   (2)   Final appeal hearing. Any decision of a hearing officer made
as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under subsection 20-97(h)(1)
above may be appealed, to the city council upon filing a written demand with
the city manager within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of the decision.
Hearings held under this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with
city hearing procedures. Failure to make written demand within the time
specified herein shall bar further appeal. The city council shall make a
final decision on the appeal within ninety (90) days of the date the appeal
was filed and shall transmit a written copy of its decision by registered or
certified mail.



   (3)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under
subsection 20-97(h)(2) above, the city council shall prepare an official
record of the case that includes:



   (A)   All notices, motions, and other like pleadings;



   (B)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



   (C)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken.



   (D)   A copy of the final decision of the city council.



   (4)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or
decision of the city council is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted
under subsection 20-97(h)(2) above, may seek judicial review of the order or
decision by filing a written petition within thirty (30) days after receipt
of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not
thereafter, with the Superior Court of McDowell County along with a copy to
the city. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the copy of the petition
of judicial review, the city council shall transmit to the reviewing court
the original or a certified copy of the official record.



   (i)   Permit modification.



   (1)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same
procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below.
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance:



   (A)   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change
in the permit is indicated,



   (B)   A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess
of four (4) months,



   (C)   Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules)
in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge
until control facilities are operational.



   (2)   Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
subsection 20-97(b), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.



   (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute
a waiver of the sixty-day notice required by N.C.G.S. 143-215.1(b) for
modifications.



   (j)   Permit conditions.



   (1)   The POTW director shall have the authority to grant a permit
with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose
of this ordinance and N.C.G.S. 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain,
but are not limited to, the following:



   (A)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five (5) years);



   (B)   A statement of nontransferability;



   (C)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or
local limits or both;



   (D)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



   (E)   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an
accidental discharge or slug load as defined in section 20-82;



   (F)   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for
prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in section
20-82, if determined by the POTW director to be necessary for the user;



   (G)   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes
at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental
discharges, or slug load as defined in section 20-82. Also see sections
20-102 and 20-103; and



   (H)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.



   (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the
following:



   (A)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.



   (B)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties.



   (C)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology
or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce,
eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.



   (D)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system.



   (E)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system.



   (F)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment.



   (G)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules.



   (H)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of
noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30)
days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).



   (I)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements.



   (J)   Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or
special notification reports.



   (K)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records
relating to wastewater discharges as specified in section 20-110 and
affording the POTW director, or his representatives, access thereto.



   (L)   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW
director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any
significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to
introduction in the system.



   (M)   Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the
POTW director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process
used by the permittee.



   (N)   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal
and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective
during the terms of the permit.



   (O)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW director to
ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.



   (k)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period
less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



   (l)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.



   (m)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply
for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with section 20-97, a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the expiration of the existing permit.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 5.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 20-98. Baseline monitoring reports.



   (a)    Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW director a report
which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. At least
ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the POTW director a report
which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. A new source
shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (b)    Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



   (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.



   (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.



   (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



   (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



   (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



   (A)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.



   (B)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations,
or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in section 20-107 of this article.



   (C)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in section 20-108 of this article and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including
40 CFR 403.12(g)(4).



   (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's current
authorized representative as defined in section 20-82 and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 20-99
of this article.



   (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 20-97(c) of this
article.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-99. Compliance schedule progress reports.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by subsection 20-98(b)(7) of this article:



   (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (b)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;



   (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW director
no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and



   (d)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between
such progress reports to the POTW director.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-100. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard;
deadline.



   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the POTW director a report containing the information described in section
20-98 of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production
rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 20-97(c) of this
article.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-101. Periodic compliance reports.



   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of
requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis.



   (a)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW director but in no case less than once every six (6)
months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be
performed in accordance with procedures set out in sections 20-107 and 20-108
of this article. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with section 20-97 of this article.



   (b)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW director,
using the procedures prescribed in section 20-107 and 20-108 of this article,
the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



Sec. 20-102. Reports of changed conditions.



   Each user must notify the POTW director of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the
change. See subsection 20-103(d) for other reporting requirements.



   (a)   The POTW director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
section 20-97 of this article.



   (b)   The POTW director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under section 20-97 of this article or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under section 20-97 of this article in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (c)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and
the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-103. Reports of potential problems.



   (a)    In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in section 20-82,
that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the POTW director of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (b)    Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the POTW director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this article.



   (c)    A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (d)    All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in section 20-82.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-104. Reports from unpermitted users.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW director as the POTW director may
require.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-105. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.



   (a)    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the POTW director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW director within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the
POTW director, the user is not required to resample:



   (1)   If the POTW director monitors at the user's facility at least
once a month; or



   (2)   If the POTW director samples between the user's initial
sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



   (b)    If the POTW director does not require the user to perform any
self-monitoring and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation, the
POTW director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the repeat
analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violations,
unless one (1) of the following occurs:



   (1)   The POTW director monitors at the user's facility at least
once a month; or



   (2)   The POTW director samples the user between their initial
sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or



   (3)   The POTW director requires the user to perform sampling and
submit the results to the POTW director within the thirty-day deadline of the
POTW becoming aware of the violation.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-106. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.



   The city prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without
notification and approval of the POTW director.



   (a)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user
discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than
one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under section 20-102 of this article. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of sections 20-98, 20-100 and 20-101 of this article.



   (b)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a),
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during
which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.



   (c)   In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (e)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-107. Analytical requirements.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-108. Grab and composite sample collection.



   (a)    All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (b)    Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as
required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs
necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 CFR
403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and
ninety-day compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW director may allow
collection of multiple grabs during a twenty-four-hour period which are
composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136.



   (c)    Composite samples: All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there
is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using
flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW director. When
authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-109. Timing.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-110. Record keeping.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the POTW director.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-111. Electronic reporting.



   The POTW director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic
reports for any reporting requirements of this article. Such procedures shall
comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under
division 8 of this article.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 6.
COMPLIANCE MONITORING



Sec. 20-112. Monitoring facilities.



   The city requires the user to provide and operate at the user's own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but
the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.



   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
of the city and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days
following written notification by the city.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-113. Inspection and sampling.



   The city will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created
or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority and EPA or their
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval
authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to
enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities. Denial of the POTW director's approval authority's or EPA's
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-114. Search warrants.



   If the POTW director, approval authority, or EPA has been refused
access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of
a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the POTW director, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the court having jurisdiction within the city.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 7.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION



Sec. 20-114.1. [Generally.]



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the POTW director that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data.



   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article,
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit,
nondischarge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
will not be recognized as confidential information.



   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 8.
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sec. 20-115. Administrative remedies.



   (a)    Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW director finds
that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article,
wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW director may serve
upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve
the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation.



   (b)    Consent orders. The POTW director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to subsection 20-115(d), below.



   (c)    Show cause hearing. The POTW director may order any
industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge,
has violated this article or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge
permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
In the event the POTW director determines that a show cause order should be
issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation.



   The POTW director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing
and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.



   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the
assessment of a civil penalty under section 20-116 nor is any action or
inaction taken by the POTW director under this section subject to an
administrative appeal under subsection 20-97(h).



   (d)    Administrative orders. When the POTW director finds that an
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article, permits or
orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW
director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



   (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



   (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth
in the order;



   (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of
a continuing or threatened violation;



   (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a
specified time period.



   (e)    Emergency suspensions. The POTW director may suspend the
wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents
or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the
POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or nondischarge permit.



   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service
and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. A hearing will be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice
of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's
waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW director shall take such
steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals. The POTW director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW director prior to the date
of the above-described hearing.



   (f)    Termination of permit or permission to discharge. The POTW
director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to discharge
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



   (1)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;



   (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;



   (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



   (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to
discharge, conditions of this article, or any applicable state and federal
regulations.



   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to
show cause under section 20-115 of this article why the proposed action
should not be taken.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-116. Civil penalties.



   (a)    Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be fined up to twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per day per violation.



   (1)   Penalties between ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation may be
assessed against a violator only if:



   (A)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been
imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the
violation, or



   (B)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as
the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this article, or
the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW
director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty
has been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the
violation.



   (b)    In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
director shall consider the following:



   (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to
the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the
violation;



   (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



   (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or
on air quality;



   (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



   (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



   (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;



   (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to
comply with the pretreatment program;



   (8)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



   (c)    Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this
section shall be as provided in subsection 20-97(h).



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-117. Other available remedies.



   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this article,
are available to the POTW director who may use any single one (1) or
combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies
include, but are not limited to:



   (a)   Criminal violations. The district attorney for the applicable
judicial district may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant
users who violate the provisions of N.C.G.S. 143-215.6B. [Note: Under North
Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to
knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(g)), to
knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment
permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent
danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and to
falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General
Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)).



   (b)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the
provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW
director, through the city attorney, may petition the superior court of
justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.



   (c)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in
violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



   (d)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this article or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the appropriate ordinances of
the city governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any
costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-118. Remedies nonexclusive.



   The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The POTW
director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the POTW
director may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the POTW director is empowered to take more than one (1)
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 9.
ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE



Sec. 20-118.1. [Annual publication of significant noncompliance.]



   At least annually, the POTW director shall publish in the largest daily
newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users
which were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as
reportable noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(10), with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous twelve (12)
months.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 10.
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



Sec. 20-119. Upset.



   (a)    An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of paragraph (b), below, are met.



   (b)    A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:



   (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of
the upset;



   (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



   (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW
director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset [if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five (5) days]:



   (A)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;



   (B)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and



   (C)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (c)    In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (d)    Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (e)    Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-120. Prohibited discharge standards defense.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section
20-83 of this article or the specific prohibitions in subsections
20-83(b)(2), (3) and (5) through (7) of this article if it can prove that it
did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or
interference and that either:



   (a)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (b)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
[the city] was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



Sec. 20-120.1. Bypass.



   (a)    A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.



   (b)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the POTW director, at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



   (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of this time
the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW
director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.



   (c)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW director may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



   (A)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;



   (B)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is
not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and



   (C)   The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (b) of
this section.



   (2)   The POTW director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW director determines that it will
meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 11.
SEVERABILITY



Sec. 20-120.2. [Severability.]



   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this article
is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



DIVISION 12.
CONFLICT



Sec. 20-120.3. [Conflict.]



   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this article are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.



(Ord. No. O-08-07-15-1, § 2, 7-15-08)



ARTICLE V.
ENFORCEMENT*



__________



*   Editors Note: ordinance of November 5, 1990, §§ 1--7, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as Art. V, §§
20-121--20-127, was at the discretion of the editor.



__________



Sec. 20-121. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   AO. Administrative compliance order.



   Compliance meeting. Informal meeting with the SIU to discuss the
resolution of reoccurring noncompliance.



   NPDES permit. Natural pollutant discharge elimination system permit.



   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.



   RNC. Reportable noncompliance.



   Show cause meeting. Formal meeting requiring the SIU to appear and
demonstrate why the control authority should not take a proposed enforcement
action against it.



   SIU. Significant industrial user.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 1)



Sec. 20-122. Purpose.



   This enforcement response plan outlines procedures the City of Marion
will use in order to identify, document, and respond to violations of
pretreatment regulations by significant industrial users (SIU's). This plan
describes how the city will investigate violations, and describes the types
of enforcement to be taken, identifies the officials responsible for each
type of response, and reflects the City of Marion's responsibility to enforce
all pretreatment requirements and standards.



   The City of Marion's enforcement response plan is to ensure compliance
with federal and state regulations, and to ensure that all industries are
given fair and equal treatment if enforcement of pretreatment standards and
regulations are necessary.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 2)



Sec. 20-123. Enforcement authorities available.



   Section 20-99 of the City of Marion's sewerage and waste discharge
standards gives the POTW the authority to take a wide variety of enforcement
actions. Each of these actions can be viewed as having a certain degree of
punitiveness. The city's enforcement response plan will utilize all of the
enforcement tools available to the POTW in a system which outlines escalating
enforcement actions dependent on the nature of the violations and the
cooperativeness or recalcitrance of the violator. Listed below are remedies
authorized by the SUO and Code citation. The list is presented in order of
punitiveness, least punitive first and most punitive last.



   (1)   Notice of violation (section 20-99(a)).



   (2)   Consent order (section 20-99(d)).



   (3)   Show cause order/hearing (section 20-99(c)).



   (4)   Administrative order (section 20-99(d)).



   (5)   Emergency suspensions (section 20-99(e)).



   (6)   Termination of permit (section 20-99(f)).



   (7)   Criminal penalties (Section 20-101 (1) and (2)).



   In addition to this, section 20-100 of the SUO authorizes the director
to assess civil penalties of up to two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per day violation. Civil penalties are normally used along with
one of the other seven (7) activities listed above and the punitiveness of
the penalty depends on the dollar amount.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 3)



Sec. 20-124. Noncompliance determination.



   (a)    The City of Marion will investigate SIU compliance by:



   (1)   Inspections of the SIU.



   (2)   Reviewing SIU self-monitoring data.



   (3)   Reviewing compliance data collected by the POTW.



   (b)    The sewer use ordinance and guidance provided by the EPA and
the division of environmental management has been used by the city to
identify these categories of noncompliance:



   (1)   Unpermitted discharges: Unpermitted discharges can result from
several activities. The SIU might fail to obtain a permit prior to
discharging to the wastewater treatment plant. The SIU might discharge to a
point in the collection system which is not identified in the SIU's permit.
The SIU might begin to discharge a pollutant which was previously identified
as absent by the industry. Also, the SIU might continue to discharge when its
permit has expired.



   Unpermitted discharges will normally be discovered during the
inspection of an industry. The inspector will be responsible for determining
the severity of the violation during his inspection. The severity will depend
on whether the unpermitted discharge poses an immediate threat to the POTW or
the environment and whether the industry was unaware of the requirements or
seeking to avoid the regulations.



   (2)   Permit noncompliance. The four (4) areas permit noncompliance
falls into are discussed below:



   a.   Permit limit noncompliance permit: Permit limit violations are
fairly straightforward and the severity depends on whether the violation is
considered reportable noncompliance (RNC). RNC is defined in North Carolina's
general pretreatment regulations. It is the pretreatment coordinator's
responsibility to evaluate compliance with pretreatment limitations each time
data is received and at the end of each semiannual reporting period.



   b.   Self-monitoring noncompliance: Noncompliance with monitoring
occurs when the SIU fails to conduct all of the self-monitoring required by
its pretreatment permit. The severity of the violations depends on how much
self-monitoring was actually completed. If the SIU conducted less than eighty
(80) percent of the sampling and analyses required in a six-month period, the
violation is considered significant or RNC. Each time a self-monitoring
report is received from the SIU it is the responsibility of the pretreatment
coordinator to compare the report to the permit requirements and evaluate
compliance with monitoring requirements.



   c.   Reporting violations: Reporting violations occur when the SIU
fails to provide information which is required by the permit within the time
period stated in the permit or when the information is incomplete or false.
Reports required by the permit can include self-monitoring reports, spill
prevention plans, baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports
and sludge handling plans. In the case of late or incomplete reports the
severity of the violation depends on the length of time the report is late.
If a complete report is not submitted within thirty (30) days of the due
date, the violation is considered RNC. Knowingly submitting false information
is always considered a significant violation.



   It is the pretreatment coordinator's responsibility to track the report
due dates included in the pretreatment permits and to evaluate compliance in
terms of the tardiness and completeness of the submission.



   d.   Violations of other permit conditions: The pretreatment permits
issued by the city contain about twenty (20) conditions which do not fall
into the category of limits, monitoring or reporting requirements. For
example, the pretreatment permit prohibits slug loads and requires the SIU to
properly operate its pretreatment facility. Violations of these conditions
would normally be discovered as part of an inspection or in conjunction with
another enforcement action. The pretreatment coordinator is responsible for
evaluating compliance with these requirements and the severity of the
violation is determined by the director.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 4)



Sec. 20-125. Violations of enforcement orders.



   Violations of enforcement are actually very similar to pretreatment
permit noncompliance in that they can be broken down into limits violations
(interim limits), monitoring violations (increased monitoring required by
order) and reporting violations. In addition, violations of enforcement
orders would include missing milestone dates and noncompliance with final
limits once the order has expired. However, all violations of enforcement
orders, with the exception of interim limits violations, are considered RNC.
Interim limit violations would not be considered significant if they did not
meet the criteria listed in the pretreatment regulations of North Carolina
and if the SIU paid the stipulated penalty assessed.



   Once the SIU has been put on an enforcement order, the city's initial
response to violations becomes simply a matter of notifying the SIU of the
violation and collecting the stipulated penalty outlined in the order. It is
the pretreatment coordinator's responsibility to track compliance with the
order and notify the director when penalties should be assessed. Once the
director is informed of noncompliance with an order, he will determine
whether the violations are so severe as to warrant elevated enforcement. For
example, an escalated enforcement action would be needed if its were clear
that the SIU could no longer meet the remaining milestone dates in the
existing order.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 5)



Sec. 20-126. Response to noncompliance.



   In order to ensure that the city is taking timely and effective
enforcement actions, two (2) tools will be employed: An enforcement response
guide and an enforcement flowchart. The purpose of the enforcement response
guide (ERG) is to identify initial responses and time frames for each of the
types of violations discussed under "Noncompliance Determination." Once the
enforcement action is taken, the flow chart can be used to identify the more
punitive action which will be taken if the SIU failed to return to compliance
as a result of the previous or initial action.



   Attached to and made a part of this article by reference, is the ERG
and the flowchart. These tools will help make enforcement of violations of
pretreatment regulations much easier to identify, document, and respond to.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 6)



Sec. 20-127. Penalties.



   The city shall charge the SIU, in addition to the amounts established
in Table I of the Enforcement Response Guide, any amounts assessed the City
of Marion by the federal and/or state governments for any violations caused
by the SIU.



(Ord. of 11-6-90, § 7)



Chapter 21
ZONING*



__________



*   Editors Note: Printed herein is the zoning ordinance adopted by city
council on February 19, 1974; effective April 1, 1974. Said ordinance being
readopted by Ordinance No. O-03-10-07-01, on October 7, 2003; and as amended
by Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, adopted January 17, 2006.



   Section 1, amendment 6 of Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, adopted January 15,
2008, redesignated Appendix A as Chapter 21. Section numbers have been
changed to reflect said change. Prior section numbers have been maintained in
the history notes following each section.



   Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4;
cemeteries, Ch. 5; flood hazard management, Ch. 8; parks and recreation, Ch.
12; planning, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15;
subdivisions, Ch. 16.



   State Law References: Planning and regulation of development, G.S. 
160A-360 et seq.; zoning, G.S.  160A-381 et seq.



__________



   Art. I. Authority and Enactment Clause,  21-1--21-10



   Art. II. Short Title,  21-11--21-15



   Art. III. Jurisdiction,  21-16--21-20



   Art. IV. Definition of Terms Used in the Ordinance,  21-21--21-30



   Art. V. Establishment of District,  21-31--21-50



   Art. VI. Application of Regulations,  21-51--21-70



   Art. VII. General Provisions,  21-71--21-200



   Div. 1. Nonconforming Uses, Continuance, and Lots,  21-71--21-85



   Div. 2. Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards,  21-86--21-125



   Div. 3. Gasoline Service or Filling Station Standards,  21-126--21-130



   Div. 4. Sign Regulations,  21-131--21-155



   Div. 5. Landscape Standards,  21-156--21-160



   Div. 6. Auto-Related Business Standards,  21-161--21-170



   Div. 7. Temporary Uses and Structures,  21-171--21-180



   Div. 8. Accessory Uses,  21-181--21-195



   Div. 9. Campground Standards,  21-196--21-200



   Art. VIII. Use Requirements by District,  21-201--21-220



   Art. IX. Overlay Districts,  21-221--21-230



   Art. IX.5. Dimensional Requirements,  21-231--21-250



   Art. X. Exceptions and Modifications,  21-251--21-270



   Art. XI. Administration and Enforcement,  21-271--21-300



   Art. XII. Planning and Zoning Board,  21-301--21-309



   Art. XII.5. Historic Preservation Commission,  21-310--21-320



   Art. XIII. Amendments,  21-321--21-340



   Art. XIV. Legal Status Provisions,  21-341--21-350



   Art. XV. Penalty and Effective Date,  21-351--21-360



ARTICLE I
AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE



Sec. 21-1. Authority and enactment.



   The City Council of Marion, North Carolina, in pursuance of the
authority granted by the General Statutes of North Carolina, particularly
Chapter 160-A, Article 19, Part 3, hereby ordains and enacts into law the
following articles and sections.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(Art. I), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-5-08)



Secs. 21-2--21-10. Reserved.



ARTICLE II
SHORT TITLE



Sec. 21-11. Short title.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Marion, North Carolina."



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(Art. II), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-5-08)



Secs. 21-12--21-15. Reserved.



ARTICLE III
JURISDICTION



Sec. 21-16. Jurisdiction.



   The provision of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits
of the City of Marion as established on the map entitled "Official Zoning
Map, City of Marion, North Carolina."



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(Art. III), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-5-08)



Secs. 12-17--21-20. Reserved.



ARTICLE IV
DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THE ORDINANCE



Sec. 21-21. Definitions.



   Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter
shall have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this
chapter, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows:



   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in
the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "lot" includes the
word "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structures."
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust company or corporation as well as an individual. The words "used" or
"occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include
the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The words
"map," " zoning map," "Official Zoning Map" or "Marion Zoning Map" shall mean
the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Marion, North Carolina."



   Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property and is fifteen (15) feet or less in width.



   Approved screening. Includes, but is not limited to, opaque enclosures,
buildings, natural objects, plantings, fencings, walls or other appropriate
means to visually conceal the view of junked or inoperable motor vehicles (or
other uses that are required to be screened) from adjoining property or the
public roadway at any season of the year. In determining whether screening is
adequate, the following factors, along with others, should be considered:
topographical features of the property and naturally occurring visual
obstructions, such as but not limited to vegetation.



   Approved screening plan. A site specific plan approved by the person or
board issuing the permit and that includes but is not limited to natural
objects, plantings, fencings, walls or other appropriate means to visually
conceal the view of junked or inoperable motor vehicles (or other use that is
required to be screened) from the public roadway at any season of the year.
In determining whether to approve a screening plan, the following factors,
along with others, should be considered: topographical features of the
property and naturally occurring visual obstructions, such as but not limited
to vegetation.



   Armory. A place where arms and federal and/or state military equipment
may be stored and military personnel may be trained.



   Automated teller machine (ATM). A terminal designed to facilitate
transactions that accept and dispense cash in connection with a financial
account. A machine may be located at a bank or other financial institution,
or as a terminal in an off-site location as an accessory use and/or structure
to an existing commercial use.



   Automobile. For the purpose of this chapter the term automobile shall
include all motor vehicles.



   Automobile graveyard. Any establishment or place of business which is
maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts. Any establishment or place of business upon which six (6) or more
unlicensed, used motor vehicles which cannot be operated under their own
power are kept or stored for a period of fifteen (15) days or more shall be
deemed to be an "automobile graveyard."



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  136-143(1).



   Automobile sales (also referred to as "car sales" or "motor vehicle
sales") businesses. Any establishment or place of business which is
maintained or operated for the primary purpose of selling motor vehicles. For
purposes of this definition, factors to be considered in determining the
primary purpose of the business include but are not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to vehicle sales
or service broken down into the following categories: vehicle sales, new
parts, labor for service, and used parts;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than twelve
(12) months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile sales
business, but rather an automobile graveyard and/or junk yard);



   (3)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof;
and



   (4)   The number and configuration of grease bays or repair work
areas.



   For the purposes of this definition, automobile sales businesses where
the service department generates fifty (50) percent or more of the gross
receipts of the business are considered to be automobile repair shops and
subject to all regulations governing automobile repair shops.



   Automobile repair shop. Any establishment or place of business which is
maintained or operated for the primary purpose of making mechanical and/or
body repairs to motor vehicles. Factors to be considered in determining the
primary purpose of the shop include but are not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to repair service
broken down into the following categories: new parts, labor for service, used
parts;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile repair shop,
but rather an automobile graveyard and/or junk yard);



   (3)   Whether business has initiated proceedings to declare vehicles
abandoned under state law so the vehicle can be disposed of;



   (4)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof;
and



   (5)   The number and configuration of grease bays or repair work
areas.



   For the purposes of this definition, automobile sales businesses where
the service department generates fifty (50) percent or more of the gross
receipts of the business are considered to be automobile repair shops and
subject to all regulations governing automobile repair shops. For purposes of
this chapter, automobile tire sales and service shops, as defined herein,
shall be considered automobile repair shops. An automobile repair shop that
operates a combination of towing, tire and sales shall comply with all the
regulations governing each use.



   Automobile tire sales and service shop. Any establishment or place of
business which is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of selling
tires and/or tire repair. For purposes of this definition, factors to be
considered in determining the primary purpose of the shop include but are not
limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to tire service;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile tire shop, but
rather a automobile graveyard and/or junk yard);



   (3)   The length of time that used tires are stored on the property;



   (4)   Used tires stored on the property longer than thirty (30) days
should be evidence that the business is not an automobile tire shop, but
rather a junkyard;



   (5)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof.
For the purpose of this definition, tire, tire sales and services shall be
considered an automobile repair shop.



   Automobile towing and wrecker service businesses. Any establishment or
place of business which is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of
towing motor vehicles. For purposes of this definition, factors to be
considered in determining the primary purpose of the shop include but are not
limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to towing service;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not an automobile towing service,
but rather a automobile graveyard and/or junk yard);



   (3)   The length of time and number of junked vehicles that are
stored on the property;



   (4)   Whether business has initiated proceedings to declare vehicles
abandoned under state law so the vehicle can be disposed of;



   (5)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof.



   For the purpose of this definition, tire, towing and wrecking services
shall be considered an automobile repair shop.



   Bed and breakfast home. A private home offering bed and breakfast
accommodations to eight (8) or less persons per night for a period of less
than one (1) week provided that the business:



   (1)   Does not serve food or drink to the general public for pay;



   (2)   Serves only the breakfast meal, and that the meal is served
only to overnight guests of the business;



   (3)   Included the price of breakfast in the room rate; and



   (4)   Is the permanent residence of the owner or manager of the
business.



   Bingo hall. A facility used to conduct bingo games in compliance with
state statutory provisions, and open to the public and not in a subsidiary
nature to another use.



   Boarding house. Any dwelling, wherefore compensation, lodging and/or
meals are provided. The occupancy for such use of a dwelling unit shall not
exceed more that one (1) person per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor space, other than the owner and/or employees of the unit.



   Building. A structure which is completely enclosed by a roof and by
three (3) or more solid exterior walls, which is permanently affixed to a lot
or lots, and used or intended for the shelter, support or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property of any kind.



   Building, customary accessory. A detached building subordinate to the
main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the
main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith.



   Building height. The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the
finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the
roof.



   Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which said building is located.



   Building setback line. A line delineating the minimum distance between
the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other
structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. Whenever the front,
side or rear portions of a lot abuts a street right-of-way, setback lines
shall be measured from said right-of-way line. In the event there is no
right-of-way line, the setback shall be measured from the traveled portion of
the road or street.



   Carport. A structure consisting of a roof and two (2) or less exterior
walls.



   Cemetery. Land dedicated and intended for the interment of the deceased
and dedicated for burial purposes including columbariums and mausoleums.



   Columbarium. A structure or building substantially exposed above ground
intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of a deceased
person.



   Condominium. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or
group of attached units where each dwelling unit is to be deeded and/or
separately owned from the other units, and where all land is owned in common
by owners of all the dwelling units collectively.



   Condominium building. A building containing two (2) or more condominium
dwelling units.



   Construction office, temporary. A structure, housing the field office
operations for the construction of a building or group of buildings being
built simultaneously. The temporary construction office shall be located on
the actual construction site and must be removed immediately upon completion
of construction.



   Customary incidental home occupation. Any use conducted entirely within
a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes
and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there
are no direct retail sales or permanent display on the premises and no person
not a resident on the premises is employed specifically in connection with
the activity, except that not more than one (1) assistant may be employed in
the following home occupations: lawyer, physician, optometrist, dentist,
osteopath, private home shows, chiropractor, and insurance agent. Provided
further that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except such as is
normally used for domestic or professional purposes, and that not over
twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor space of any structure is used
for home occupations. No use defined as a special exception in any zoning
district in article VIII, use requirements by district, of this chapter shall
be permitted as a customary incidental home occupation without prior approval
by the board of adjustment.



   Day care center. A facility licensed by the state, that provides care,
supervision, and an organized program to children or adults who do not reside
in the facility, are present during daytime hours, and do not stay overnight.



   Domestic servant. An individual or individuals employed by the occupant
of a dwelling unit, for wages reportable and reported to the Internal Revenue
Service, to perform services such as household duties, yard maintenance, and
the like on a regular (not less frequently than weekly) basis.



   Dwelling, multifamily. A building arranged or designed to be occupied
by two (2) or more families living independently of each other. The minimum
floor area for a multifamily dwelling unit is five hundred (500) square feet
of gross living area.



   Dwelling, single-family. A building arranged or designed to be occupied
by one (1) family. The minimum floor area for a single-family dwelling unit
is eight hundred (800) square feet of gross living area.



   Dwelling unit. A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and
independent living facilities for one (1) family, including permanent
facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation per unit.



   Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a single-family dwelling unit
who are related by blood or marriage or adoption. A maximum of five (5)
persons, not related by blood or marriage or adoption, may occupy a
single-family dwelling unit. Domestic servants employed or living on the
premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as part of the
family. The maximum permissible number of five (5) unrelated persons who may
lawfully occupy a single-family dwelling unit shall not apply to any group
occupying a boarding/ rooming house or a fraternity house.



   Family care home. A home with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family
environment for not more than six (6) resident handicapped persons.



   Gasoline service or filling stations. Any establishment or place of
business which is maintained or operated for the primary purpose of selling
gasoline or motor fuel or which contains fuel pumps and other such fuel
dispensing appliances. For purposes of this definition, factors to be
considered in determining the primary purpose of the business include but are
not limited to the following:



   (1)   Gross receipts of the business attributable to gasoline or
motor fuel sales or service broken down into the following categories:
gasoline or motor fuel sales, labor for service, and parts;



   (2)   The age of each vehicle and how long each vehicle has been on
the property (used vehicles that are on the property for longer than six (6)
months may be evidence that the business is not a gasoline service or filling
station, but rather an automobile graveyard and/or junk yard);



   (3)   Any business-type licenses that are held, or the lack thereof;



   (4)   The number of gasoline pumps or fuel distribution devices; and



   (5)   The number and configuration of grease bays or repair work
areas.



   For the purposes of this definition, gasoline service or filling
stations where the service or repair work constitutes fifty (50) percent or
more of the gross receipts of the business are considered to be automobile
repair shops and subject to all regulations governing automobile repair shops.



   Group care facility. An establishment qualified for a license by the
State of North Carolina that provides resident services to individuals of
whom one or more are unrelated. The individuals are handicapped, aged or
disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation or extended care, and are provided
services to meet their needs. This category includes group homes for all
ages, halfway houses, and foster and boarding homes.



   Handicapped person. A person with a temporary or permanent physical,
emotional, or mental disability including but not limited to mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments,
emotional disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally
ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in G.S. 122-58.2(1)b.
(1981, c. 565, s.1.).



   In view or visible. Means that it is capable of being seen without
visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity.



   Indoor firing or archery range. An enclosed, permanent structure for
the purpose of archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of
recreational target practice.



   Industry, light. A use that involves the manufacturing, production,
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, repair, research, packaging,
warehousing, wholesaling, and distribution of finished products,
predominately from previously prepared or refined materials or raw materials
that do not require refinement.



   Industry, heavy. Manufacturing or other enterprises with external
effects that pose risks due to the involvement of flammable or explosive
material, radioactive material, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, solvents,
solid waste, sanitary waste, or other hazardous materials in the
manufacturing, storage or other processes of such material that have the
potential of creating a hazardous condition or public nuisance.



   Inoperable motor vehicle. See "Junked and/or inoperable motor vehicle."



   Junk. old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts
thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  136-143(3).



   Junked and/or inoperable motor vehicle. A vehicle that does not display
a current license plate and that:



   (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or



   (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or



   (3)   Is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00).



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  160A-303.2(a).



   Junkyard. An establishment or place of business which is maintained,
operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for
maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the terms shall
include garbage dumps and sanitary fills. An establishment or place of
business which store or keeps for a period of fifteen (15) days or more
materials within the meaning of "junk" as defined herein which had been
derived or created as a result of industrial activity shall be deemed to be a
junkyard.



   State Law References: Similar provisions, G.S.  136-143(4).



   Kennel. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon
or wherein are kept five (5) or more dogs, cats or similar small animals in
any combination, whether such keeping is for care, pleasure, profit,
breeding, or exhibiting, and including places where dogs or cats or similar
small animals in any combination are boarded, kept for sale, care, or kept
for hire.



   Law enforcement facility. A facility used for law enforcement functions
including but not limited to law enforcement agency offices, communication
centers, court room facilities and jails.



   Lot. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a
building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the
customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. For the purposes
of this definition, the word "lot" shall mean any number of contiguous lots,
or portions thereof, upon which one (1) or more principal structures are to
be erected for a single use.



   Lot, depth of. The average distance between front and rear lot lines as
measured along the side lot lines.



   Lot, width of. The distance between side lot lines measured at the
building line.



   Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of which
has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of McDowell County,
North Carolina, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of
which has been so recorded.



   Major automobile repair work. Work on a vehicle that is necessary to
ensure the correct operation of the vehicle which cannot be completed in less
than one (1) hour.



   Manufactured/ mobile home. A factory-assembled transportable home built
on a permanent chassis, and designed and intended to be used as a year-round
dwelling unit. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms manufactured home
and mobile home are the same, and refer to a dwelling that was constructed
after June 15, 1976 following the enactment of the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and not constructed in
accordance with the standards of the North Carolina Residential Building
Code, current edition.  A manufactured home shall not be construed to be a
modular home, travel trailer, park model, or other form of recreational
vehicle, or a building type permitted for nonresidential purposes. The floor
area for a manufactured home shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width
with no less than six hundred (600) square feet of gross living area unless
otherwise stated in the ordinance. Manufactured homes are classified in the
following categories:



   (1)   Class A: A multi-sectional manufactured housing unit
constructed after June 15, 1976 that meets or exceeds the U.S. Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Department standards for manufactured home
construction.



   (2)   Class B: A manufactured home constructed after June 15, 1976
that meets or exceeds the U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Department
standards for manufactured home construction.



   (3)   Class C: Any manufactured housing unit that does not meet the
Class A or Class B definition.



   Minor automobile repair work. Work on a vehicle that is necessary to
ensure the correct operation of the vehicle which can be completed in less
than one (1) hour.



   Mobile food vendor. A temporary commercial activity for the purpose of
offering food and/or beverage products for retail sale from a mobile food
vendor unit, pushcart, or other moveable structure.



   Mobile food vendor unit. A vehicle, pushcart, or other moveable
structure that is temporary in nature and is commercially designed
specifically for the purpose of keeping or storing food and beverages for
retail sale by a commercial vendor.



   Mobile home. A factory-assembled portable housing unit, or a portion
thereof, built on a chassis and intended for use as a dwelling unit, and is
not constructed in accordance with the standards of the North Carolina
Uniform Residential Building Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. A mobile
home is designed to be transported on its own chassis. A mobile home shall be
construed to remain a mobile home whether or not wheels, axles, hitch, or
other appurtenance to mobility are removed, and regardless of the nature of
the foundation provided. All vehicles which are designated mobile homes by
the Uniform Standards Code for Mobile Homes shall be construed as mobile
homes. A mobile home shall not be construed to be a travel trailer or other
form of recreations vehicle or occupied for nonresidential purposes. All
references to mobile homes in this chapter shall include manufactured homes.
The floor area for a mobile home shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in
width with no less than six hundred (600) square feet of gross living area.



   Mobile home park. Any premises where more than one (1) mobile home is
parked for living and sleeping purposes, or any premises used or set apart
for the purpose of supplying to the public parking space for mobile homes for
living and sleeping purposes, and which includes any building, structures,
vehicles, or enclosures used or intended for use as part of such mobile home
park.



   Mobile home site. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated
for the accommodation and use of one (1) trailer or mobile home and
containing all improvements and utility connections required under this
chapter and other applicable city codes.



   Modular housing. A form of manufactured housing unit that meets the
construction standards of the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building
Code for one-family and two-family dwellings regardless of how the unit or
its components are transported to the site.



   Motel. A building or group of buildings used as an abiding place of ten
(10) or more persons, who are lodged for compensation. Parking spaces are
conveniently located to each unit.



   Nonconforming use. Any building or structure, or the use of any land,
building or structure existing at the time of the adoption of, or amendment
to this chapter, that does not conform to the regulations of the district in
which it is located.



   Nonresidential development means all development other than residential
development.



   Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



   (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, or other insects,
rats, or pests; or



   (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation
over eight (8) inches in height; or



   (3)   A point of collection of pools or pounds of water; or



   (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline oil or
other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or



   (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated
from the inside, such as trunk, hoods, etc.; or



   (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over; or



   (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste,
animal waste or any rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or



   (8)   One which has sharp points thereon which are jagged or contain
sharp edges of metal or glass; or



   (9)   Located within a public right-of-way and which is creating a
traffic hazard or impeding ingress or egress into a residential dwelling or
place of business;



   (10)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety
hazard and a public nuisance by the city council.



   Nursing home. A nursing home is defined as an institution, however
named, which is advertised, announced or maintained for the express or
implied purpose of providing nursing or convalescent care for three (3) or
more persons unrelated to the licensee. A nursing home is a home for chronic
or convalescent who do not usually require special facilities, such as an
operating room, x-ray facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical
facilities. A nursing home provides care for persons who have remedial
ailments or other ailments, for which medical or nursing care is indicated.



   Open storage. The storage of any products, materials, vehicles,
equipment, junk, or scrap outside the confines of an enclosed building, and
more specifically defined as:



   (1)   Merchandise display: Display of products and materials, and
operable vehicles and equipment for the purpose of offering for sale at
retail, and incidental to a principal office or retail building existing on
the premises;



   (2)   Equipment and material storage: Storage of any equipment or
materials in usable condition which are not being specifically displayed as
merchandise or offered for sale at retail; or



   (3)   Junk and scrap storage: Storage of used products, junk, or
scrap materials such as wood, cloth, paper, glass, metal, plastic, or rock
material which could be refurbished, recycled, or converted into usable stock
or material.



   Parking aisle. An area within a parking facility intended to provide
ingress and egress to a parking space.



   Parking area or parking lot. A parking area is the total area that
includes all parking spaces, aisles, and driveways, as defined by the back of
curb or edge of pavement.



   Parking space. An area of not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen (18)
feet, plus the necessary access space. Parking spaces shall be provided with
vehicular access to a street or alley, shall not be provided in a required
front yard area, and shall always be located outside the dedicated street
right-of-way.



   Patio home. A one-story single family dwelling (excluding mobile homes)
designed to maximize the combination of indoor-outdoor living and privacy
through the use of patio walls and court yards as buffer areas. Patio homes
may only be constructed within approved patio home developments.



   Pixel.  A pixel is a physical point in a raster image, or the smallest
element in a display device that can be controlled and turned off or on at
various levels of illumination.



   Pixel pitch. The distance measured horizontally and vertically between
each pixel within an electronic message display.



   Planned unit development. Any development where more than one (1)
principal building is proposed to be constructed on a single tract, or any
multifamily development containing nine (9) or more dwelling units, or any
building with a gross floor area of more than twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet.



   Property line. A line delineating the boundary of a lot or other piece
of property.



   Senior housing. An independent living facility providing multiple one
(1) to two (2) bedroom residential dwelling units occupied only by senior
citizens that are fifty-five (55) years and older and persons with
disabilities.



   Shelter/mission. Facility providing personal assistance on a nonprofit
basis to individuals of an indigent status. Such assistance must include food
and/or temporary shelter and may, in addition, include religious instruction,
counseling, and other incidental services customarily provided by missions.



   Sign. Any display of letters, words, numbers, figures, devices,
emblems, pictures, logos, or any other means whereby the same are made
visible for the purpose of making anything known, whether such display be on,
or attached to, or as a part of a structure, surface, or any object whether
natural or manmade. The word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant, or
insignia of any nation, state, city, or other political unit.



   Special exception. A use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled
as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote
the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience,
appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in a
zoning district as a special exception, if specific provision for such
special exception is made in this zoning chapter.



   Sports complex. A sports complex consists of a combination of a bowling
center, batting cages, miniature golf, sports fields and similar nonmotorized
activities. A sports complex may have a restaurant, snack bar, and/or
concession stand to serve its patrons.



   Street. A public thoroughfare which affords a principal means of access
to abutting property.



   Structure. Anything constructed or erected, or anything attached to
something having a permanent location on the ground.



   Temporary storage unit. A reusable enclosed or semi-enclosed vessel,
cargo container or truck trailer originally, specifically or formerly
designed or used for the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of
freight, articles, goods, belongings or commodities; or structure designed
for or capable of being mounted on a chassis for movement by truck, rail or
other similar device.



   Temporary structure. A structure that is temporary in nature and is
required for a defined period of time during an event or the construction
phase of permitted development, including, but not limited to, emergency
shelters, construction project offices, equipment storage, temporary storage
unit, trailer, cargo container, or sales office for the marketing of the
property in which it is located. The placement or a temporary structure is
permitted pursuant to a temporary use permit. Permanent placement and
occupancy of a temporary structure is prohibited.



   Temporary use. A use that is required for a defined period of time and
is uniquely temporary or seasonal in nature, including, but not limited to,
Christmas tree sales, seasonal sales of food products, sidewalk sales,
equipment storage, circus, or other civic event.



   Tent. A portable shelter of canvas, plastic, or skins stretched over a
supporting framework of poles with ropes and pegs.



   Textile recycling container.  A solid metal, fully enclosed, and
self-contained container no larger than six feet in height or width for the
purpose of disposing of cloth or woven fabric to be taken offsite to be
recycled.



   Townhouse. A single building unit constructed in a series or group of
attached units, with property lines separating such units, and where each
building units and lot is to be deeded and/or separately owned from the other
building units and lots.



   Townhouse building. A building containing two (2) or more townhouse
building units.



   Townhouse development. A development consisting of two (2) or more
townhouse buildings.



   Travel trailer. A vehicular or structure designed to be self-propelled
or moved on wheels and intended as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation or vacation use. This term shall also include campers,
recreational vehicles, camper-trailers, motorized homes, vans or other
short-term sheltered vehicles.



   Travel trailer park or campground. Any parcel of land which contains or
is designed, laid out, or adapted to accommodate travel trailers, motorized
homes, recreational vehicles, cabins, tents, or similar vehicle or devices
intended for travel, recreations or vacation use and ancillary structures.



   Use. Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or
intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or on a tract of land.



   Use, accessory. A use located on the same lot with a principal use, and
clearly incidental or subordinate to and customary in connection with the
principal use.



   Use, principal. The main use on a lot.



   Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning
ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and
where, owing to the condition peculiar to the property and not the result of
the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.



   Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or as
otherwise provided herein.



   Yard, front. A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the
front line of the building to the front line of the lot, excluding steps.



   Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main
building.



   Yard, side. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
between the building and the side line of the lot extending through from the
building line to the rear yard.



   Zoning administrator. The city planner or other individual(s)
authorized by the city manager to administer this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(400), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-5, § 2(400), 1-15-08; O-08-02-19-2, § 2,
2-19-08; Ord. No. O-07-08-18-2, § 2, 9-18-07; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10, §
3(21-90), 6-17-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-11, § 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No.
O-09-03-24-3, § 2, 3-24-09; Ord. No. O-09-08-4-3, § 2, 8-4-09; Ord. No.
O-09-09-15-1, § 2, 9-15-09; Ord. No. O-10-05-18-1, 5-18-10; Ord. No.
O-10-12-14-2, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. O-11-01-18-1, § 2, 1-18-11; Ord. No.
O-11-12-06-2, § 2, 12-6-11; Ord. No. O-12-08-21-2, § 2; Ord. No.
O-15-1-20-1, § 2, 1-20-15; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 3, 1-20-15; Ord. No.
O-15-07-21-3, § 2, 7-21-15; Ord. No. O-15-11-17-6, § 1, 11-17-15)



Secs. 21-22--21-30. Reserved.



ARTICLE V
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT



Sec. 21-31. Use district.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Marion is hereby divided
into seven (7) districts designated as follows:



   (1)   R-1 Single-Family Residential District;



   (2)   R-2 Neighborhood Residential District;



   (3)   C-1 Central Business District;



   (4)   C-2 General Business District;



   (5)   M-1 Industrial District;



   (6)   Office and Institutional District;



   (7)   B-1 Neighborhood Business District.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(500), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-32. District boundaries.



   The boundaries of the districts enumerated in section 21-31 above, are
hereby established as shown on the map entitled, "Official Zoning Map, City
of Marion, North Carolina," adopted by the city council and certified by the
city clerk. Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is
hereby made a part of this chapter as if fully written herein. Said map shall
be retained in the office of the city clerk.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(501), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-33. Interpretation of district boundaries.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning map the following rules
shall apply:



   (1)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the centerlines of streets, highway, streams, or rivers, street
right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such lines shall be construed to
be such boundaries.



   (2)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.



   (3)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the center lines of streets or highways, or
right-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the zoning
map. If no distance is given such dimension shall be determined by the use of
the scale shown on said zoning map.



   (4)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot of single
ownership, the direct requirements for the least restricted portion of such
lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such
extension shall not include any part of such a lot more than thirty-five (35)
feet beyond the district boundary line.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(502), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-34--21-50. Reserved.



ARTICLE VI
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS



Sec. 21-51. Use.



   No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or structurally altered
except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter or amendments
thereto, for the district in which it is located.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(600), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-52. Height and density.



   No building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the
height limits, or to exceed the density regulations of this chapter for the
district in which it is located.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(601), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-53. Lot size.



   No lot, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots of
record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side
or rear yard, lot area per family, or other requirements of this chapter are
not maintained.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(602), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-54. Yard use limitations.



   No part of a yard or other space required about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as
part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(603), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-55. Only one principal building on any lot.



   Only one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings
may hereafter be erected on any lot, except as authorized by article X,
section 21-255, nor shall any building be erected on any lot which does not
abut at least thirty-five (35) feet on a publicly dedicated or maintained
street.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(604), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-56--21-70. Reserved.



ARTICLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS



DIVISION 1.
NONCONFORMING USES, CONTINUANCE, AND LOTS



Sec. 21-71. Nonconforming uses.



   Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendment thereto,
there exists lots, structures, or uses of land and structures which were
lawful before this chapter was adopted or amended, but which are prohibited
in the future under the terms of this chapter, or amendment.



   It is the intent of this article to permit the continuance of certain
of these nonconforming uses until they are removed by economic forces or
otherwise.



   It is the intent of this article to discourage the survival of
nonconforming uses to prohibit their enlargement, expansion, or extension.



   Nothing herein shall preclude the adoption of an amortization period in
which certain nonconforming uses or conditions are to be phased out.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(700), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-71.1. Continuance.



   Lawful nonconforming uses, buildings and structures existing at the
time of the enactment of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, shall be
allowed to remain subject to the following regulations:



   (1)   A nonconforming use of a building may be reestablished after
discontinuance of less than twelve (12) months provided it is reestablished
as the same nonconforming use that previously occupied the building. The
reestablishment of a nonconforming use shall be subject to the written
approval of the board and subject to such conditions as the board may require
in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the area.



   (2)   A nonconforming use of land shall be restricted to the area
occupied by such use as of the effective date of the zoning ordinance. A
nonconforming use of a building or buildings shall not be enlarged to either
additional land or buildings after the effective date of the zoning ordinance.



   (3)   When a nonconforming use of any structure or land has been
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, it shall not be
reestablished or changed to any use not in conformity with the provisions of
the zoning ordinance.



   (4)   Any nonconforming building or nonconforming use, which is
damaged by fire, flood, wind or other act of God or man, may be reconstructed
and used as before, if it be done within twelve (12) months of such damage,
unless damaged to extent of more than sixty (60) percent of its fair sale
value immediately prior to damage in which case any repair or reconstruction
shall be in conformity with the provision of the zoning ordinance.



   (5)   A nonconforming building or building house [housing] a
nonconforming use shall not be structurally altered except in conformance
with the provision of the zoning ordinance. This provision shall not be
construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs required for structural
safety.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(700), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-72. Nonconforming lots of record.



   Where the owner of a lot of official record in any district at the time
of the adoption of this chapter or his successor in title thereto does not
own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot
size requirements of this chapter, such lot may be used as a building site
provided that:



   (1)   Where the lot area and lot width are no more than twenty-five
(25) percent below the minimum specified in this chapter, and other
dimensional requirements are otherwise complied with, the zoning
administrator is authorized to issue a building permit; and



   (2)   Where the lot area and lot width are more than twenty-five
(25) percent below the minimum specified in the ordinance, or other
dimensional requirements cannot be met, the board is authorized to approve as
a variance such dimensions as shall conform as closely as possible to the
required dimensions.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(701), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-73. Nonconforming manufactured homes.



   Dimensional or use nonconformities associated with manufactured homes
shall be addressed in the following manner.



   (1)    The replacement of one manufactured home with another
manufactured home shall be permitted provided that no new dimensional
nonconformities are created, the replacement manufactured home conforms with
the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act and
constructed after June 15, 1976, and such replacement occurs within three
hundred sixty five (365) days of the last day of occupancy of the original
manufactured home.



   (2)    Any manufactured home not constructed in accordance with the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, has been
vacant for three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days, where active
water, sewer, and power utilities have not been maintained at the home during
that time, and is deemed by the City to be a public nuisance in accordance
with Marion City Code, Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation and/or unfit for human
habitation in accordance with Marion City Code, Chapter 4 Building shall not
be reoccupied, and the property owner shall be required to remove the home
within ninety (90) days of notice from the City of Marion.  An extension may
be requested in writing by the property owner indicating a plan and date of
removal or repair of the structure.  Failure to remove the manufactured home
shall be deemed a violation of the Marion City Code and subject to civil
action.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 6, 1-20-15)



Secs. 21-74--21-85. Reserved.



DIVISION 2.
OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS*



__________



*   Cross References: Off-street parking,  18-256 et seq.



__________



Sec. 21-86. Generally.



   (A)    Purpose. In order to assure proper and uniform development of
public and private property in the City of Marion, to relieve traffic
congestion, and to minimize any detrimental effects of off-street parking
areas on adjacent properties, the procedures and standards set forth herein
shall apply. Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided
on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established.
The number of parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as the
number specified below for the various uses.



   (B)    Permit.



   (1)   Permit required. All permanent off-street parking shall
require a permit from the zoning administrator prior to the creation,
alteration, enlargement, establishment or change of use of a structure or
outdoor use of land occurs, and prior to any development, redevelopment,
reconfiguration, or expansion of a new or existing parking area not part of a
larger building or use activity.



   (2)   Permit not required. Regular maintenance and restriping that
does not change the number or configuration of parking spaces or increase the
parking area shall not require a permit.



   (3)   Application for permit. An application for permit shall be
submitted, reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator prior to any
activity required under the permit and shall contain adequate information to
determine compliance with this division and all other applicable sections of
the City Code.



   (4)   Off-street parking plan. An off-street parking plan shall be
submitted with a permit application pursuant to section 21-273.2, plan review
of the City Code and shall show the design and dimensions for the off-street
parking area that conform to the standards in this division and all other
applicable sections of the City Code.



   (5)   General requirements.



   a.   Parking space requirements for uses not specifically listed
herein shall be determined by the zoning administrator based upon the
requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of
the use.



   b.   Fractional space requirements shall be rounded to the nearest
whole number.



   c.   For properties containing more than one (1) use, the number of
required parking spaces is the cumulative number of spaces for all uses with
the exception of approved shared parking.



   d.   All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the
same lot as the principal structure or use or on a contiguous lot which has
the same zoning classification and is under the same ownership. The zoning
administrator may authorize an alternative satellite parking location
provided that the required parking spaces are located within five hundred
(500) feet of the building entrance of the principal structure or use, are
located in a zoning district that permits the principal use and provided that
ownership arrangements are made so as to assure the permanent availability of
such spaces to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.



   e.   Required off-street parking spaces may be provided
cooperatively for two (2) or more uses, subject to arrangements that will
assure the permanent availability of such spaces to the satisfaction of the
zoning administrator. The number of such combined parking spaces shall equal
the sum of the parking spaces required for the separate uses. However, the
zoning administrator may reduce the total number of parking spaces required
if it is determined that some or all of the spaces may serve two (2) or more
uses by reason of the daily hours of operation or seasonal activity of such
uses.



   f.   No open area in an off-street parking area shall be encroached
upon by buildings, storage, or any other uses; nor shall the number of
parking spaces be reduced except after the submission of proof to the zoning
administrator that, by reason of reduction in floor area, seating capacity,
number of employees, or change in other factors controlling the regulation of
the number of off-street parking spaces, the proposed reduction is reasonable
and consistent with the intent of this chapter.



   g.   No parking space shall be utilized for storage, repair work, or
other similar activity.



   h.   Off-street parking shall not be required within the C-1 central
business district, however all off-street parking provided within the C-1
central business district shall comply with this division and all other
applicable sections of the City Code.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(702), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-86), 6-17-08)



Sec. 21-86.1. Schedule of required parking spaces.



   Automobile repair shop-- Two (2) spaces for each gas pump plus two (2)
spaces for each grease rack or working bay or one (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of gross floor space, which ever number produces
the largest number of parking spaces, plus one (1) space for each employee at
maximum employment on any one (1) shift.



   Automobile sales, outdoor equipment and machinery sales, and commercial
nurseries-- One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor area, plus one (1) space for each employee or sales person, plus one
(1) space for each vehicle stored on site.



   Rooming and boarding houses--One (1) space for each accommodation; plus
one (1) space for each two (2) employees.



   Motels, hotels, inns, and tourist courts--One (1) space for each
accommodation; plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees.



   Bowling alleys--Two (2) spaces for each alley, plus one (1) space for
each two (2) employees.



   Funeral homes (mortuary)--One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the
chapel or parlor.



   Places of public assembly with fixed seats--One (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of gross floor space directed to patron use.



   Residential dwellings--Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit, including
mobile homes.



   Schools, kindergartens, elementary and junior high, public or
private--One (1) space for each classroom and administrative offices.



   Schools, high, public and private--One (1) space for each staff member
and employee plus one (1) space for each ten (10) students. Spaces should be
calculated for the maximum staff and students for which the building is
designed.



   Churches and other religious institutions-- One (1) space for each four
(4) seats in the principal assembly room.



   Colleges-- One (1) space for each four (4) students, plus one (1) space
for each faculty and staff member.



   Libraries, museums, art galleries, and public buildings--One (1) space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor space.



   Professional and business offices--One (1) space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of gross floor space.



   Wholesale and industrial uses--One (1) space for each two (2) employees
at maximum employment on a single shift, plus one (1) space for each company
vehicle operating from the premises.



   Bank and other financial institutions--One (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of gross floor space, plus one (1) space for each
two (2) employees.



   Retail stores and shops of all kinds including barber, shoe repair and
similar service outlets which are not included in an approved planned unit
development--One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor space, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees.



   Restaurants (cafe)--One (1) space for each three (3) seating
accommodations, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on shifts of
greatest employment.



   Gasoline service or filling stations--Two (2) spaces for each gas pump
plus two (2) spaces for each grease rack or other working bay.



   Hospitals--One (1) space per bed intended for patients (except
bassinets) plus one (1) space for each medical staff member, plus one (1)
space for each two (2) employees on shift of greatest employment.



   Law enforcement facilities--One (1) space per two (2) cells, plus one
(1) space for each staff member on the shift of greater employment.



   Auditoriums, assembly halls, gymnasiums, community centers, and senior
centers--One (1) space for every three (3) fixed seats and one (1) space for
every three (3) movable seats in the largest assembly room.



   Recreational center swimming pools--One (1) space for each one hundred
(100) square feet of water and deck area.



   Bed and breakfast homes--One (1) space for each accommodation (rented
bedroom) plus two (2) spaces for the owner/manager.



   Planned unit development consisting of retail and service outlets--
Four (4) parking spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
floor space. The board of adjustment may approve up to twenty (20) percent
reduction of the required parking upon finding that the reduced number of
parking spaces will be sufficient to satisfy the demand for parking expected
for the use, considering the nature of the use and characteristics of the
property. The board of adjustment may approve parking spaces for use of an
outdoor display area provided that such area is indicated on the site plan
and approved by the board of adjustment.



   Senior housing--One (1) space for each dwelling unit.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(702), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-86), 6-17-08)



Sec. 21-87.2. Design of nonresidential and multifamily residential parking
areas.



   (A)    General parking area design standards. The following minimum
design standards shall apply to all nonresidential and multifamily
residential parking areas. Additional design standards are recommended but
not required for properties and uses with fourteen (14) spaces or less.



   (1)   All off-street parking areas and parking spaces shall be
designed in a manner which does not require vehicles to back out onto a
public street, sidewalk or over a landscape bufferyard.



   (2)   Wheel stops are required if the space abuts a wall, fence,
landscaped area, pedestrian walkway, building, or is located perpendicular to
another parking space, and shall have a minimum three-foot clearance from the
back of the wheel stop to such abutment. Wheel stops or curbs shall be a
minimum of six (6) inches in height and shall be anchored to the ground, and
may be concrete, rot-resistant heavy timber or other effective materials.



   (3)   All handicap accessible parking spaces shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code.



   (4)   All off-street parking areas shall comply with the provisions
of division 5, landscape standards.



   (B)    Additional parking area design standards. All nonresidential
and multifamily residential uses requiring fifteen (15) or more parking
spaces shall conform to the following design standards:



   (1)   Parking areas must be graded for proper drainage to ensure
surface water is diverted to a storm drain or other on-site catch basin to
keep parking area, public streets and adjacent property free of accumulated
water.



   (2)   All required parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced
with a minimum thickness of two (2) inches of asphalt, concrete, other
all-weather hard surface, over a minimum thickness of four (4) inches of an
aggregate base material. All parking areas shall be designed to facilitate
proper drainage and shall not drain over any public street, public
right-of-way, or onto adjacent property.



   (3)   Parking spaces shall be clearly marked with paint striping a
minimum of four (4) inches in width. All parking areas shall be maintained in
good condition and clear of obstructions at all times.



   (4)   Directional entrances, exits, and aisles shall be signed and
marked on the pavement to adequately guide vehicular and pedestrian
circulation on-site.



   (5)   Parking areas may be designed to connect with parking areas on
adjacent lots, where appropriate and approved by the adjacent property owner
to eliminate the need to use the abutting roads for cross movement of
vehicles.



   (6)   All parking areas shall include facilities that ensure safe
pedestrian circulation on-site and between parking areas, dedicated
rights-of-way, and adjacent properties where appropriate. Bikeway facilities
are recommended but optional. If a bikeway system is included it shall
complying with the following requirements as part of the site design:



   a.   An internal pedestrian walkway or bikeway system shall
functionally connect front doors, storefronts or primary building entries
with planned or existing public sidewalks on each public street;



   b.   An internal pedestrian walkway or bikeway system shall provide
a direct connection to any planned or existing public greenway system or park
facility;



   c.   An internal pedestrian walkway or bikeway system shall provide
a direct and functional connection from the front doors, storefronts or
primary building entry to any on-site off-street parking area;



   d.   An internal pedestrian walkway or bikeway system shall provide
for identifiable pedestrian crossing treatments along functional pedestrian
routes wherever an internal pedestrian walkway or bikeway system crosses an
interior access drive or interior access driveway; and



   e.   Parking areas with twenty (20) or more parking spaces may
substitute a bicycle rack that provides space for five (5) bicycles at a
ratio of one (1) bicycle rack for each twenty (20) parking spaces. One (1)
parking space may be subtracted for each five-space bicycle rack.



   (C)    Parking space design standards. All parking spaces shall
comply with the parking dimension standards set forth below:



   Table 21.86.1: Minimum Parking Space Dimensional Requirements



 




 

Angle of Off-Street Parking Space






 

0

 

30

 

45

 

60

 

90




Minimum width of parking space

 

9 feet

 

9 feet

 

9 feet

 

9 feet

 

9 feet




Minimum length of parking space

 

22 feet

 

18 feet

 

18 feet

 

18 feet

 

18 feet




Minimum aisle width single row parking

 

12 feet

 

12 feet

 

14 feet

 

19 feet

 

20 feet




Minimum aisle width double row parking

 

22 feet

 

22 feet

 

22 feet

 

24 feet

 

25 feet




 



   Figure 21.86.1: Minimum Parking Space Diagram



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(702), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-86), 6-17-08)



   Cross References: Off-street parking,  18-256 et seq.



Sec. 21-87. Off-street loading and unloading space required.



   Every lot on which a nonresidential use is hereafter established, shall
provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles
off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or
if there is no alley, to a public street. For the purpose of this section an
off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet by
forty (40) feet and an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet in height.
Required space shall be considered as follows:



   Table 21-87.1 Off-Street Loading Space Standards



 


Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.)

 

Number of Spaces




0--20,000

 

1




20,001--40,000

 

2




40,001 and above

 

3




 



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(703), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-87), 6-17-08)



Sec. 21-88. Clear visibility triangle.



   (A)    Corner lot. On a corner lot, with the exception of lots
located within the C-1 central business district, in any residential
district, no obstruction to vision more than two and one-half (2 ) feet in
height measured from the center line of the street shall be placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersection street
right-of-way lines and a straight line connection points on said street
right-of-way lines each of which is thirty-five (35) feet distance from the
point of intersection.



   Figure 21-88.1 Clear Visibility Triangle For A Corner Lot.



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



   (B)    Driveway access. The same criteria as used on corner lots in
this section shall apply to driveway access except that such standards shall
apply to driveways in all districts that do not have a controlled stop, and
the triangular area formed by the intersection street right-of-way lines and
straight line connection points on said street right-of-way lines each shall
be twenty-five (25) feet distance from the point of intersection.



   Figure 21-88.2 Clear Visibility Triangle For a Driveway Access.



   GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Click here



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(704), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-88--21-90), 6-17-08)



Sec. 21-89. Driveway and internal traffic lane standards..



   (A)    Driveway standards:



   (1)   Driveway permit. All driveways shall conform to the standards
required in chapter 15, streets, of the City Code. Exceptions may only be
granted in writing by the public works director prior to the issuance of a
permit.



   (2)   Abandoned driveways. As a condition of issuance of any permit,
all abandoned and nonconforming driveways and driveway aprons on the same
property shall be removed, landscaped and the curb, gutter and sidewalk shall
be properly restored.



   (B)    Internal traffic lane standards.



   (1)   Traffic lanes shall be designed so that each lane is no less
than a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and no greater than a maximum of
eighteen (18) feet in width.



   (2)   Traffic lanes shall be clearly marked with directional
painting and/or traffic control signage and shall not provide direct access
from individual parking spaces or parking aisles.



   (C)    Drive-through stacking lane. Access and stacking for a
drive-through lane shall be located away from a public street, private
driveway, internal traffic lane, and parking aisle so that queued vehicles do
not block traffic along a public road, driveway access, or the internal
movement of other vehicles on-site. The total length of an on-site stacking
lane shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) linear feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(704), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-88--21-90), 6-17-08)



Sec. 21-90. Parking area maintenance.



   It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain and repair the
parking area and related improvements in accordance with the above standards.
If the city council finds that a parking area is in need of maintenance or
repair, to ensure public safety and welfare, the council may direct the
property owner to make repair the parking area, or direct the city to repair
the parking area thirty (30) days after written notice to the property owner.
Such repair or maintenance costs shall be applied as a lien against the
property.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(704), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  3(21-88--21-90), 6-17-08)



Secs. 21-91--21-125. Reserved.



DIVISION 3.
GASOLINE SERVICE OR FILLING STATION STANDARDS



Sec. 21-126. Gasoline service or filling stations.



   The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service or
filling stations:



   (1)   All buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any street or road right-of-way.



   (2)   Gasoline pumps and other appliances shall be located at least
fifteen (15) feet from any street right-of-way.



   (3)   All service, storage or similar activities shall be conducted
entirely on the premises.



   (4)   All major repair work, if any, shall be conducted within a
building capable of being completely enclosed.



   (5)   Open storage of wrecked or junked motor vehicles, discarded
tires, auto parts or similar materials shall not be permitted.



   (6)   Wrecked or junked motor vehicles, discarded tires, auto parts
or similar materials may be stored within an enclosed structure which
visually conceals such objects.



   (7)   In order to maintain safety for pedestrian and vehicle
traffic, vehicles associated with automobile repair shops, automobile sales,
tire sales and services, towing and wrecking service businesses may not be
parked, displayed, stored or repaired within four (4) feet of the curb or the
edge of the road if no curb exists.



   (8)   On-site traffic areas shall be provided and arranged in such a
manner as to provide easily identifiable ingress and egress, adequate
customer and employee parking, access for emergency vehicles, and adequate
turnarounds such that backward movement onto the public roadways is avoided.



   (9)   Inoperable motor vehicles shall not be stored in the customer
or employee parking spaces required per the off-street parking requirements
set out in section 21-86.



   (10)   The provisions contained in chapter 9, article III,
concerning abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles continues to apply.



   (11)   Gasoline service or filling stations must obtain a permit
from the zoning office.



   All gasoline service or filling stations within the city limits of
Marion not in compliance with this section 21-7.5 within six (6) months after
the adoption of the ordinance adopting or amending this section shall be in
violation.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(705), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-127--21-130. Reserved.



DIVISION 4.
SIGN REGULATIONS



Sec. 21-131. General purpose and intent.



   The purpose of this section is to support and complement the various
land uses allowed in the City of Marion by regulating the installation and
placement of signs.  These regulations are adopted under the zoning
authority of the City to achieve the following.



   (1)   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication while preserving the rights of free speech under the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution.



   (2)   To preserve the scenic and aesthetic features that serve to
unify the City of Marion and convey a message of quality in order to protect
and promote the development of the tourist industry and provide for the
protection of the quality of life for residents and visitors.



   (3)   To insure the safety of the local and visiting motorist on the
public roads by reducing the detracting influence of uncontrolled advertising
signage



   (4)   To providing reasonable regulations while safeguarding the
interest of local businesses.



   (5)   To insure light, air, and open space is maintained, to reduce
hazard at intersections, and to protect property values of the entire
community.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-132. Applicability.



Sec. 21-132.1. Permits required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
attach, post, paint, move, replace, or in any other manner display any sign
without first obtaining a sign permit from the Zoning Administrator, except
otherwise prohibited, exempted, or not requiring a permit under this chapter.
Additional permits may be necessary pursuant to the regulations in the state
building code or other sections of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-132.2. Permit application.



   (a)   All permanent signs. A sign permit shall not be issued until a
complete application for each separate sign and support structure has been
submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator.



   (b)   Permanent off-premises signs.  The sign structure must be
completely installed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
permit issuance. During the 180-day period, the new sign structure shall be
considered in existence for the purpose of spacing of adjacent signs as set
out in the appropriate rules and regulations of this chapter. The
off-premises sign owner shall pay an annual renewal fee for each off-premises
sign Off-premises initial and annual renewal fees shall be required to be
paid by the owners of the off-premises sign structures for each permit
requested in order to defray the cost of the administrative and inspection
expenses incurred by the City of Marion in administering the permit
procedures. Such fee schedules shall be determined by the city council.



   (c)   Alteration of sign face. Resurfacing of a sign, if in
conformance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, shall be
considered maintenance or repair and shall not require a permit. 



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-132.3. Compliance required.



   Any sign, which becomes a legal nonconforming sign as herein defined
may continue to exist provided that no nonconforming sign shall be:



   (a)   Changed or replaced with another nonconforming sign, except
that the sign face may be changed on an existing sign structure so long as it
is not enlarged or expanded.



   (b)   Relocated, except in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (c)   Re-established after damage or destruction in excess of fifty
(50) percent of the value at the time of the damage or destruction.




   (d)   Modified in any way, which increases the sign's degree of
nonconformity.




   (e)   Re-established after the sign structure has been removed.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-132.4. Message type.




   (a)   Noncommercial message.  Any sign display or device allowed
under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise
lawful noncommercial message.





   (b)   Commercial message.  Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-133. General provisions.



Sec. 21-133.1 Measurement of sign face.



   (a)   The area of a sign face shall be deemed to be the entire area
within the smallest square or rectangle that will encompass the outer limits
of the text, representation, emblem, logo, symbol, or other display on the
sign.  The area shall include any material or color forming an integral part
of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
structure against which it is placed. See Figure 133-1.



Figure 133-1: Sign Area Measurement








   (b)   The structural members not bearing informational or
representational matter shall not be included in computation of area of a
sign face.





   (c)   A sign may include double-sided display so long as both sides
are of the same size and location on the sign structure, otherwise it shall
be deemed two separate signs.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-133.2 Measurement of sign height.



   The height of a sign shall be measured from the highest point of a sign
or its support whichever is greater, to the base of the sign at the highest
adjacent grade. See Figure 133-2.



Figure 133-2: Sign Height







(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14)



Sec. 21-133.3. Location.



   (a)   All permitted signs, with the exception of public signs, shall
be located outside of a public right-of-way and outside of the clear-site
triangle.



   (b)   Such signs shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet from the
edge of the traveled way where the right-of-way is unknown or does not exist.



   (c)   The following signs are permitted by zoning district provided
such signs are in conformance with all applicable provisions in this chapter.
All other signs are prohibited pursuant to section 21-136:



 


TABLE 21-133.3: DISTRICT SIGN PROVISIONS



District Sign Provisions
 
District Types:

R-1 Single Family Residential

R-2 General Residential

B-1 Neighborhood Business

C-1 Central Business
 
M-1 Industrial

DO Downtown Overlay

C-2 General Business


O-I Office Institutional




Sign Type

 

R-1& R-2

 

C-1 & C-2

 

M-1

 

O-I

 

B1 & DO

 
Description




A-frame sign
 

N

 

E

 

N

 

N

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(1)


Arm sign
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(1)(c)


Banner (temporary)
 

E(1)

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(15)


Building marker
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(2)


Building-mounted banner (permanent)
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(2)(c)


Canopy awning
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(2)(b)


Changeable copy sign
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(1)(d)


Construction sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(3)


Digital petroleum price signs
 

N

 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 
Sec. 21-135(3)10.b


Digital time, date, temperature (TDT) sign
 

N

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(3)10.a


Directional sign (on-premises)
 

N

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

N

 
Sec. 21-134(4)


Drive-thru menu sign
 

N

 

P(3)

 

N

 

N

 

N

 
Sec. 21-135(1)(e)


Electronic message sign (on-premises)
 

P(4)

 

P(3)

 

N

 

P

 

N

 
Sec. 21-135(3)


Feather banner
 

N

 

E

 

N

 

N

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(5)


Flag
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(6)


Government sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(7)


Holiday decoration
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(8)


Home occupation sign
 

P

 

P

 

N

 

N

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135-(1)(c), - (2)(a), or -(2)(e)


Incidental sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(9)


Legal or warning sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(10)


Multi-tenant/mixed-use monument sign
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N

 
Sec. 21-135(1)(b)


Occupant/street number sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(11)


Pedestrian canopy sign
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(2)(d)


Pole-mounted sign
 

N

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(1)(f)


Portable political campaign sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(12)


Public art/murals
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(13)


Off-premises advertising
 

N

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(4)


Off-premises directional
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(4)(b)


Real estate sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(14)


Single tenant monuments
 

P(1)(2)(5)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(1)(a)


Special event sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(16)(a)


Stadium/recreational sign
 

E(2)

 

N

 

E

 

E

 

N

 
Sec. 21-134(15)


Vending/automatic teller, gas pump signs
 

E(1)

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(17)


Wall-mounted sign
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(2)(e)


Wall-mounted projecting arm sign
 

P(1)

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
Sec. 21-135(2)(a)


Window sign/display
 

E(1)

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(18)


Yard sale sign
 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

E

 
Sec. 21-134(16)(b)


E = Permit Not Required

P= Permit Required

N= Not Permitted

S = Special Exception
 
(1)    Approved businesses (excluding home occupations)

(2)    R-2 only

(3)    C-2 only

(4)    Non-commercial non-residential

(5)    Multi-family residential six units or more only




 



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 2, 1-20-15;
Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-133.4. Illumination.




   Any sign illuminated by a direct or indirect source of light including
but not limited to neon, fluorescent, incandescent, light-emitting diode
(LED), or other similar lighting or light-producing element shall adhere to
the following provisions in addition to all other applicable regulations.





   (a)   All illuminated signs.





   (1)   Signs may be illuminated by a direct or indirect source of
light, provided the indirect light source is shaded, shielded or directed so
that no direct rays or glare emanating from the light source are visible from
any public right-of-way or abutting property.





   (2)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the average level of
illumination on the vertical surface of any direct or indirect illuminated
sign shall not exceed three (3) foot-candles, unless permitted ground-mounted
or bottom-mounted lighting fixture is used, in which case the average level
of illumination on the vertical surface of the sign shall not exceed two (2)
foot-candles. A foot candle is defined as a unit of illuminance or light
falling onto a surface.  One foot candle is equal to one lumen per square
foot.  A lumen is the basic measure of the quantity of light emitted by a
source.





   (3)   No sign shall have flashing, scrolling, intermittent,
fluttering, or animated illumination which has changing light intensity,
brightness or color, or simulates movement unless otherwise expressly
permitted with this chapter.





   (4)   No illuminated sign shall be permitted within one hundred
(100) feet of property in any residential district unless the illumination of
such sign is so designed that it does not shine or reflect light onto such
property. Any illuminated sign that is permitted in a residential district
shall not reflect light or shine onto any property in the residential
district except the property on which the sign is located.





   (5)   Illuminated signs shall be shielded so as to prevent beams or
rays of light from being directed at any portion of a public right-of-way or
adjacent property.  Illumination intensity or brilliance shall not cause
glare or impair the vision of motorists, and shall not interfere with any
driver’s operation of a motor vehicle.




   (6)   Any outdoor open-faced sign where the source of illumination
is uncovered or exposed, such as but not limited to, neon tubing, LED
lighting, or other exposed illumination source is prohibited unless otherwise
expressly permitted in this chapter. See Figure 133-3.



Figure 133-3: Example of Open-Lighted Sign







   (7)   All lighting shall meet all applicable state electrical codes.



   (b)   Direct illumination signs. For the purposes of this chapter, a
sign illuminated from an internal light source so that light shines through a
translucent surface or where the silhouette of alphabetic or numeric
characters, symbols, or logos are illuminated as a result of the light source
illuminating the back ground shall be considered a direct illumination sign.
See Figure 133-4:



Figure 133-4: Examples of Direct Illumination Signs



   



   










   (1)   Channel letter type signs may use neon tubing as an internal
illumination source, provided that the light source is shielded by
translucent face or that a silhouette type sign is used where the light
source illuminates the sign background and the letters or symbols are opaque.





   (2)   With the exception of backlit signs, it is recommended that
direct illumination signs consist of light colored letters or symbols on a
dark background to improve visibility.




   (c)   Indirect illumination signs. For the purpose of this chapter,
a sign illuminated primarily by light being directed toward, across, or from
behind and not from within the sign structure is considered an indirect
illumination sign.  See Figure 133-5.



Figure 133-5: Examples of Indirect Illumination Signs



   



   



 



   (d)   Electronic message center (EMC) signs. An electronic message
center (EMC) sign is an electronically activated changeable copy sign that
can be programmed manually or by computer to display message content during a
fixed duration of time. See Figure 133-6.



Figure 133-6: Examples of Electronic Message Center Signs



   



 




     Where electronic message center signs are permitted they must
conform to the following regulations:





   (1)   No sign shall be brighter than is necessary for clear and
adequate visibility and shall not exceed a maximum of 7,500 cd/ m2 during
daylight hours or greater than 750 cd/ m2 between dusk and dawn so as not to
cause glare or impair the vision of motorists, and shall not interfere with
any driver’s operation of a motor vehicle.





   (2)   Such sign shall come equipped and be controlled by either a
combination of a photosensor and a time switch, astronomical time switch, or
other manufacturer installed dimming technology that automatically adjusts
the brightness in direct correlation with ambient light conditions.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-133.5. Historic signs.




   A sign designated as a historic resource by the Historic Resources
Commission shall be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter as to
height, illumination, location, and sign area and may be maintained as
legally conforming signs subject to the following conditions.





   (a)   All parts of the exempted historic sign including neon tubes,
incandescent lights and shields, and sign faces shall be maintained in a
functioning condition as historically intended for the sign to the greatest
degree possible.





   (b)   The wording or image of a historic sign may be altered only if
the alterations do not substantially change the historic dimensions, height,
scale, style, or type of materials of the historic sign.





   (c)   Failure to maintain a historic sign as required above shall be
grounds for disallowing an exemption from the requirements of this Chapter.
The sign shall thereafter be brought into compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter subject to a determination by the Planning Director.





   (d)   Full reconstruction of a historic sign shall require approval
of the Historic Preservation Commission or, in the CBD zoning district, the
Design Commission of the Marion Business Association.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-134. Signs not requiring a permit.




   A permit is not required for the following signs, provided they are not
prohibited as defined in Section 21-4.6, and provided they comply with all
provisions set forth in this chapter. Signs permissible in this section shall
not be considered in determining the total sign area for a property, however,
if a sign exceeds the size or in any other way does not comply with these
limitations, it shall be considered as a prohibited sign and/or shall be
subject to all other provisions in this chapter.





   (1)   A-frame signs. A-frame signs are defined as signs with
two-sides angled vertically that advertise a special sale, event, or feature
that are removed at the close of business each day. This sign type includes
changeable grease boards, black boards, and white boards.





   (a)   When located in the Downtown Overlay (DO) District the
placement of such sign shall be within three (3) feet of the building except
that such signs may be placed no less than two and one-half (2 ½) feet from
the edge of curb where it abuts on-street parking.  A minimum five (5) foot
wide unobstructed pathway shall be maintained to provide free and clear
pedestrian accessibility.  In all other business districts, such signs shall
be located on private property and not within the public right-of-way, and
shall not obstruct the view of motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians.





   (b)   Such signs shall be designed to be visible to and orient
pedestrian traffic, and not intended for viewing by motorists.





   (c)   No more than one (1) per business when fronting a sidewalk and
no more than one (1) per property when fronting a public street.





   (d)   Shall be removed and placed indoors when business is closed.




   (e)   Such signs shall be constructed in an “A-Frame” design and
shall be no greater than three feet (3) wide and six (6) feet in height.




   (f)   Such signs shall be constructed of durable materials to
withstand normal weather conditions. Unfinished and/or untreated plywood or
other material unsuitable for outdoor conditions shall be prohibited.
Spray-painted messages shall be prohibited.





   (g)   Such signs located in the Downtown Overly (DO) District and
having unique artistic qualities that enhance the appearance of downtown but
do not meet the requirements of this section may be approved upon favorable
recommendation by the Marion Business Association.




Figure 134-1: Examples of A-Frame Signs



      



 




   (2)   Building marker signs. A sign cut or etched into the masonry,
or constructed of bronze or similar material on a building.




Figure 134-2: Examples of Building Marker Signs



   



 



   (3)   Construction signs.



   (a)   Construction signs shall be allowed provided such signs do not
exceed one (1) sign per street frontage with a maximum of two (2) signs per
construction site.



   (b)   Non-residential and multi-family construction signs shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and residential construction signs
shall not exceed four (4) square feet in an area.



   (c)   Such signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.



   (d)   Signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building
permit and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.



Figure 134-3: Examples of Construction Signs



   



 



   (4)   Directional Signs.



   (a)   Directional signs must be located on-premises to which
directions are indicated.



   (b)   Directional signs may not exceed four (4) square feet per face.



   (c)   Such signs may contain no copy other than directional
information.



   (d)   No more than two (2) signs per entrance or exit shall be
permitted.



   (e)   A sign larger than four (4) square feet or illuminated shall
require a sign permit and shall be installed in conformance to the state
building code.



   (f)   In addition to such signs, one (1) parking lot informational
sign not exceeding nine (9) square feet shall be permitted identifying the
conditions of use.



Figure 134-4: Examples of Directional Signs



   



 




   (5)   Feather banner. Feather banner is a sign on flexible material
that blows in the wind like a flag and resembles the outline of a feather and
advertises a business, special sale, event or feature.





   (a)   One per property is permitted.





   (b)   Must be removed daily at the close of business.





   (c)   Must be placed on private property outside of the street
right-of-way.





   (d)   Shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation
or sight lines.




Figure 134-5: Examples of Feather Banners



      



 



   (6)   Flags. Flags or insignia of any nation, state, county or
municipality, any religious, civic or fraternal organization, or any
educational or cultural facility provided that the height of the flagpole
does not exceed the maximum building height and includes no more than three
(3) individual poles installed less than one hundred linear feet apart.



Figure 134-6: Examples of Flags



      



 



   (7)   Government signs.



   (a)   Signs posted by various local, state, and federal agencies in
the performance of their duties such as regulatory signs, welcome signs and
traffic signs.



   (b)   Signs installed under governmental authority which note the
donation of buildings, structures or streetscape materials.



   (c)   Any other sign required by local, state, or federal law,
statute or ordinance.



Figure 134-7: Examples of Government Signs



      



 



   (8)   Holiday decorations (temporary). Temporary decorations or
displays are permitted when such are clearly incidental to and are
customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious
holiday or celebration provided that such signs do not create a public safety
hazard or a distraction to motorists.



Figure 134-8: Examples of Holiday Decorations



      



 



   (9)   Incidental signs.



   (a)   On-premise sign that are intended to provide information of a
general directive or are informational in nature, which bears no advertising
matter, and does not exceed two (2) square feet of sign copy area.



   (b)   Such signs shall be attached flush to a building, which may
include windows and doors.



   (c)   Such signs shall not scroll, flash, simulate movement, or
create a distraction to motorists, and shall meet all requirements for
illumination, except that indoor neon signs meeting the provisions for
incidental signs are permitted.



   (d)   Indoor electronic message center signs visible from a public
right-of-way or adjacent property are prohibited except those that conform to
the provisions for incidental signs and the requirements of section 21-135(3)
of this chapter.



Figure 134-9: Examples of Incidental Signs



      



 



   (10)   Legal or warning signs.



   (a)   Signs erected to warn of danger or hazardous conditions such
as signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies.



   (b)   Signs required for or specifically authorized for a public
purpose by any law, statute or ordinance.



   (c)   Signs that display information pertinent to the safety or
legal responsibilities of the general public with regard to a particular
piece of property shall be located on the premises to which the information
pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such sign.



Figure 134-10: Examples of Legal or Warning Signs



      



 



   (11)   Occupant/street number signs. Such signs shall be affixed to
structures, mailboxes, and driveway entrances which serve to identify the
address of the structure or occupant. All such signs shall be placed in such
a manner as to be visible from the street.



Figure 134-11: Examples of Occupant/Street Number Signs



      



 



   (12)   Portable political campaign signs.



   (a)   Political signs shall not be illuminated.



   (b)   Such signs shall be no greater than 864 square inches on NC
Department of Transportation rights-of-way, and in all other locations such
signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in non-residential zoning
districts, and four (4) square feet in residential zoning districts.
Freestanding signs exceeding this size shall be required to obtain a permit
and must comply with regulations for permanent freestanding signs within the
district they are located.



   (c)   No sign shall be higher than 42 inches (four feet) above the
edge of the adjacent roadway as measured from the edge of pavement.



   (d)   Such signs shall not be located within landscaped beds and
shall not be attached to trees or utility poles or on city-owned property,
and shall not be located in a manner that blocks site visibility at street
intersections, obscure motorist visibility, or obstruct another sign.



   (e)   Political signs may be displayed sixty (60) days prior to an
election and removed no later than seven (7) days after the election. In the
event of a runoff election, political signs for the candidates involved may
remain until seven (7) days after the runoff election. Signs not removed
after seven (7) days shall be removed by the City and shall be held for ten
(10) days before being discarded.



Figure 134-12: Examples of Portable Political Campaign Signs



      



 



   (13)   Public art/murals. Any work of art intended for the pleasure
and enjoyment of the public and approved by resolution by the City Council,
and/or recommended by either McDowell Arts Council or the Marion Business
Association.



Figure 134-13: Examples of Public Art/Murals



      



 



   (14)   Real estate signs.



   (a)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



   (b)   Such signs shall be no greater than four (4) square feet in
area and four (4) feet in height (if freestanding) when located on
residential property.



   (c)   Such signs shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square
feet in area and eight (8) feet in height (if freestanding) for
non-residential property.



   (d)   Real estate signs, including “sold” signs, shall be
removed within thirty (30) days of closing of the sale, rental, or lease of
the property.



Figure 134-14: Examples of Real Estate Signs



      



 



   (15)   Stadium and recreational signs. Signs located within a
stadium intended to be read only by the persons seated within the stadium,
and not visible from any public right-of-way outside the stadium.



Figure 134-15: Examples of Stadium and Recreational Signs



      



 



   (16)   Temporary signs. A sign that is used in connection with a
circumstance, situation or event that is designated, intended, or expected to
take place or to be completed within a reasonable short or definite period of
time. Such signs shall be permitted provided the following:



   (a)   Special event signs. Signs may be erected by a public agency,
school, non-profit, civic or other persons(s) approved by the city to hold a
special non-commercial event; or business grand opening, special sale, or
business closing.



      (1)   Such on-premises signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet.



      (2)   Signs larger than four (4) square feet shall be attached
flush to a building, structure, or fence, and shall not be attached directly
to the ground, to a pole, or between two (2) or more poles or similar support
structures.



      (3)   On-premises signs may be erected no greater than thirty
(30) days prior to the event and off-premise non-commercial signs may be
erected no greater than seven (7) days prior to the event; all signs shall be
removed no later than one (1) business day following the event.



      (4)   Signs shall not be illuminated.



      (5)   Signs located shall be located on private property.



      (6)   Off-premise signs shall be limited to no more than one
(1) temporary event sign per property at any one time except that one (1)
additional sign shall be allowed for each additional street frontage.



      (7)   Off-premises signs shall contain no commercial messages.



Figure 134-16(a): Examples of Temporary Special Event Signs



      



 



   (b)   Yard sale signs:



      (1)   Such signs may be located on-premises only and shall not
be located within a public right-of-way nor placed on a tree, street sign or
utility pole.



      (2)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



      (3)   Yard sale signs are limited to four (4) square feet in
area and four (4) feet in height.



Figure 134-16(b): Temporary Yard sale Signs



      



 



   (17)   Vending machine/automatic teller and gasoline pump signs.
Signs attached to and made as integral part of a vending machine, automatic
teller machine, or gasoline pump if advertising or giving information about
the products or services dispensed or vended by that machine.



Figure 134-17: Examples of Vending machine and Gasoline Pump Signs



      



 



   (18)   Window signs and displays.



   (a)   Window displays. Merchandise, pictures, or models of product
or services that are incorporated as an integral part of a window display.



Figure 134-18: Examples of Window Signs and Displays



      



 



   (b)   Window and vehicle signs.



      (1)   Signs which are posted, painted, placed, or affixed to
the interior or exterior of a window.



      (2)   Signs affixed flush to an operational motor vehicle
indicating the name of a business, when the vehicle is not intended to be
used for display of signs.



Figure 134-19: Examples of Window and Vehicle Signs



      



 



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-135. Signs requiring a permit.



   The following signs are allowed subject to the issuance of a permit.



   (1)   Freestanding signs.



   (a)   Single tenant monuments.



      1.   Single tenant monument signs are permitted in all
commercial districts and multi-unit residential community developments with
greater than six (6) units.



      2.   All ground mounted signs shall be located a minimum of
five (5) feet behind the public right-of-way to avoid obstructing visibility.



      3.   Such signs shall not be located ten (10) feet of a side
property line, twenty (20) feet from any public right-of-way intersection, or
within a required clear-site triangle.



      4.   Such signs shall have a solid architectural base that
supports the sign and is comprised of masonry materials.



      5.   Sign display areas shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of
the overall monument. The overall monument including bases and structural
elements shall not exceed eighty-four (84) square feet and an overall height
of seven (7) feet. Except that a monument sign established on a slope will be
calculated from the base at highest adjacent grade. See Figure 135-1 for
calculating measurement of a monument sign. See Figure 135-2 for examples of
a monument sign.



Figure 135-1: Monument Area Measurement







Figure 135-2: Examples of Monument Signs



   



 



   (b)   Multi-tenant and mixed use signs.



      1.   Multi-tenant and mixed-use signs shall be allowed for
multi-tenant commercial, mixed- use, and planned unit developments only.
Individual tenant ground mounted signs are not permitted under this set of
criteria.



      2.   Maximum sign area allowed is one hundred (100) square
feet plus eight additional feet per storefront or office. Including all
structural elements, the maximum height of the sign shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet. Overall monument (armatures, monument, bases, brick or stone
structural elements, etc.) including maximum sign area should not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.



      3.   One multi-tenant sign per primary street frontage shall
be permitted. Additional monuments on secondary road entrances shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet in total area, including all structural
elements.



Figure 135-3: Examples of Multi-Tenant and Mixed Use Signs







 



   (c)   Arm signs.



      1.   Arm signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet, and no
greater than six (6) feet in height from adjacent grade; with the exception
of home occupation signs which shall not exceed two (2) square feet in size,
and no greater than four (4) feet in height from adjacent grade.



      2.   Bottom of sign panels shall maintain a minimum three (3)
feet clearance from grade.



      3.   All arm signs shall be located a minimum of five feet (5)
behind the public right-of-way.



      4.   A ten (10) foot side-yard setback shall be required if
the property abuts a residential district.



Figure 135-4: Examples of Arm Signs







 



   (d)   Changeable copy signs. A sign capable of having changeable
copy, excluding electronic message center signs, for the purpose of
advertising a schedule of events, rules and regulations, or similar messages.



      1.   Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet,
and shall include the name of the on-premises advertiser or co-located with a
sign indicating the advertiser’s name.



      2.   Such signs may be double-sided if it is manufactured in
one (1) enclosed sign cabinet or by means of installation that gives the
appearance of being one (1) sign.



      3.   Such signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet
behind the public right-of-way. At intersections, no sign shall be located
within the clear-site triangle.



      4.   Such sign shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet
to any adjacent lot line. A twenty (20) foot side-yard setback shall be
required if the side yard abuts a residential district.



Figure 135-5: Examples of Changeable Copy Signs








   (e)   Drive-thru menu boards.



      1.   Such signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet and
shall conform to the architectural standards and colors of the building.



      2.   No more than one (1) menu board is permitted per
drive-thru entrance.



Figure 135-6: Examples of Drive-Thru Menu Boards







 



   (f)   Pole-mounted signs.




      1.   Pole-mounted signs shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in sign area, and shall not exceed a maximum height of thirty
(30) feet within the C-2 General Business District and M-1 Industrial
District. Within all other non-residential districts, pole-mounted signs
shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area, and twenty (20) feet in height.





      2.   There shall be no more than two (2) pole mounted signs
permitted per property, except that one additional sign may be permitted at
the entrance of each additional road frontage.





      3.   Such signs, including any structural and/or design
elements, shall not encroach into the public right-of-way. 





      4.   A pole-mounted sign within the C-2 District may exceed
the height and size requirements provided the following conditions are met:





         a.   The property is no less than two (2) acres in size.





         b.   The sign is within a 1,000-foot radius of the
centerline of the I-40 interchange.





         c.   The scale of the sign is in proportion with the
building or site to which it pertains and does not overshadow the building or
surrounding area.





         d.   The sign is consistent with building design and
surrounding structures, and is appropriate to the type of use to which it
pertains. Design elements, such as the size, shape, materials, color,
lettering style, and arrangement of the sign shall present a professional
quality appearance.





         e.   Special circumstances exist that require deviation
from the standard requirements.





         f.   The sign area does not exceed 300 square feet in
size and is no greater than 50 feet in height above the street grade of the
adjacent interstate.





         g.   Such sign is expressly used for the advertising of
interstate dependent businesses (e.g. restaurants, lodging, and/or gas
stations).





         h.   The sign shall not be located within four hundred
(400) feet of another sign that is greater than thirty (30) feet in height.




         i.   The sign application is approved by the board of
adjustment.



Figure 135-7: Examples of Pole-Mounted Signs







 



   (2)   Building mounted signs.



   (a)   Projecting arm signs.




      1.   A projecting arm sign shall maintain a clearance of eight
(8) feet from the bottom of the sign above the finished grade of the
sidewalk, with the exception of home occupation signs which shall not exceed
two (2) square feet in size.





      2.   One projecting arm sign per primary business entrance.





      3.   Such signs shall not project more than four (4) feet from
the wall and shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area.





      4.   Such signs should reflect the proportional and
dimensional relationships of the structure.




      5.   The projecting sign shall not be mounted above the floor
of the second story, parapet wall or eave line of the building.



Figure 135-8: Examples of Projecting Arm Signs







 



   (b)   Canopy awning signs.




      1.   All awnings should be made of a flame-resistant woven
fabric (suggested weight of 9.25 oz. per square yard).





      2.   Pitch may vary, but shall be limited to a minimum of 35
degrees and a maximum of 55 degrees.





      3.   The bottom valance length shall not exceed ten (10)
inches, and shall not be less than nine (9) feet above the finished grade of
the sidewalk.





      4.   All custom screen print shall be professionally designed
and applied to the awning.





      5.   Structural tubing should be steel or aluminum frame only.





      6.   Any variations to the standard awning specifications
shall be approved by the Planning Director upon favorable recommendation by
the Marion Business Association.




      7.   With the exception of pedestrian signs, no other sign
temporary or permanent shall be attached to a canopy awning or support
structure.



Figure 135-9: Examples of Canopy Awning Signs



   



 



   (c)   Building-mounted banner signs.




      1.   One (1) permanently affixed flag or banner shall be
permitted for every five (5) feet of linear building frontage, with no more
than five (5) total per building. 





      2.   Such signs shall be attached perpendicular to the
building and secured using industry standard mounting hardware.





      3.   No individual building mounted banner shall exceed eight
(8) feet in height or three (3) feet in width.





      4.   Such sign shall be located above the first floor level of
the building frontage with the lowest mounting armature no less than twelve
(12) feet above grade.




      5.   No banner or mounting armature shall be attached to any
other existing sign, awning, or other structural apparatus.



Figure 135-10: Examples of Building-Mounted Banner Signs







 



   (d)   Pedestrian canopy signs.



      1.   Pedestrian canopy signs shall be centered under a canopy
or covered walkway, and the bottom of such signs being no less than eight (8)
feet above the pedestrian walkway.



      2.   Such signs shall not exceed three square feet in size.



      3.   No more than one (1) sign per storefront shall be
permitted. 



Figure 135-11: Examples of Pedestrian Canopy Signs







 



   (e)   Wall-mounted signs.




      1.   Such signs shall not have a maximum size limit, with the
exception of home occupation signs which shall not exceed two (2) square feet
in size.





      2.   No wall sign shall project more than eighteen inches from
the building wall.  Further, no wall sign or its supporting structures shall
cover any part of a window, nor shall it extend beyond above the highest
point of the building wall, roof line, parapet, or mansard roof.





      3.   No wall sign shall be attached to any cupola, tower,
chimney, or other architectural structure that is above the roof line.





      4.   A transition line should separate the signage from the
façade below.




      5.   Wall signs should reflect the proportional and
dimensional relationships of the structure.



Figure 135-12: Examples of Wall-Mounted Signs







 



   (3)   Electronic message signs. Electronic message signs are
permitted as a component of otherwise permitted signage subject to the
following regulations.



   (a)   No sign shall be placed within 300 feet of a residential
district or 100 feet of a residential property, except signs that can be
automatically programmed to be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. and have received Special Exception approval by the City of Marion
Board of Adjustment.



   (b)   The message and/or graphic image must be complete during the
duration of the display, without continuation in content to the next image,
message, and/or to any other sign. Transitions from one static message and/or
image to the next shall appear instantaneous without the appearance of
movement of any kind, and take no longer than two (2) seconds to complete.



   (c)   With the exception of regulatory warning signs, all moving
text, graphics, lights creating the appearance of animation, flashing,
scrolling, fading, streaming video, and other forms of motion are prohibited.



   (d)   The message display shall remain static for a minimum of one
(1) minute before transitioning to another static image.



   (e)   All electronic message center (EMC) signs larger than
twenty-four square feet but no greater than one hundred square feet shall be
approved as a Special Exception by the Board of Adjustment. Double-sided
display shall not be calculated individually if the sign is manufactured in
one enclosed sign cabinet or by means of installation gives the appearance of
being one sign.



   (f)   Each static message display shall be limited to one monochrome
color displayed on a solid black background at any one given time and have
pixel line spacing no greater than 20 mm in width. Full color display is
permitted provided such signs have pixel line spacing of 10 mm or less and
shall have an optimal viewing distance (OVD) a minimum of three (3) times the
pixel pitch to the public right of way. The OVD shall be calculated using the
formula: pixel pitch value multiplied by three (3) = setback in linear feet.



   (g)   There shall be no more than one (1) electronic message sign
per property, and shall be wall-mounted, co-located with a larger existing
pole-mounted sign and affixed no greater than ten (10) feet from adjacent
grade, or as an individual monument sign.



   (h)   Such signs which are illuminated or which use electronic
lighting to display message shall be subject to the restrictions and
limitation applicable to illumination in this chapter.



   (4)   Off-premise advertising signs. Any sign identifying,
advertising, or directing the public to a product, service, business or
activity sold, located or conducted primarily elsewhere than on the premises
is permitted in accordance with the following regulations with exception of
off-premise electronic message signs which are prohibited:



   (a)   All off-premises signs.



      1.   Each structure shall have no more than one (1) sign, and
such sign may have doubled-sided display face.



      2.   No off-premise outdoor advertising sign in any location
shall be more than eight hundred (800) feet from a business, commercial or
industrial enterprise located on the same side of the street, road or highway
as the sign.



      3.   No off-premise advertising sign shall be attached to or
painted on any building or structure.



      4.   Notwithstanding all other applicable regulations, such
signs set forth in subsection b. below may be constructed within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any dwelling unit; or such signs set forth in subsection C or
D below may be constructed within five hundred (500) feet of any dwelling
unit provided that the owner of any dwelling unit located within such
distance executes a statement granting express permission for the placement
permitted under this section. Such statement shall refer to the book and page
number on which the deed for the owner's property is recorded in the McDowell
County Registry and said statement shall be properly notarized. A copy of
said statement shall be submitted with application to the zoning
administrator.



      5.   Off-premise advertising signs shall only be illuminated
by an indirect source of light and shall be subject to the restrictions and
limitation applicable to illumination in this chapter.  Electronic Message
Center signs and all other signs designed to emit light from within the sign
face is prohibited, with the exception for government controlled information
and directional signs.



   (b)   Directional signs. Directional signs shall conform to the
standards and provisions of this chapter, except subsection 21-135(4)(a) of
this chapter. Directional signs shall:



       1.   Contain only the name and logo of a business located in
the city limits, with an arrow or other mark to indicate the direction of the
business location and the distance to the business from the sign.



       2.   Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area
per sign face, and may be double-sided.



       3.   Directional signs shall not be located in the
right-of-way and shall have written notarized permission from the property
owner in which the sign is located.



       4.   There shall be no more than one directional sign per
street, and no more than two directional signs providing direction to one
site.



      5.   An off-premises sign directing or assisting the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic associated with an approved temporary use or
civic event shall be considered temporary and shall comply with subsection
21-134(15)(a) of this chapter.



   (c)   Off-premises advertising signs (highway). In addition to
subsection a. above, off-premise advertising signs located where designed to
be visible from any U.S. or N.C. highway shall be permitted if in accordance
with the following:



      1.   Such sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square
feet per sign face, and not exceed thirty (30) feet in height above adjacent
roadway grade.



      2.   Shall be no less than twenty (20) feet from the edge of
right-of-way or no less than thirty (30) feet from the edge of the traveled
way where the right-of-way is unknown.



      3.   Such signs shall be no less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) linear feet (measuring along both sides of the highway) from
any other off-premise advertising sign; no less than five hundred (500) feet
from any intersection of the centerlines of any street; no less than five
hundred (500) feet from any at-grade railroad crossing or any bright; and no
less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any dwelling unit, church or place
of worship, cemetery, school, playground or park located within six hundred
sixty (660) feet of the right-of-way.



   (d)   Off-premises advertising signs (commercial corridor). In
addition to Subsection a. above, off-premises advertising signs located where
designed to be visible from any other road or street shall be permitted if in
accordance with the following:



      1.   Such sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet
per sign face, and shall not exceed thirty (30) feet above adjacent roadway
grade.



      2.   Shall be no closer to the right-of-way than ten (10) feet
from the right-of-way, or no closer than twenty (20) feet from the edge of
the traveled way where the right-of-way is unknown or does not exist.



      3.   Such signs shall be at least one thousand (1,000) linear
feet (measuring along both sides of the highway) from any other off-premises
advertising sign; at least three hundred (300) feet away from any
intersection of the centerlines of any streets; at least three hundred (300)
feet from any at-grade railroad crossing or any bridge, and at least five
hundred (500) feet from any dwelling unit, church or place of worship,
cemetery, school, playground or park located within six hundred sixty (660)
feet of the right-of-way.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-14-11-18-4, § 2, 11-18-14;
Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15; Ord. No. O-16-05-17-1, § 2, 5-17-16)



Sec. 21-136. Prohibited signs.




   In order to maintain the character and the aesthetic quality within the
City of Marion the following signs are prohibited:





   (1)   Signs which contain words or graphics which are obscene, as
that term is defined in G.S. Chapter 15.





   (2)   No sign shall be erected or maintained where by reason of its
position, wording, illumination,  size, shape, or color it may obstruct,
impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any
authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device.





   (3)   Any sign, which obstructs ingress or egress, is located within
a clear-site triangle, creates an unsafe distraction for motorist, or
obstructs the view of motorist entering a public road or highway.





   (4)   Signs, whether temporary or permanent, within any street or
highway right-of-way, with the exception of governmental signage.





   (5)   Signs attached, maintained, painted, or drawn on utility
poles, towers, telephone poles, trees, bridges and overpasses, rocks or other
natural features, benches, or other signs.





   (6)   No signs located in a manner which are designated to be
visible from any road, street or highway, or portion thereof, which is
designated a scenic corridor by the city council shall be permitted.





   (7)   Vehicles used for the sole purpose of displaying signs, and/or
any sign designed to be placed and/or transported on wheels.





   (8)   Signs located on or attached to the roof of a structure,
except as expressly permitted herein.





   (9)   Spectacular signs, flashing arrow signs, or any sign
advertising copy with changeable letters to display a message or advertise,
except as expressly permitted herein.





   (10)   Signs including but not limited to billboards, “snipe” or
“bandit” signs, or those that include people wearing costumes and/or
holding temporary signs, except as expressly permitted herein.





   (11)   Abandoned signs, dilapidated signs, or signs that advertise
an activity or business no longer conducted on the property on which the sign
is located.





   (12)   Signs that incorporate flashing, blinking, strobe lights or
signs with moving parts or parts, which simulate movement.





   (13)   Inflatable signs, aerial signs, or balloons (excluding
standard latex party balloons) that direct attention to a business, product,
service, or other commercial activity conducted, sold, or offered on a
permanent or temporary basis.





   (14)   Permanent or temporary signs placed on property without
permission from its property owner or agent.





   (15)   Any sign or form of lettering attached to, rather than
printed on an awning.





   (16)   Any printed and/or translucent canvas awnings with internal
illumination.





   (17)   Any sign attached to gas pumps or gas pump islands that can
be read from off the property.





   (18)   Portable signs or any other sign having the potential to be
relocated, and which is not permanently installed or permanently anchored to
either the ground, pole, canopy, or other structure except as expressly
permitted herein.





   (19)   All other signs that do not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-137. Sign maintenance.



   All signs, supports, braces, poles, wires and other appurtenances of
signs or sign structures shall be kept in good repair, maintained in safe
condition, and shall conform to the standards in this chapter. Maintenance
carried out in accordance with this section shall not require a sign permit,
provided the sign is not enlarged, moved or altered in any manner which would
create or increase a nonconforming condition.



   (1)   A sign shall be in a state of disrepair when more than twenty
(20) percent of its total surface area is absent, covered with disfigured,
cracked, ripped, peeling paint or poker paper, or any combination of these
conditions. Any sign in a state of disrepair shall be considered in violation
of this chapter.



   (2)   No sign shall be allowed to stand with bent or broken sign
facing, broken supports, loose appendages or struts which cause the sign to
stand more than fifteen (15) degrees from the perpendicular.



   (3)   No sign or sign structure shall be allowed to have weeds,
vines or other vegetation growing on it and obscuring it from the street or
highway from which it is intended to be viewed.



   (4)   No illuminated sign shall be allowed to stand with only
partial illumination.



   (5)    Any sign that violates the maintenance provisions listed
above shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be repaired or removed
as required by the applicable sections of this chapter.



   (6)    No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the
visibility of any sign, damage, trim, destroy or remove any trees, shrubs or
other vegetation located within a public right-of-way of any road or highway,
except where a legal permit for such has been obtained from the City of
Marion and/or the North Carolina Department of Transportation.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-138. Revocation of permit.




   Any valid permit issued for a lawful sign structure shall be revoked by
the zoning administrator for any one (1) of the following reasons:





   (1)   Mistake of material facts by the issuing authority for which
had the correct facts been known, the sign permit in question would not have
been issued.





   (2)   Misrepresentation of material facts by the applicant on the
application for permit for the sign.





   (3)   Failure to pay annual renewal fees.





   (4)   Failure to construct the sign structure within one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of the permit.





   (5)   Any alteration of a sign structure for which a permit has
previously been issued which would cause that sign structure to fail to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the city council pursuant thereto.





   (6)   Any violation of subsection 21-141 of this chapter.





   (7)   Unlawful destruction of trees or shrubs or other growth
located on the right-of-way in order to increase or enhance the visibility of
a sign structure.





   (8)   Abandonment or discontinuance of a sign.





   (9)   Failure to maintain a sign such that it remains blank for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.





   (10)    Failure to maintain a sign such that it reaches a state of
dilapidation or disrepair as determined by the zoning administrator.





   (11)    Making repairs to a nonconforming sign which exceed fifty
(50) percent of the initial cost of the sign. Total repairs within any
twenty-four (24) consecutive months may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the
value of the sign. To avoid liability under this clause, the advertiser
should contact the zoning administrator prior to making any repairs to
discuss the scope of the proposed improvements. The scope of the improvements
is limited to the following: repairing the sign or the sign structure,
replacing broken glass or other work to keep the sign safe and in good repair.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-139. Reconstruction of damaged signs or sign structures.




   (1)    Any conforming sign or sign structure, which has been damaged
may be repaired and used as before, provided all repairs are initiated within
thirty (30) days and completed within sixty (60) days' of such damage.
However, if the sign should be declared unsafe by the zoning administrator,
the owner of the sign or the owner of the record of the real property whereon
the sign is located, shall immediately correct all unsafe conditions in a
manner satisfactory to the zoning administrator.





   (2)    As a courtesy to the sign owner, if the zoning administrator
discovers that a sign has been damaged or is in an unsafe condition, the
zoning administrator will promptly notify the owner of the sign or the owner
of record of the real property whereon the sign is located of such damage or
unsafe condition. The affirmative duty and liability shall, however, at all
times remain with the owner of each sign to keep each sign in a safe and
undamaged condition in keeping with the terms of this chapter.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-140. Value of signs.




   The value of a sign shall be the value for tax purposes of any sign so
listed.  If the tax value is not available, the value shall mean the
original cost of the sign.  In the absence of information as to the original
cost submitted by the sign owner, the zoning administrator shall estimate the
original cost based upon the best information reasonably available.




(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-141. Administration, enforcement, appeals.



   The zoning administrator shall have the following authority:



   (1)   To issue a violation notice for any violation of the chapter.
A violation notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by such other method as allowed by law, to the owner of the
sign in violation of the ordinance. Whenever the owner of the sign cannot be
located and notified, said notice shall be delivered to the owner of record
of the real property whereon the sign is located. The time period provided
herein shall commence upon receipt of such violation notice. The violation
notice shall identify the sign and shall describe the nature of the
violation, refer to the section of the ordinance violated, specify in detail
what action must be taken to correct the violation, and specify a reasonable
time limit of up to thirty (30) days within which the violation must be
corrected.



   (2)   To issue a remove order for any sign or sign structure not
corrected within the time allotted under the violation notice, or for a
prohibited sign under the violation notice, or for a prohibited sign as
established by this chapter. A remove order shall be delivered to the sign
owner or to the owner of record of real property whereon the sign is located
in the same manner as set out for a violation notice and shall not be
effective until received. The recipient of the remove order shall be allowed
thirty (30) days after the receipt of the remove order within which to remove
the subject sign at his expense. The remove order shall identify the sign and
reasons for the issuance of the remove order and shall refer to the section
of the ordinance violated.



   (3)   To remove or cause to be removed any sign or sign structure
not removed in accordance with a remove order after thirty (30) days from
receipt of such order, and to assess the receipt of such order with the cost
of such removal.



   (4)   To issue citations for any violation of this chapter in
accordance with section 1-10 Code Enforcement of the city code.



   (5)   To issue an unsafe sign notice should the zoning administrator
find that any sign has become insecure in imminent danger of falling or
otherwise unsafe. An unsafe sign notice shall be delivered to the sign owner
or to the owner of the record of the real property whereon the sign is
located in the same manner as set out for a violation notice except that the
recipient of the notice shall forthwith in the case of immediate danger and
in any case within ten (10) days, of receipt, secure the sign in a manner to
be approved by the zoning administrator in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter or remove such sign. If the notice is not complied with in ten
(10) days, the zoning administrator shall remove such sign at the expense of
the recipient of the notice.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Sec. 21-142. Amortization of certain signs.



   (1)   Spectacular signs shall become nonconforming in all districts
within one (1) year after the date of adoption of this chapter, at which time
annual permits will expire and shall not be renewed. After the one-year
amortization period, all spectacular signs in the city limits shall be
considered in violation of this section and shall be removed.



   (2)   Portable signs, as defined in subsection 21-136(19), shall
become nonconforming in all districts, unless otherwise specified, as of the
date of adoption of this section and shall be removed within six (6) months
after the date of adoption.



   (3)   Electronic message signs in which illumination level and
duration of display message exceed the standards set forth in this chapter
shall become nonconforming in all districts and shall come into conformance
within (1) year after adoption of this chapter, at which time the sign shall
be brought into compliance. Existing electronic signs that do not have the
functional capability to be programmed to control illumination level and
duration of display may remain so long as they do not create a public safety
hazard.



(Ord. No. O-14-05-06-1, § 2, 5-6-14; Ord. No. O-15-07-21-3, § 3, 7-21-15)



Secs. 21-143--21-155. Reserved.



DIVISION 5.
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS



Sec. 21-156. General provisions.



   (A)    Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to
encourage landscaping throughout the City of Marion hence protecting and
enhancing public and private investments, economic and tourism opportunities
while providing multiple environmental benefits. The landscaping and
buffering standards for new development, as defined in paragraph (C) set
forth below, require landscaping along public rights-of-way, in parking lots,
between residential districts and commercial or industrial districts and
require screening of certain trash containers, in order to:



   (1)   Improve the visual quality of the city and minimize potential
negative impacts of developments such as noise, dust, glare of lights,
parking lots, traffic, heat, overcrowding, and odor.



   (2)   Provide environmental benefits such as climate modification,
decreased energy consumption, reduced impervious surface area and storm water
runoff, decreased erosion, improved water and air quality and protection of
wildlife habitat.



   (3)   Safeguard public and private property values and to protect
public and private investment.



   (B)    Definitions. The following words or terms have the meaning as
herein defined:



   Critical root zone. A circular area surrounding a tree, of which the
center is the center of the tree trunk and the radius is the distance from
the outside of the trunk to any point twelve (12) times the diameter at
breast height (DBH), which points constitute the circumference of the
critical root zone.



   Diameter at breast height (DBH). The total cross-sectional diameter of
the trunk(s) of a tree measured four and one-half (4 ) feet from the ground
at the center of the tree.



   Evergreen. A tree, shrub, or plant having foliage that persists and
remains green throughout the year.



   Groundcover. A prostrate plant growing less than two (2) feet in height
at maturity that is grown for ornamental purposes. Groundcovers are used as
an alternative to grasses. On slopes, groundcovers control erosion while
eliminating the maintenance of mowing on hillsides. Many groundcovers survive
in poor soils, shade and other adverse conditions.



   Planting area. The area prepared for the purpose of accommodating the
planting of trees, shrubs, and groundcovers.



   Residential buffer yard. A row of trees or shrubs reaching a height of
at least eight (8) feet in height so that property is screened visually from
neighboring residential uses. Buffer strips shall be an evergreen species, or
combination of evergreen species dense enough to provide visual screening
from the ground level to the mature height of at least eight (8) feet.



   Shrub. A woody plant, usually multistemmed or well branched from the
base, the branches being retained to the ground. When used for buffer
plantings, shrubs must also reach a mature height between four (4) and
fifteen (15) feet.



   Street buffer. A planting area or strip of land, extending inward from
the curb, edge of street, or property line that runs parallel to a public
street, and is designed to provide continuity of vegetation along the
right-of-way and to soften the impact of development by providing a pleasing
view from the road and a more comfortable pedestrian environment, while
decreasing noise, dust, litter, glare of lights, and stormwater runoff from
impervious surfaces.



   Tree, large. A large tree growing to over forty (40) feet in height at
maturity, usually deciduous that is planted to provide a canopy cover for
shade.



   Tree, small. A small to medium ornamental tree, growing fifteen (15)
feet to forty (40) feet in height at maturity, that is planted for aesthetic
purposes such as colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage.



   (C)    Landscape plan required. A landscape plan is required for:



   (1)   Any new development in the B-1, C-1, C-2, M-1, or OI districts.



   (2)   Any new development in the R-1 or R-2 district with the
exception of single-family, or multifamily developments with less than eight
(8) units.



   (3)   Renovations in the B-1, C-1, C-2, M-1 or OI districts with a
total cost exceeding fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the
building, according to McDowell County tax records, within a
twenty-four-month time period.



   (4)   Expansions exceeding fifty (50) percent of the pre-expansion
floor area or paved surface in the B-1, C-1, C-2, M-1, or OI districts within
a twenty-four-month time period.



   (5)   Existing unpaved parking lots which are paved over or existing
paved lots which are demolished and repaved.



   (D)    Contents of landscape plan and approval process.



   (1)   Applicants are advised to meet with the zoning administrator
prior to submitting a plan in order to discuss applicable landscape
requirements, other ordinance requirements, and coordination with utility
plans.



   (2)   Whenever an application for a zoning permit and/or a building
permit is submitted to the planning and development services department, a
landscape plan shall be submitted if required by section 21-156(3) of this
section. Such plan shall be in sufficient detail to enable the zoning
administrator to determine whether or not such plan, when fully implemented,
will comply with these landscaping requirements. The zoning administrator
shall review the plan and assure compliance with these requirements, and
approve or deny the zoning permit accordingly.



   (3)   A landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain the
location of the streets, street rights-of-way, all existing and proposed
structures, utilities, dumpster (trash container), street yards, planting
areas, screening, vehicular parking areas with individual parking spaces
identified, as well as location of existing and proposed plants and
associated characteristics. Plants shall be identified on plan by species
(common or scientific name,) size and age. Proposed date of planting shall
also be noted on plan. The dimensions of the required street yard and
planting areas shall be identified. The landscape plan may be incorporated
into the site plan as outlined in section 21-273.2 of this chapter. A design
professional seal is required pursuant to Section 302.4 of the North Carolina
State Building Code.



   (4)   Certificate of occupancy. The landscape shall be completely
installed as indicated on the approved plan prior to the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/ occupancy. A conditional certificate of occupancy
may be issued by the building inspector for the temporary use and occupancy
of a building, structure or land for a maximum period of one hundred eighty
(180) days from the date of the issuance of such certificate whenever the
landscaping requirements of this ordinance are not complied with on time. If
the landscaping indicated on approved plans is not completely installed
within one hundred eighty (180) days, the conditional certificate of
occupancy shall expire and further use of the property shall constitute an
illegal use and occupancy of said property.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(707), 01-17-06; Ord No. O-06-05-16-03,  2,
5-16-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  2,
6-17-08; Ord. No. O-09-09-15-6,  2, 9-15-09)



Sec. 21-156.1. General requirements and conditions.



   (A)    Alternate methods of compliance. The landscape requirements
herein are intended to be minimum standards for quality development and
environmental protection and are not intended to be arbitrary or inhibit
creative solutions. An alternative compliance proposal may be used if it is
equal or better than normal compliance in its ability to fulfill the intent
of this article, and exhibits superior design quality. The planning board
shall determine whether alternate method of compliance is equal or better
than normal compliance and that the intent of this chapter has been fulfilled.



   (B)    Safety considerations. Landscaping shall not obstruct the
view of motorists using any street, private drive, parking aisle or other
approaches to street intersections so as to constitute a condition
endangering the public safety upon any such street, driveway, parking aisle
or street intersection.



   (C)    Trees may be planted on the public right-of-way of any public
street provided they have been approved by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation and the City of Marion, and they do not hinder the repair or
construction of public utilities.



   (D)    All required tree planting and landscaped areas shall be
maintained at all times in good, stable and healthy condition.



   (E)    Large trees shall not be planted within fifteen (15) feet
overhead electrical power lines or other overhead utilities.



   (F)    Planting material greater than two and one-half (2 ) feet in
height shall not be planted within the clear visibility triangle without
approval from the zoning administrator pursuant to section 21-88 of the City
Code.



   (G)    Adequate wheel stops or curbs shall be installed for the
protection of required trees and plantings that are adjacent to vehicular
parking, display area, or driveway. Wheel stops or curbs shall be a minimum
of six (6) inches in height and shall be anchored to the ground, and may be
concrete, rot-resistant heavy timber or other effective materials.



   (H)    In most cases, the applicant shall avoid removing existing
vegetation and shall incorporate such vegetation as much as possible in
proposed plan.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(707), 01-17-06; Ord No. O-06-05-16-03,  2,
5-16-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  2,
6-17-08; Ord. No. O-09-09-15-6,  2, 9-15-09)



Sec. 21.156.2. Specific landscaping requirements.



   (A)    Street buffer yard. All land uses to which these landscaping
requirements apply with the exception of properties in the C-1, central
business district, shall provide a street buffer yard along the property.



   (1)   The minimum size requirement for a buffer yard is based on the
following table:



   Table: 21-156.1 Street Buffer Yard Requirement.



 


Street Type

 

Right-of-Way Width (Feet)

 

Buffer Yard Width (Feet)




Two-Lane

 

20 to 50

 

10




Two-Lane/Four-Lane

 

51 or greater

 

20




 



   (2)   Reduced buffer yard on corner lot. Land uses located on a
corner lot contiguous to two (2) public streets may reduce one (1) required
buffer yard width by fifty (50) percent provided that the following
conditions are met:



   a.   All vegetation required prior to the reduction shall be
installed within the buffer yard.



   b.   The reduced buffer yard shall be located on the property deemed
to be the side yard or portion of the property adjoining the lesser of the
right-of-way widths.



   (3)   Impervious surfaces, such as driveways, within a street buffer
yard shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the required street buffer
yard, except that not more than two (2) twenty-five-foot driveways may be
permitted for any lot having a street frontage of less than two hundred (200)
feet in length.



   (4)   The amount of plant material required in a bufferyard area is
measured per every one hundred (100) linear feet and is based on the
following table. Calculations shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.



   Table: 21-156.2 Required Plant Material



 


Bufferyard Type

 

Large Tree

 

Small Tree1

 

Shrub




10-foot wide

 

1

 

2

 

10




20-foot wide

 

2

 

3

 

14




1 Two (2) small trees may be substituted for one (1) large tree.




 



   (5)   Minimum planting sizes required at installation are as follows:



   Groundcover: Two-inch pot.



   Shrubs: Eighteen (18) inches in height, or three-gallon pot.



   Small trees: Five (5) feet in height, one-inch caliper, or seven-gallon
pot.



   Large trees: Eight (8) feet in height, two-inch caliper, or ten-gallon
pot.



   (6)   Minimum tree placement requirements are as follows:



   a.   Large trees. All trees reaching a mature height of thirty-five
(35) feet or more should be planted a minimum of:



   i.   Four (4) feet from the back of the curb, edge of street
pavement, driveway, or sidewalk.



   ii.   Ten (10) feet from all buildings.



   iii.   Fifteen (15) feet from street lights, utility poles, and
above ground utility wires.



   iv.   Ten (10) feet from all underground utilities.



   b.   Small trees. All trees reaching a mature height of less than
thirty-five (35) feet should be placed a minimum of:



   i.   Three (3) feet from the back of the curb, edge of street
pavement, driveway, or sidewalk.



   ii.   Five (5) feet from all buildings.



   iii.   Ten (10) feet from street lights, utility poles, and above
ground utility wires.



   iv.   Five (5) feet from all underground utilities, utility vaults,
ground level utility structures.



   (7)   Parking, merchandise display, off-street loading, and
dumpsters are prohibited in the buffer yard.



   (8)   Signs are permitted in accordance with section 21-131 of this
chapter.



   (9)   Provided the required buffer yard width and landscaping is
maintained, a buffer yard may contain pedestrian and bicycle paths, or other
similar design elements.



   (B)    Vehicular parking areas and display areas.



   (1)   All new parking lots with fifteen (15) or more spaces or
parking lots expanded to add fifteen (15) or more spaces shall be required to
obtain a zoning permit and to comply with this section of the landscape
ordinance.



   (2)   If an existing parking lot is expanded or improved to add
fifteen (15) or more parking spaces, it shall comply with the parking lot
requirements of the landscape ordinance within the expanded or improved
portion.



   (3)   In new or expanded parking lots with fifteen (15) or more
parking spaces; trees shall be planted at a rate of one (1) large tree or two
(2) small trees for every fifteen (15) parking spaces.



   (4)   Required trees shall be located within or adjacent to parking
lots as tree islands, medians, at the end of parking bays, traffic
delineators, or between rows or parking spaces in a manner such that no
parking space is located more than sixty (60) feet from the trunk of a large
tree. A minimum planting area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of soil
surface area shall be required per large tree with a minimum planting area
width of nine (9) feet.



   (C)    Buffers and screening. Any use required to submit a landscape
plan as outlined in this article abutting a residentially zoned district or
residential use within a residentially zoned district must provide a buffer
yard of ten (10) feet in width between the proposed development and the
existing residential district or use. Such buffer yard area shall consist of
a dense and solid row of evergreen trees or shrubs at least eight (8) feet in
height at maturity.



   (D)    Trash container (i.e., dumpsters) screens and/or buffers.



   (1)   It is the intent of this section to provide for a visual
screen and/ or buffers between trash container and dumpster location and all
street rights-of-way and adjoining properties.



   (2)   Trash containers and dumpsters shall not be located in the
front yard of any property and shall be screened from view on all sides,
except for one (1) opening not greater than ten (10) feet in width to allow
for service access. If access is difficult, the public works director and the
zoning administrator shall determine the acceptable location of the dumpster.
Screening may consist of evergreen vegetation growing to over ten (10) feet
at maturity or a solid wood fence. Existing vegetation may be used as an
alternative method of compliance as set forth in subsection (b) of this
section.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(707), 01-17-06; Ord No. O-06-05-16-03,  2,
5-16-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-10,  2,
6-17-08; Ord. No. O-09-09-15-6,  2, 9-15-09)



Sec. 21-157. Tree protection.



   (A)    Protective fencing. Vegetation that is to be protected on
land being developed, as indicated on the approved landscape plan, shall be
protected by temporary fencing or other equally effective measures during
construction activity. All land disturbing activity, storage of equipment,
building material, or other debris shall be kept within the area of
development activity and outside of the protective fencing.



   (B)    Treatment of trees. No nails, ropes, cables, signs, fencing,
streamers, banners or other material shall be attached to any part of any
tree.



   (C)    Public land.



   (1)   It shall be unlawful to:



   a.   Plant, prune, remove, or apply chemicals that are harmful to or
disturb any tree or the soil within the critical root zone of any tree; or



   b.   Clear vegetation, begin any excavation, remove soil or place
fill on any public land or easement owned maintained by the City of Marion.



   (D)    Prohibited trees. It shall be unlawful to plant any invasive
exotic plant material or tree within the City of Marion.



   (E)    Abuse and mutilation of trees. It shall be a violation of
this division to damage, destroy, or mutilate any tree or shrub in a public
right-of-way or any public place.



   (F)    Public hazards. It shall be the duty of the property owner
where a public hazard exists, to abate the hazard by removing or trimming the
growth. If the owner of property, after being notified of the existence of a
public hazard on their property, fails to abate the hazard within thirty (30)
days the City of Marion shall have the hazard abated and assess the exact
cost to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments or
liens.



   (G)    Removal of trees.



   (1)   Trees and shrubs shall not be removed from public property or
public right-of-way or easement without approval from the City of Marion Tree
Board.



   (2)   The city retains the right to remove any tree on any public
street right-of-way or easement owned or maintained by the city which is
necessary to permit the proper maintenance or improvement of the public
street or abate a public hazard.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-6,  2, 9-15-09)



Sec. 21-158. Penalties.



   (A)    Any person(s) constituting a violation of this article
resulting in the loss or destruction of a tree located on public property
shall be subject to a civil penalty equivalent to one and one-half (1 ) times
the monetary value of the tree(s) removed or destroyed plus the cost to
replace the destroyed trees with new tree(s) with a total diameter at breast
height (DBH) equal to that of the destroyed tree(s).



   (B)    Unless otherwise specified, the City of Marion shall enforce
the provisions of this chapter in accordance with procedures, penalties, and
remedies described in section 1-10, code enforcement, of the Marion City Code.



(Ord. No. O-09-09-15-6,  2, 9-15-09)



Secs. 21-159, 21-160. Reserved.



DIVISION 6.
AUTO-RELATED BUSINESS STANDARDS



Sec. 21-161. Automobile repair shops, automobile sales, tire sales and
services, towing business or combination thereof.



   The following regulations shall apply to all automobile repair shops,
automobile sales, tire sales and services, towing and wrecking service
businesses or combination thereof:



   (1)   Open storage of junked or inoperable motor vehicles, auto
parts or similar materials shall not be permitted. Tires may be temporarily
stored for no longer than thirty (30) days in the side or rear yard and shall
be neatly stacked at all times in an organized manner using the lacing
techniques. Up to sixty (60) tires may be stored in the front yard provided
the tires are also neatly stacked using the lacing technique. Tires in the
front yard in excess of sixty (60) shall be enclosed in approved screening.



   (2)   Junked or inoperable motor vehicles, auto parts or similar
materials may be stored within an enclosed structure which visually conceals
such objects or stored on a site that is the subject of an approved screening
plan, as defined herein and approved by the zoning administrator.



   (3)   In order to maintain safety for pedestrian and vehicle
traffic, vehicles associated with automobile repair shops, automobile sales,
tire sales and services, towing and wrecking service businesses may not be
parked, displayed, stored or repaired within four (4) feet of the curb or the
edge of the road if no curb exists.



   (4)   Junked or inoperable motor vehicles shall not be stored in the
customer or employee parking spaces required per the off-street parking
requirements set out in division (2).



   (5)   All service, sales, storage or similar activities shall be
conducted entirely on the premises.



   (6)   All major repair work, if any, shall be conducted within a
building capable of being completely closed.



   (7)   Certain businesses claiming to be auto repair shops,
automobile sales, tire sales and services or towing and wrecking service
businesses that do not meet the definitions in section 21-21 of this chapter
may be deemed gasoline service or filling stations and, therefore, subject to
the regulations governing gasoline service or filling stations.



   (8)   Certain businesses claiming to be automobile repair shops,
automobile sales, tire sales and services, and towing and wrecking service
businesses that do not meet the definitions in section 21-21 of this chapter
may be deemed junk yards and, therefore, subject to the regulations governing
junk yards.



   (9)   The provisions contained in chapter 9, article III concerning
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles continues to apply. Automobile
repair shops and automobile sales businesses, tire sales and services and
towing and wrecking service businesses must obtain a permit from the zoning
office.



   (10)   All automobile repair shops and automobile sales businesses,
tire sales and services and towing and wrecking service businesses within the
city limits of Marion not in compliance with this section within six (6)
months after the adoption of the ordinance adopting or amending this section,
shall be in violation.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(708), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-15-1-20-6, § 1, 1-20-15)



Secs. 21-162--21-170. Reserved.



DIVISION 7.
TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES



Sec. 21-171. Purpose and intent.



   (1)    Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to
permit temporary uses and structures within the city on a controlled,
time-limited basis to minimize adverse impacts on the community. The intent
of this section is to establish specific regulations to allow temporary uses
while eliminating to the greatest possible extent, any problems, threats, or
dangers to the public health, safety or welfare as may exist with any and all
such uses.



   (2)    Permitted temporary uses. Temporary uses shall be limited to
a use or use of land, building, or structure not intended to be of a
permanent duration. Such uses shall be limited to the following:



   (A)   Circuses and/or carnivals.



   (B)   Evangelistic and religious events.



   (C)   Outdoor bazaars, cookouts and/or similar activities by
churches or other nonprofit institutions or organizations.



   (D)   Open lot sale area for farm produce made or grown by the farm
producer or immediate family.



   (E)   Open lot sales area for Christmas trees.



   (F)   Contractors' office and/or construction shed including mobile
offices during construction on the development site.



   (G)   Temporary special sales, yard sale or "flea" markets in
commercial or industrial zoned districts.



   (H)   Yard sales conducted outdoors by a resident in their
respective yard area.



   (I)   Other temporary recreational or entertainment related events
or activities such as fairs or concerts.



   (J)   Temporary relocation of manufactured housing for displaced
persons as a result of natural or manmade disaster.



   (K)   Mobile food vendor, push cart, or similar temporary retail
food sales.



   Itinerant merchants, as defined by the North Carolina General Statutes,
shall not be considered a temporary use pursuant to this section. Itinerant
merchants shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 10, article VII of
the Marion City Code, rather than the regulations of this section.



   (3)    Duration, frequency and permitted zoning districts. The
following table defines the requirements for duration, frequency, and
permitted zoning districts for which a temporary use may occupy a site:



 


Temporary Use

 

Maximum Duration Per Separate Use Per Site

 

Maximum Frequency of Event Per Person or Group Per Site

 

Permitted Zoning Districts






Circuses and/or carnivals

 

Seven (7) days

 

Four (4) per calendar year

 

Any nonresidential zoning district within a distance no greater than two
thousand (2,000) feet from Interstate 40




Circuses and/or carnivals

 

Seven (7) days

 

One (1) per calendar year

 

All other locations nonresidential zoning districts




Evangelistic and related religious congregations

 

Fourteen (14) days

 

Four (4) per calendar year

 

All nonresidential zoning districts.




Outdoor bazaars, cookouts and/or similar activities by churches or other
nonprofit institutions or organizations

 

Three (3) days

 

One (1) every three (3) months

 

All zoning districts




Open lot sales for farm produce

 

Two (2) days

 

Twenty-four (24) per calendar year

 

All commercial zoning districts




Open lot sales for Christmas trees

 

Forty-five (45) days

 

One (1) per year

 

All commercial zoning districts




Contractors' office and/or construction shed including mobile offices during
construction on the development site

 

Between issuance of a building permit and a final certificate of occupancy,
annual renewal is required.

 

None

 

All zoning districts




Temporary special sales, yard sale or "flea" markets in commercial or
industrial zoned districts

 

Two (2) days

 

Four (4) times per year

 

All nonresidential zoning districts




Yard sales conducted outdoors by a resident in their respective yard area

 

Two (2) days

 

Four (4) times per year

 

All residential zoning districts




On-site estate auctions

 

Two (2) days

 

One (1) per year

 

All zoning districts




Other temporary recreational or entertainment related events or activities
such as fairs or concerts

 

One (1) day except fourteen (14) days for an annual event.

 

One (1) per month for one (1)-day events; one (1) per year for fourteen (14)
day events

 

All nonresidential zoning districts




Temporary relocation of manufactured housing for displaced persons as a
result of natural or manmade disaster

 

Eighteen (18) months unless authorized by city council

 

None

 

Within a designated disaster relief area





 



   (4)    Criteria. A temporary use permit may be issued to the owner,
tenant or lessee of any property located within the city. A temporary use
permit may be issued provided the proposed use meets the following criteria:



   (A)   The temporary use must be compatible with the surrounding uses.



   (B)   The temporary use shall not generate noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the
applicable zoning district.



   (C)   If the temporary use is anticipated to draw less than one
hundred (100) people at any given time, then it shall be approved by the
zoning administrator.



   (D)   If the temporary use is anticipated to draw more than one
hundred (100) people at any given time, then it shall be approved by the city
manager. If the event is anticipated to draw over one thousand (1,000)
people, it must be approved by the city council and an application must be
submitted no less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the event.



   (E)   No more than two (2) temporary use permits may be issued at
any given time to the same applicant, unless approved by the city manager.



   (F)   The city shall refuse to issue a permit when the activity or
purpose stated in the application would violate any ordinance of the city or
statue of the state, or when the activity or purpose would constitute a clear
and present danger to public health or safety.



   (5)    Permit required. Any person desiring to conduct a permitted
temporary use, as defined in subsection (2) and (3) above with the exception
of residential yard sales, must first obtain a permit from the city. Such
permit will establish the requirements for the particular use set out in
subsection (C) and (D) below.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this permit is to insure that a
temporary use meets the requirements set out herein and to coordinate
traffic, parking, and other inspections as necessary to the safe and
healthful operation of the event.



   (B)   Application. Application for a temporary use permit shall be
made to the city of Marion at least five (5) business days prior to the start
of such use with the exception of temporary uses requiring city council
approval in which the application must be submitted no less than thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the event.



   (C)   Requirements. A temporary use permit shall not be issued until
evidence is shown that the following requirements have been or will be
complied with:



   1.   The temporary use is permitted under subsection (2) and (3)
above.



   2.   Ample parking is provided for the temporary use, in addition to
required parking for any permanent use or uses located on the same property
as the proposed temporary use.



   3.   Written authorization is given from the property owner or
his/her agent for the temporary use to take place.



   4.   Any temporary use held outside of a building and within five
hundred (500) feet of any residence shall cease operation by 10:00 p.m.



   5.   Noise shall be controlled so that no adjoining property owner
or occupant is unduly disturbed by the temporary use.



   6.   Restroom facilities are provided at a rate of not more than one
hundred (100) persons per toilet seat unless otherwise approved by the county
health officer. All facilities shall be located and screened in a manner not
to be visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent to a residential use.



   7.   All solid waste, human waste and animal waste shall be removed
off-site and transported to an approved sanitary facility pursuant to chapter
9, health and sanitation of the Marion City Code.



   (D)   Additional requirements. The following additional requirements
shall apply:



   1.   Where a tent or similar structure is to be used, the following
requirements or documentation shall be met:



   i.   A limitation on the number of occupants in a structure shall be
observed as per the fire inspector.



   ii.   If a tent is to be used for human occupancy, a certificate of
insurance must be submitted which will cover liability on the part of the
applicant or sponsor in the event of an accident.



   iii.   A certificate of flame resistance shall be submitted which
will provide assurance that the structure has been properly treated with
flame retardant and has been maintained as such.



   2.   Contractors' office and/or construction shed including mobile
offices shall be removed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy.



   3.   Any temporary use deemed by the chief of police to have a
potential risk to health, safety or public order may require the applicant to
provide private protective services.



   4.   Where a mobile food vending unit is to be established the
following requirements shall be met:



   i.   It shall be unlawful for any mobile food vendor to go in or
establish upon private property without consent by the property owner or his
or her designee.



   ii.   Mobile food vendors are prohibited from locating on a public
right-of-way unless otherwise approved by city council.



   iii.   The vending unit may not obstruct at any time any trash
container, fire hydrant, fire lane, ingress or egress to the property, or
building entrance.



   iv.   Extension cords, drop cords, wires, and/or other materials
shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movement.



   v.   The vendor, or his or her designee, shall be in attendance at
the mobile food vendor unit at all times, except in case of an emergency.



   vi.   All vendor equipment and merchandise shall be removed from the
premises or stored from public view during nonoperating hours.



   vii.   The vendor, or his or her designee, shall be removing all
trash generated from mobile food operation at the end of each business day.



   viii.   The vending unit shall be located on property of an existing
business having an active privilege license.



   ix.   The vending unit shall operate only at times concurrent with
the operating hours of the existing business on which the vending unit is
located.



   x.   Mobile food unit or pushcart shall not take up more than one
(1) designated parking space, or ten-foot by ten-foot area.



   xi.   The vending unit operator shall comply with all federal, state
and local laws when operating the unit.



   xii.   The vending unit shall receive all applicable state health
and food safety permits or exemption in writing from the state health
inspector prior to city approval.



   xiii.   No more than one (1) mobile food vendor shall be located on
a site at any one (1) time.



   xiv.   A mobile food vendor shall not be required to obtain a permit
when vending activities are secondary or accessory to an approved temporary
event.



   xv.   All signage associated with the mobile food operation shall be
securely attached flush to the vending unit and shall not be attached to the
ground.



   xvi.   No more than two (2) temporary use permits shall be issued to
a single mobile food vendor without special exception approval by the board
of adjustment.



   xvii.   A violation of this section or any other applicable City
Code shall be cause for immediate revocation of any permit issued pursuant to
this section.



   5.   Additional requirements for mobile food vendors in C-1 central
business district.



   i.   Mobile food vendors are permitted in designated areas of the
C-1 central business district upon approval by the city council.



   ii.   All vendors shall be required to sign and execute a hold
harmless release and agreement for sidewalk and right-of-way obstruction.



   iii.   All vendors shall be required to maintain active liability
insurance and provide documentation of lender's receipt of signed and
notarized release and agreement form.



   iv.   Vendors shall operate from a mobile pushcart capable of being
moved manually by no more than one (1) person.



   v.   Mobile food vendors shall be prohibited from blocking
pedestrian access along any sidewalk and shall allow a minimum clearance of
four (4) feet between the pushcart and the edge of road.



   vi.   Vendors are permitted to operate between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   vii.   Vendors shall be responsible for removing equipment and
merchandise when not in operation.



   viii.   The vendor, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for
removing all trash at the close of each business day and shall not place
trash associated with the vending operation in public trash receptacles.



   ix.   Generators, noise generating devices, or any other attention
getting device that may, by virtue of its design, create a distraction to
motorists, pedestrians, or adjacent properties shall be prohibited.



   x.   All mobile food cart units shall be self-contained and not
require the use of ancillary power from any secondary source in order to
operate.



   xi.   The City of Marion shall not provide power to a mobile food
unit as part of the approved mobile food vendor permit application.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(709), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-11, § 3, 6-17-08; Ord. No. O-09-08-4-3, § 3,
8-4-09; Ord. No. O-10-08-17-2, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. O-12-09-18-3, § 2,
9-18-12; Ord. No. O-14-07-15-01, § 2, 7-15-14)



Sec. 21-172. Temporary structures.



   A temporary structure not associated with an approved temporary use
shall be permitted on a limited basis, provided that it meets the
requirements of the zoning district it is located in and complies with the
provisions of this section.



   (A)   Placement.



   (1)   Temporary structures shall be permitted within all
nonresidential zoning districts, except the C-1 central business district;



   (2)   There shall be no more than two (2) temporary structures per
acre or three (3) temporary storage units per lot whichever is less;



   (3)   [Temporary structures] shall not be located within the front
yard setbacks and shall be adequately screened from the public right-of-way
and from all adjacent property;



   (4)   [Temporary structures] shall not be stacked;



   (5)   [Temporary structures] shall not be modified by adding
windows, electrical, plumbing or mechanical improvements and/or used for
permanent occupancy or habitable space;



   (6)   [Temporary structures] shall not be used to store solid waste,
debris, hazardous or toxic materials, or used to store materials or goods for
property other than at the site where the structure is located.



   (B)   Time limit.



   (1)   The maximum time for a temporary structure to remain on a
property shall be thirty (30) consecutive days with a maximum of two (2)
permits in a twelve-month period per lot if not in conjunction with an active
building permit for construction as specified in this section.



   (2)   Temporary structures shall be removed prior to any final
inspections for the building permit or issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   (C)   Maintenance. The temporary structure shall remain in good
condition, free from evidence of deterioration, rust, holes, cracks, or
breaks. When not in use the temporary structure shall remain locked.



   (D)   Existing structures. Temporary structures existing prior to
the effective date of Ordinance No. O-08-06-17-11, and have not received
approval from the City of Marion, may continue subject to section 21-71,
nonconformities, providing the following:



   (1)   The structures are not located within any required setback,
bufferyard or parking area;



   (2)   The structures are not connected to electric or water
utilities;



   (3)   Existing structures are registered with the planning and
development department within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective
date of the ordinance and renewed annually thereafter; and



   (4)   This section shall not apply to structures that have received
an official approval from the building inspector for the installation as a
permanent structure.



   (E)   Inspections. The city may inspect the contents of any
temporary structure at any reasonable time to ensure that it is not in
violation of this section or with all other applicable sections of the Code.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(709), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-06-17-11,  3, 6-17-08; Ord. No. O-09-08-4-3,  3,
8-4-09)



Secs. 21-173--21-180. Reserved.



DIVISION 8.
ACCESSORY USES



Sec. 21-181. Swimming pools.



   All swimming pools both public and private shall be completely enclosed
by a solid wall or chain link fence at least six (6) feet in height. Swimming
pools shall be located only in rear or side yards and shall be at least ten
(10) feet from the property line.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(710), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-182--21-195. Reserved.



DIVISION 9.
CAMPGROUND STANDARDS



Sec. 21-196. Campgrounds.



Sec. 21-196.1. Purpose.



   The purpose of this section is to regulate and guide the establishment
of campgrounds in order to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Marion, North Carolina. This section is designated
to accomplish the following specific objectives:



   (1)   To further the orderly layout of travel trailer parks and
campgrounds;



   (2)   To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;



   (3)   To provide adequate light and air; and



   (4)   To ensure that facilities for transportation, parking, water,
sewage, and recreation are provided for campground visitors.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  2, 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-196.2. Permit required.



   No person, firm or corporation shall construct a new travel trailer
park or campground or alter or expand an existing travel trailer park or
campground unless such person, firm or corporation holds a valid zoning
permit. Such permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator after special
exception approval of the board of adjustment.



   (1)   Fees. Fees for construction permits shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each permit plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each campsite
proposed.



   (2)   Application. All applications shall be submitted in compliance
with subsection 21-303.2., special exceptions.



   (3)   Development time frame. When a campground is to be developed
in phases, an application may be submitted for the entire development and a
zoning certificate of compliance may be made for each phase of development.
If the construction of the campground has not begun within twelve (12) months
from the issue date of the zoning permit or within twelve (12) months after
each subsequent certificate of compliance, the board of adjustment may grant
an extension of the special exception approval if the applicant appears
before the board and shows cause.



   When a campground is developed in phases, the location and description
of each phase must be included in the application for special exception to be
considered for approval.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  2, 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-196.3. General requirements.



   (1)    All campgrounds shall have a gross land area of ten (10)
acres or greater and contain a minimum of fifteen (15) camper spaces.



   (2)    A minimum of ten (10) percent of the total land area shall be
devoted to accessible common open space for recreational use. These areas
shall be separate from camper spaces, and shall be grouped and suitable for
active and passive recreation and shall be reasonably located for safe and
convenient access to campground residents.



   (3)    No more than one (1) travel-trailer may be parked on any one
(1) space. Campers shall not be permitted on parcels, lots, or other areas
not approved through these regulations.



   (4)    Pursuant to the N.C. State Building Code, each campground
shall have at least one (1) service building to provide necessary sanitation
and laundry tray. This structure may also contain a retail sales counter
and/or coin-operated machine for the campground residents use, provided there
is no exterior advertising. Vending machines also may be permitted in a
sheltered area. All service buildings shall be provided and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition and kept in good repair at all times. They shall
be safely and adequately lighted. Facilities shall be ADA accessible and
conveniently located. All buildings and structures shall be constructed in
accordance with the N.C. State Building Code, and all applicable requirements
of the Marion City Code.



   (5)    No swimming pool or bathing area shall be installed, altered,
improved, or used without compliance with applicable McDowell County Health
Department regulations and approvals.



   (6)    The campground owner/operator is responsible for providing a
central location for refuse collection and shall adequately screen and buffer
such location from campground residents and campsites. Storage, collection
and disposal of refuse shall be managed as not to create health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident, fire hazards, or air
pollution. The location of on-site refuse facilities and collection schedule
shall be approved by the Marion Public Works Solid Waste Department prior to
zoning approval.



   (7)    It shall be unlawful to park or store a manufactured home in
a campground. However, one (1) manufactured home or other permanent residence
may be allowed within the campground to be used by persons responsible for
the operation and/or maintenance of the campground.



   (8)    All campgrounds must comply with zoning regulations for signs
within the zoning district they are located.



   (9)    All camping units must be placed individually on approved
camper spaces where all design standards and utilities have be completed and
a certificate of compliance has been issued.



   (10)    Junked, wrecked or inoperable vehicles and/or
travel-trailers are prohibited in campgrounds.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  2, 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-196.4. Design standards.



   (1)    Off-street parking.



   (A)   One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided and
maintained for each camper space. Required parking spaces may be included
within the minimum required space area for each camper space.



   (B)   One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided
for every two hundred (200) square feet of office space and one (1) space for
each campground employee.



   (2)    Ingress and egress. No camper space within the campground
shall directly access a public road. Access to all campers and accessory
structures within the campground shall be made using internal streets.



   (3)    Internal streets.



   (A)   One-way or two-way streets shall be used throughout the
campground. One-way streets shall have a minimum width of sixteen (16) feet.
Two-way streets shall have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet. Such
streets shall be well maintained and clearly identified. All streets within
the campground shall be privately owned and maintained. Each camper space
shall abut an internal street within the campground.



   (B)   All internal streets that dead-end shall provide a permanent
forty-foot-wide radius turnaround to accommodate travel trailers and
emergency response vehicles.



   (C)   Maintenance of all internal streets and drainage facilities
shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or operator of the campground.
Such streets shall be maintained in a manner to be free from pot holes,
breaks in the pavement, rough surfaces, ponding of water and associated
problems that would impede or cause hazards to motor vehicles.



   (D)   Campgrounds shall not be located on through lots unless the
campground is designed in a manner, which does not encourage motorists from
using the campground as a means of traveling from one (1) public street to
another. Campgrounds requiring only one (1) entrance and exit area shall
provide at least one (1) permanent turnaround within the campground.



   (4)    Travel trailer campground space standards.. The following
minimum space requirements take into account the need for adequate space to
prevent overcrowding, prevent fire hazards, and to provide sufficient light
and air.



   (A)   No space shall have direct vehicular access to a public road.



   (B)   Each space shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from
the centerline of any public road.



   (C)   Each space shall be a minimum of one thousand two hundred
fifty (1,250) square feet and a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width.



   (D)   Each space shall be identified by a permanent number that is
displayed on each space. Each number shall be placed on concrete, wood,
metal, or any permanent post and conspicuously located on the space.



   (5)    Utility requirements. Each space shall have access to public
water and sewer with quick disconnect. Adequate and safe sewage disposal
facilities shall be provided in all campgrounds. A public sewage disposal
system and sewage treatment plant complying with the requirements of the
North Carolina Department of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources shall
be provided in every campground. Individual septic tank systems are not
permissible. Sewage dumping stations shall be approved by the Marion Public
Works Department. Each campground shall provide a minimum of one (1) sewage
dumping station for each one hundred (100) camper spaces, which are not
equipped with individual sewer and water connections. Each campground shall
also provide a sewer outlet to accommodate any dependant campers for emptying
containers of human waste. No method of sewage disposal shall be installed,
altered, or used without the approval of the Marion Public Works Department.



   (6)    Buffering. A minimum ten-foot wide vegetated buffer strip
shall be installed and maintained around the perimeter of the campground
property boundary. This strip shall be free of all encroachment by buildings,
parking/camper areas or impervious coverage.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  2, 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-196.5. Registration of occupants.



   (1)    Every campground owner or operator shall maintain an accurate
register containing a record of all occupants and owners of campers in the
campground. The register shall be available for inspection at all times by
authorized city officials. The register shall contain the following
information:



   (A)   Name and address of the occupants of each space.



   (B)   Camper space number.



   (C)   Date when occupancy within the campground begins and the date
when occupancy within the campground ceases.



   (2)    No camper space shall be used as a permanent place of
residence. Any action toward removal of wheels of a camper except for
temporary purposes or repair or any action that attempts to permanently affix
a travel trailer to a camper space is hereby prohibited.



   (3)    No travel trailer or occupant of a travel trailer shall be
permitted within a campground for longer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days within a twelve-month period.



   (4)    All travel trailers or other similar vehicles or devices
shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  2, 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-196.6. Inspection.



   The City of Marion Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized public
official is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are
necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this section. In
connecting to city water and sewer, it shall be the duty of campground owners
or operators to give free access to such premises at reasonable times for
inspections.



   The person to whom a permit for a campground is issued shall operate
the campground in compliance with this section and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the campground, its facilities and equipment in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. Failure to comply with this
section may result in revocation of the zoning permit by the planning and
development services director.



(Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  2, 1-15-08)



Secs. 21-197--21-200. Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII
USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT



Sec. 21-201. Intent.



   It is the intent of this article that if any use or class of use is not
specifically permitted in a district as set forth below, it shall be
prohibited in that district.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(800), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-202. R-1 single-family residential district.



Sec. 21-202.1. Intent.



   The R-1 single-family residential district is established as a district
in which the principal use of land is for single-family residential purposes.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(801), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-04-15-2,  2, 4-15-08; Ord. No. O-07-08-18-2,  2,
9-18-07)



Sec. 21-202.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the R-1 single-family residential district, a building or land
shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Single-family dwellings (excluding mobile homes).



   (2)   Multifamily dwellings provided that:



   (A)   Multifamily dwellings are created only within existing
residential structure.



   (B)   Adequate off-street parking shall be available as provided in
section 21-86.



   (C)   The owner of the multifamily dwelling must live on the
premises.



   (D)   There shall be no more than two (2) separate units created
within any residential structure.



   (E)   A zoning compliance certificate must be obtained from the
zoning administrator.



   (3)   Churches or similar places of worship, including single-family
parish houses or parsonages. A columbarium is permitted as an accessory use
provided that such use is located on the same lot as the church and located a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjacent residential property.



   (4)   Golf courses, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, community
centers, country clubs, civic clubs and lodges operated on a noncommercial or
nonprofit basis for recreational purposes only.



   (5)   Public elementary, junior high school, high school and private
schools having a similar curriculum, but not trade schools.



   (A)   Buildings designed to be mobile or equipped with hitch
apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights or other factory-assembled
unit built on a chassis shall be prohibited.



   (B)   All buildings and structures are in keeping with the
residential character of the neighborhood.



   (C)   Adequate landscaping, screening and/or buffering shall be
provided to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood.



   (6)   Public utility buildings and facilities if such use is
essential for the service of the immediate area and provided that:



   (A)   All building shall be located at least thirty-five (35) feet
from side and front lot lines and ten (10) feet from rear lot lines.



   (B)   Fences and/or other appropriate safety devices are installed
to protect the public safety and welfare.



   (C)   No vehicles or equipment are stored, maintained or repaired on
the premises.



   (D)   All structures are in keeping with the residential character
of the neighborhood.



   (E)   Adequate landscaping, screening and/or buffering shall be
provided to insure compatibility with the neighborhood.



   (7)   Customary incidental home occupations as defined in article
IV, section 21-21 of this chapter and subject to all conditions stated
therein, provided there is no external evidence of such occupation except an
announcement or professional sign not more than two (2) square feet in area.



   (8)   Customary accessory buildings, including private garages and
noncommercial workshops and greenhouses, provided that:



   (A)   Such buildings shall be located in the rear yard and shall
comply with all applicable setback requirements of this section and of
article IX of this chapter.



   (B)   No accessory building on a corner lot shall extend beyond the
front yard line required for abutting property on the side street.



   (C)   No greenhouse heating plants shall be located within
twenty-five (25) feet of any lot line.



   (9)   Carports shall be allowed in the rear yard of the principal
building but they shall not be allowed within one (1) foot of the side and
rear property lines nor shall they be constructed so as to not drain onto
adjoining property (refer to article X, exceptions and modifications).



   (10)   Patio home developments: A development consisting of
individual lots (having a minimum of sixty (60) feet in width and seven
thousand (7,000) square feet in area) which are designed for detached
single-family housing to allow the use of the patio home concept. Prior to
development each individual lot must be approved and platted in accordance
with chapter 16 of the Marion City Code (subdivision regulations) and
described by metes and bounds. The plats(s) for patio home developments must
show the location of all proposed buildings and patio walls to be located on
each lot. The plat(s) and metes and bounds description(s) must be recorded in
the office of the register of deeds for McDowell County, North Carolina,
following final plat approval of said development by the Marion City Council.
In addition to standards provided in the subdivision regulations, the
following standards shall also apply to patio home developments:



   (A)   The ground floor area of principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area.



   (B)   All patio home sites must abut either a publicly dedicated
street or a driveway of not less than twenty-one (21) feet in width and one
hundred fifty (150) feet in length. All driveways shall have unobstructed
access to a public street or highway.



   (C)   The patio wall set back must be a minimum of two (2) feet from
the property line. All other setbacks shall meet the provisions of this
chapter. No principal building shall be closer than twelve (12) feet to each
other.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(801), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-04-15-2,  2, 4-15-08; Ord. No. O-07-08-18-2,  2,
9-18-07)



Sec. 21-202.3. Special exception.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, planning and zoning board, section 21-303, powers and duties
of the board, subsection 21-303.2, special exceptions.



   (1)   Bed and breakfast homes, provided that:



   (A)   The business does not serve food or drink to the general
public for pay.



   (B)   The business serves only the breakfast meal, and that meal is
served only to overnight guest.



   (C)   The room rates include the price of the breakfast.



   (D)   The business is the permanent residence of the owner or
manager.



   (E)   One (1) off-street parking space be provided for each
accommodation (rented bedroom) plus two (2) spaces for the owner/manager.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(801), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-04-15-2,  2; 4-15-08; Ord. No. O-07-08-18-2,  2,
9-18-07)



Sec. 21-203. R-2 neighborhood residential district.



Sec. 21-203.1. Intent.



   The R-2 neighborhood residential district is established as a district
in which the principal use of land is for residential purposes.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(802), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02, § 2,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 2,
1-20-15)



Sec. 21-203.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the R-2 neighborhood residential district, a building or land
shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   All permitted uses in the R-1 single-family residential
district.



   (2)   Multifamily dwellings of eight (8) units or less.



   (3)   Rooming and boarding houses.



   (4)   Cemeteries.



   (5)   Day nurseries and kindergartens.



   (6)   One (1) Class A manufactured home per residential lot,
provided that:



   (A)   It is the principal structure on the lot, and no other
residential structure is located on the same lot;



   (B)   The manufactured home shall have a minimum width of
twenty-four (24) feet and a maximum length not to exceed four (4) times its
width, and a minimum gross floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet;



   (C)   The towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights
shall be removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy and shall
not be included in the length and width measurements of the manufactured home;



   (D)   The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
building inspector that the manufactured home was built after June 15, 1976
in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act.  The applicant may evidence of the construction date of the
home and compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act using one (1) of the following methods:



   (1)   A HUD seal mounted on the outside of the home; or



   (2)   An original HUD data plate on the inside of the home; or



   (3)   A third party inspection report by a state licensed engineer
or architect; or



   (4)   A verification letter from either the manufacturer or the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development demonstrating the
home’s compliance with this subsection.



   (5)    A Certificate of Title issued by an official State Department
of Motor Vehicles (DMV) office that indicates the date of manufacture of the
home.



   (E)   The manufactured home complies with all other municipal
building and zoning codes, and is set up in accordance with the standards
established by the North Carolina Department of Insurance;



   (F)   The longest axis dimension of the manufactured home shall be
oriented parallel with the front property line along a street.  The
placement of a manufactured home on a corner lot shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator based on the orientation of existing single-family
dwellings located on either side of the street on both intersecting streets;



   (G)   The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent masonry
foundation that meets or exceeds the standards of the North Carolina
Residential Building Code and such foundation walls shall be unpierced except
for normal ventilation and access openings. Exposed common concrete block
shall be covered by brick, stone, stucco, or other masonry or exterior veneer
façade commonly used in standard residential construction;



   (H)   The exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl,
aluminum, wood, hardboard, or other non-reflective material comparable in
composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used
in standard residential construction;



   (I)   The roof shall have a vertical rise of at least three (3)
inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run, shall be a Class 'C' as
defined by the North Carolina Building Code or better material that is
commonly used in conventional residential construction, and shall provide an
eave projection of no less than six (6) inches, which may include a gutter;



   (J)   All attachments, including but not limited to stairs, steps,
porches, decks, and/or other additions to the manufactured home, shall meet
or exceed the standards of the North Carolina Residential Building Code;



   (K)   Structural additions that alter the original shape of the
structure shall be architecturally compatible with the original building, and
have exterior siding and roofing with the color, material and appearance
similar and complimentary in appearance to the predominant materials used in
the original manufactured home construction or materials commonly used in
conventional residential construction. Unfinished metal roofing and/or siding
shall be prohibited;



   (L)   The manufactured home shall not be permitted within three
hundred (300) feet of any structure listed as a locally designated historic
landmark or U.S. Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic
Places; or located within a locally designated historic district, U.S.
Department of Interior’s National Register Historic District, or in an area
listed as a Traditional Neighborhood on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan’s
Future Land Use Map, as may be amended; and



   (7)   Armory facility.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(802), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02, § 2,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 4,
1-20-15; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-203.3. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, subsection 21-303.2 of this chapter:



   (1)   Radio and television transmitting stations and studios
provided that:



   (A)   Such facilities shall be housed in structures which are in
keeping with the character of the residential neighborhood.



   (B)   No structure shall be located within thirty-five (35) feet of
any lot.



   (C)   Adequate landscaping, screening and/or buffering shall be
provided to insure compatibility with the neighborhood.



   (2)   Manufactured home parks subject to the following requirements:



   (A)   Class A and Class B manufactured homes are permitted within a
manufactured home park.  Class C manufactured homes, travel trailers, park
models, and/or any other vehicle that does not meet the U.S. Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Department Standards for manufactured home
construction and not already existing at the time of the effective date of
this ordinance are prohibited.  Each manufactured home within a park shall
be located in a designated manufactured home site; 



   (B)   The minimum area for a manufactured home park shall be two (2)
acres;



   (C)   The maximum density shall be eight (8) manufactured home sites
per acre;



   (D)   No less than five (5) manufactured home sites shall be
delineated on an approved site plan and made available at first occupancy;



   (E)   The minimum lot size for individual manufactured home site
shall be forty (40) feet by eighty (80) feet;



   (F)   Each manufactured home including structural additions shall be
spaced no less than ten (10) feet apart except where the NC Department of
Insurance requires greater separation, the stricter provision shall apply;



   (G)   All manufactured home sites shall abut upon a driveway of not
less than twenty (20) feet in width.  All driveways shall have unobstructed
access to a public street or highway and shall be hard surfaced, or of
properly compacted gravel, well marked and lighted by the mobile home park
owner;



   (H)   There shall be a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces
for each manufactured home site, which shall be on the same site as the
manufactured home served;



   (I)   A densely planted buffer yard, consisting of evergreen trees
shall be located along all sides of the manufactured home park, but shall not
extend beyond the established setback line along any street.  The buffer
yard shall include evergreen species that reach no less than twelve (12) feet
at mature height. Minimum plant size and installation shall conform to the
landscape standards of this chapter.  This planting requirement may be
modified by the board where adequate buffering exists in the form of
vegetation and/or terrain;



   (J)   Each manufactured home shall be set up and in accordance with
regulations for the installation of manufactured homes adopted and published
by the North Carolina Department of Insurance;



   (K)   Each manufactured home or manufactured home site shall have a
county-issued 911 address plaque or other city approved permanent address
plaque identifying the home’s physical address prominently displayed and
visible from the driveway;



   (L)   The towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights
shall be removed after placement on the lot and prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy and shall not be included in the length and width
measurements of the manufactured home;



   (M)   The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
building inspector that the manufactured home was built after June 15, 1976
in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act.  The applicant may evidence of the construction date of the
home and compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act using one (1) of the following methods:



   (1)   A HUD seal mounted on the outside of the home; or



   (2)   An original HUD plaque on the inside electrical panel of the
home; or



   (3)   A third party inspection report by a state licensed engineer
or architect; or



   (4)   A verification letter from either the manufacturer or the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development demonstrating the
home’s compliance with this subsection.



   (5)    A Certificate of Title issued by an official State Department
of Motor Vehicles (DMV) office that indicates the date of manufacture of the
home.



   (N)   Each manufactured home shall have a continuous underpinning of
either masonry materials or other products suitable for the purpose of
underpinning and installed under the perimeter, unpierced except for required
ventilation and access prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy;



   (O)   Exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl, wood,
hardboard, or other non-reflective material comparable in composition,
appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard
residential construction including but not limited to manufactured home
construction;



   (P)   All attachments, including but not limited to stairs, steps,
porches, decks, and/or other additions to the manufactured home, shall meet
or exceed the standards of the North Carolina Residential Building Code;



   (Q)   Structural additions that alter the original shape of the
structure shall be architecturally compatible with the original building, and
have exterior siding and roofing with the color, material and appearance
similar and complimentary in appearance to the predominant materials used in
the original manufactured home construction or materials commonly used in
conventional residential construction. Unfinished metal roofing and/or siding
shall be prohibited; and



   (R)   The grounds of a manufactured home park shall be kept free of
trash, liter, and debris.  Grounds, buildings, and storage areas shall be
properly maintained to prevent the infestation of rodents, vermin, and
insects.  It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park owner
to maintain the park in accordance with these standards and all other
applicable Marion City Code requirements at all times.



   (3)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, group care facilities
and medical and dental offices and clinics not used primarily for the
treatment of contagious diseases, alcoholics, or drug addicts.



   (4)   Funeral homes.



   (5)   Public safety/emergency related facilities provided that a
20-foot vegetative buffer is approved by the board of adjustment after
receiving tree-planting recommendations from the City of Marion Tree Board.



   (6)   Planned unit developments, in accordance with the requirements
in section 21-255.



   (7)   Restaurants in historic structures serving the general public
subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   A site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator
showing the proposed layout including property lines and dimensions with
North arrow; location, use and dimensions of all buildings; drives, easements
and right-of-way; off-street parking areas showing methods for lighting;
buffers, screens and fences; solid waste disposal facilities showing location
and buffering, and such other information as may be essential for determining
whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed.



   (B)   The structure shall be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places at the time of the application.



   (C)   All rehabilitation shall be done in accordance with the
"Secretary of Interior's Guidelines for Historic Preservation."



   (D)   All landscaping, parking and site improvements shall preserve
the historic character of the structure.



   (E)   All mechanical systems and solid waste storage facilities
shall be properly screened so as not to be visible from adjacent property.



   (F)   One (1) freestanding sign not to exceed nine (9) square feet
in size and eight (8) feet in height shall be allowed.



   (G)   Outbuildings should be preserved if of an historical
significance.



   (H)   The structure shall be located on a lot of at least ten (10)
acres.



   (I)   No outside lighting shall direct light on adjacent property.



   (J)   All parking areas shall be properly screened so as not to be
visible from adjacent property.



   (8)   Townhouses and condominiums.



   (9)   Accounting and attorney offices.



   (10)   Real-estate offices.



   (11)   Thrift/retail stores operated on the premise and as an
accessory use of a nonprofit organization provided that:



   (A)   The nonprofit organization is expressly permitted in the R-2
district.



   (B)   The store shall not be open from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and
shall not be open for more than two (2) days per week.



   (C)   Off-street parking is provided per section 21-7.2, off-street
parking requirements.



   (D)   Only one (1) on-premises freestanding sign shall be permitted
and it shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area.



   (12)   Senior housing.



   (13)   Accounting, attorney, real-estate, fundraising, and marketing
offices provided:



   (A)   The land use is located on a collector street, minor or major
thoroughfare, and not located on a local residential street, except if
located on a corner lot with a side yard contiguous to other said roadways.



   (B)   All parking areas are located on the side of the property and
setback equal to the front building line of the primary structure, or in the
rear of the property. 



   (C)   With the exception of an approved driveway and/or pedestrian
walkways, the front or side yard facing the residential street shall remain
as open space and include a maintained lawn, landscaping, or combination of
both in addition to all other landscaping requirements within this chapter.



   (D)   All outdoor lighting shall be fully-shielded, compatible to
outdoor lighting found within a residential area, and shall not direct light
onto adjacent property.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(802), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02, § 2,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-13-06-18-3, § 2,
6-18-13; Ord. No. O-15-01-20-2, § 5, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-204. C-1 central business district.



Sec. 21-204.1. Intent.



   In order to protect and improve the main shopping area of Marion and to
discourage uses which do not require a central location and which are not
compatible with the function of the area as the primary shopping and office
area a central business district is hereby established.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(803), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02,  3,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-204.2. Permitted uses.



   The following uses are permitted within the C-1 central business
district:



   (1)   Appliance sales and services.



   (2)   Automobile parking lots and structures.



   (3)   Automobile sales.



   (4)   Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at retail on
the premises.



   (5)   Banks and other financial institutions including loan and
finance companies.



   (6)   Barber and beauty shops.



   (7)   Billiard and pool hall, video game parlor or other coin
operated amusement or recreational machine parlor accessory to a principal
use.



   (8)   Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art schools,
music and dance studios and similar uses, but excluding industrial or
vocational trade schools.



   (9)   Bus stations.



   (10)   Churches.



   (11)   Civic and fraternal organizations.



   (12)   Commercial parking lots.



   (13)   Construction office, temporary (see section 21-21).



   (14)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.



   (15)   Public safety/emergency related facilities.



   (16)   Florist shop, but not commercial greenhouses.



   (17)   Food stores, retail only.



   (18)   Funeral homes.



   (19)   Furriers and fur storage.



   (20)   Gasoline service stations (provided that petroleum
derivatives in excess of five hundred (500) gallons are not stored
aboveground).



   (21)   Hotels.



   (22)   Libraries, museums and art galleries.



   (23)   Locksmith and gunsmiths.



   (24)   Newspaper offices and printing plants incidental to such
offices.



   (25)   Office supplies and equipment, sales and services.



   (26)   Offices - business, professional and public (including
doctors, dentist, etc.).



   (27)   Opticians and optical goods stores.



   (28)   Pawn shops.



   (29)   Photographic studios and camera supply stores.



   (30)   Physical culture and reducing salons.



   (31)   Printing, publishing and reproducing establishments.



   (32)   Public buildings and lands other than elementary, junior high
or senior high schools.



   (33)   Radio and television stations, studies and offices.



   (34)   Radio and television sales and repairs, electric shops.



   (35)   Restaurants, and cafes, but no drive-in restaurants.



   (36)   Retail establishments such as department, clothing, fabric,
shoe, variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, floor covering,
paint, antique, art goods, jewelry, gift, music, toy, sporting goods, book
and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby and craft stores, but
not excluding similar retail outlets.



   (37)   Shoe repair shops.



   (38)   Signs, as regulated in article VII, section 21-131.



   (39)   Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops.



   (40)   Taxicab stands.



   (41)   Telegraph or messenger service offices.



   (42)   Theaters, housed in a permanent indoor structure.



   (43)   Public utility distribution lines, transformer stations,
transmission lines and towers, water tanks and tower, and telephone
exchanges, with service or storage yards contained within the building.



   (44)   Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the
same lot as the main structure, excluding, however, open storage (see also
subsection 21-204.3).



   (45)   Furniture re-upholstery shops operated within the confines of
the building.



   (46)   Commercial storage units provided that units are located in
the level(s) blow the adjacent street level of existing buildings and that
they contain only low to moderate hazardous storage as defined in the North
Carolina State Building Code.



   (47)   Single-family or multifamily residential dwellings units in
existing structures provided that all units are located on floor levels above
or below the adjacent street level, or a single residential owner-occupied
dwelling unit located in the back forty (40) percent of the street level when
the front sixty (60) percent is commercial and provided that there is a
minimum of four hundred (400) square feet living space. There shall be no
apparent evidence of residential living from within the commercial
establishment, and the dwelling units shall have a separate ingress and
egress. In lieu of any other parking requirements of this chapter, the
property owner shall provide each dwelling unit with one (1) off-street
parking space. Such space may be located on property separate from the
dwelling unit but shall be within a reasonable walking distance of such unit.



   (48)   Automated teller machine (ATM). An ATM terminal may be
located within, as part of, or under an exterior canopy of a building
occupied by a bank or other financial institution for which the occupant is
responsible for the terminal's operation and maintenance; or as an accessory
use and/or structure on a parcel of land with an existing principal
commercial use so long as there is no more than one terminal located
independently on the property; or where, with the exception of one
independently-located terminal, all other terminals are "walk-up"
pedestrian-oriented and located within or attached flush to a principal
commercial building. All ATM terminals independently located shall be
constructed in a manner that provides users with a canopy for protection from
adverse weather conditions. All ATM terminals shall include a security camera.



   (49)   Adult/child day care facility provided that all outdoor
activity areas are screened and/or enclosed by six-foot high fence.




   (50)   Craft beverage business manufacturing and/or selling malt
beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and spirits including but not
limited to a brewery, winery, meadery, cidery, distillery, tap room, tasting
room, or other beverage establishment open to the public permitted under
North Carolina General Statute 18B Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages as may
be amended.




(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(803), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02, § 3,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-10-12-14-2, § 2,
12-14-10; Ord. No. O-11-01-18-1, § 2, 1-18-11; Ord. No. O-12-08-21-2, § 4;
Ord. No. O-16-12-06-1, § 2, 12-6-16)



Sec. 21-204.3. Open storage.



   The storage of materials, either raw materials, partly or completely
finished products, scrap or waste, shall be prohibited unless such materials
are completely screened from view from all adjoining streets, alleys or
properties.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(803), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02,  3,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-204.4. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exception as provided for
in article XII, section 21-303.2. of this chapter.



   (1)   Construction of new multifamily buildings. Parking will be as
set forth in section 21-86.



   (2)   Planned unit developments, in accordance with the requirements
in section 21-255.



   (3)   Light industry.



   (4)   Uses listed in section 4.5-36 of the Marion City Code as being
permitted as a special exception in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, subject
to the requirements of section 4.5-36 and any other applicable requirements
of chapter 4.5 of the Marion City Code.




   (5)   Private club permitted under North Carolina General Statute
18B Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages as may be amended.




(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(803), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02, § 3,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-16-12-06-1, § 3,
12-6-16)



Sec. 21-205. C-2 general business district.



Sec. 21-205.1. Intent.



   The purpose of this district is to provide for general and commercial
activity along major thoroughfares and at other convenient points in the
city. Regulations are designed to preserve the traffic carrying capacity of
the streets and to provide for off-street parking. It is not the intent of
this district to encourage extensive strip commercial development, but rather
to provide concentrations of general commercial activities.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(804), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-5,  2(804.3), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-02-19-2, 
2, 2-19-08)



Sec. 21-205.2. Permitted uses.



   The following uses are permitted within the C-2 general business
district:



   (1)   All permitted uses in a C-1 central business district.



   (2)   Animal hospital or veterinary clinic, but no open kennels on
the premises.



   (3)   Assembly halls, coliseums, gymnasiums, and similar structures.



   (4)   Automobile washing establishments.



   (5)   Automobile repair shops, automobile sales, tire sales/
services, or towing and wrecking service businesses as defined herein. These
businesses shall comply with section 21-161.



   (6)   Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared food
and miscellaneous food products.



   (7)   Bicycle sales and repairs.



   (8)   Bottling plants.



   (9)   Bowling supply and equipment sales.



   (10)   Building supply and equipment sales.



   (11)   Cold storage or freezer lockers.



   (12)   Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturers.



   (13)   Electrical repair shops.



   (14)   Fabricating shops of small size such as woodworking shops,
cabinet shops and upholstery shops, but excluding open storage.



   (15)   Farm machinery assembly, sales and repairs.



   (16)   Feed and seed stores.



   (17)   Glass and mirror shops, venetian blind and awning shops, tile
companies, and similar building specialties outlets.



   (18)   Greenhouses or horticultural nurseries.



   (19)   Hospital, sanitariums, nursing homes and medical and dental
clinics.



   (20)   Ice pick-up stations.



   (21)   Industrial or vocational trade schools.



   (22)   Laundries and dry cleaning establishments - including self
service.



   (23)   Mobile home sales.



   (24)   Monument sales.



   (25)   Motels, inns and tourist courts.



   (26)   Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.



   (27)   Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating and refrigeration
shops, not excluding open storage.



   (28)   Sign painting and fabricating shops.



   (29)   Signs, as regulated in article VII, section 21-131.



   (30)   Wholesale and warehousing establishments except for storage
of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides, explosives, oil,
gasoline, etc.



   (31)   Certain small manufacturing operations such as knitting,
hosiery and machine assembly operations will be a permitted use provided that
all manufacturing activities are conducted completely within an enclosed
building and in such a manner that noise, odor, smoke or other debris
associated with the manufacturing operation will not be offensive to
adjoining property owners. Further provided that there will be no outside
storage of raw materials, machinery or finished products. Also, if the
concern borders on a residential district, adequate landscaping, screening or
buffering will be required to insure compatibility with the neighborhood.



   (32)   Sports complexes, provided that twenty (20) feet of
undisturbed, natural buffer along the entire perimeter of the property is
provided to protect surrounding property owners from noise and visual
effects, and that the total requirement of off-street parking spaces shall be
the sum of the off-street parking requirements of the various uses computed
separately as specified in section division 2 of the zoning ordinance.



   (33)   Satellite parking lots.



   (34)   Billiard and pool hall, bingo hall, video game parlor or
other coin operated amusement or recreational machine parlor.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(804), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-5,  2(804.3), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-02-19-2, 
2, 2-19-08; Ord. No. O-10-12-14-2,  3, 12-14-10)



Sec. 21-205.3. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, section 21-303.2 of this chapter.



   (1)   Tire recapping centers and heavy duty truck repair having a
Class 7 or greater rating (Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 26,001
pounds or greater). Provided all recapping and other repair activities are
conducted completely within an enclosed building and in such a manner that
noise, odor, smoke, and other debris associated with this type of operation,
will not be offensive to adjoining property owners. Further provided that
there will be no outside storage of any materials, including tires, old or
new. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit tire displays. Tire
displays shall be limited to no more than ten (10) tires.



   (A)   Tires may be temporarily located outside, only during business
hours of the recapping operations, for the purpose of loading and unloading
tires.



   (2)   Planned unit developments, in accordance with the requirements
in section 21-255.



   (3)   Single-family or multi-family residential dwellings units in
existing structures; provided all units are located on floor levels above or
below the adjacent street level. There shall be no apparent evidence of
residential living from within the commercial establishment, and the dwelling
units shall have a separate ingress and egress. In lieu of any other parking
requirements of this chapter, the property owner shall provide each dwelling
unit with one (1) off-street parking space. The off-street parking shall be
in addition to other required parking for the existing structure and its uses.



   (4)   Nonmotorized bike tracks.



   (5)   Tattoo parlor, body piercing shops, or any combination
thereof, provided that the business is not located or operated within seven
hundred (700) feet of:



   (A)   A church, synagogue, or regular place of worship:



   (B)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;



   (C)   A public library;



   (D)   A park or playground with the exception of a greenway or other
public trail;



   (E)   A licensed child-care facility;



   (F)   A licensed group-home facility;



   (G)   An entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards
minors.



      And where such use is not located within the Mixed Use
Neighborhood Land Use Category as identified on the Future Land Use Map
adopted as part of the City of Marion Comprehensive Land Use Plan, as may be
amended from time to time.



      For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises
where tattoo and/or body piercing is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of any use listed above.



   (6)   Fortune telling provided that the business is not located or
operated within one thousand (1000) feet of:



   (A)   A church, synagogue, or regular place of worship:



   (B)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;



   (C)   A public library;



   (D)   A park or playground with the exception of a greenway or other
public trail;



   (E)   A licensed child-care facility;



   (F)   A licensed group-home facility; and



   (G)   An entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards
minors.



   For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises
where fortune telling is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
premises of any use listed above.



   (7)   Uses listed in section 4.5-36 of the Marion City Code as being
permitted as a special exception in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, subject
to the requirements of section 4.5-36 and any other applicable requirements
of chapter 4.5 of the Marion City Code.



   (8)   Campgrounds, as provided for in article VII, general
provisions, division 9, campgrounds of this chapter.



   (9)   Boarding kennel or animal shelter.



   a.   Property is located no less than five hundred (500) feet from
any residential zoning district.



   b.   All activity is located on property no less than two (2) acres
in size.



   c.   All kennels shall be contained within a fully enclosed building
or designed in a manner that would prohibit outdoor access between dusk and
dawn.



   d.   The setback requirement for any outdoor animal enclosure shall
include the following:



      i.   The front yard setback shall be the same or greater than
the principal building.



      ii.   Side and rear yard setbacks shall have a minimum twenty
(20) foot setback from the property line.



      iii.   A solid twenty (20) foot wide landscape buffer yard
utilizing a double row of evergreen trees no less than eight (8) feet in
height at installation and no less than twenty (20) feet in height at
maturity shall be installed and maintained in perpetuity between any outdoor
enclosure and an adjacent property line, or no less than fifty (50) feet with
a solid opaque fence.



      iv.   All outdoor enclosures shall be screened by a solid or
opaque fence a minimum of six (6) feet in height.



      v.   No outdoor animal enclosure shall be located any closer
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any structure occupied as a
residential use existing at the time of approval.



   e.   The facility shall be maintained and operated in such a manner
that all animal odors, noise, refuse and/or other onsite activities deemed as
a public nuisance and/or hazard shall not be detectable beyond the property
line in which the animal shelter or kennel is located.



   f.   A waste management plan that demonstrates compliance with
applicable state and local regulations and which ensures sanitary handling of
animal waste and prevents contamination or pollution of adjacent lands or
water bodies shall be submitted to and approved by the administrator prior to
establishment of such uses.



   g.   All animal waste shall not be stored within one hundred (100)
feet of any property line.



   h.   Kennels shall at all times maintain a sanitary and humane
environment pursuant to all applicable state and local regulations.



   i.   The facility operates in compliance with all other applicable
city codes including but not limited to chapter 3 Animals as may be amended.



   j.   A sign clearly visible and located at the entrance of the
building/facility shall be posted containing twenty-four (24) hour emergency
contact information for the facility including no less than telephone numbers
where the persons responsible for the facility may be contacted at any hour
of the day or night. The sign shall comply with regulations established for
Signs in section 21-131 of this Code.



   k.   The approving authority may impose additional conditions upon
the operation of any kennel, including but not limited to hours of operation,
the size and scale of a kennel, or the number of animals to be housed within
a kennel.



   l.   The city shall conduct an inspection as deemed necessary of a
facility and shall report any violation to the approving authority. After
reviewing the findings of the administrator and upon conclusion of the kennel
operator's due process procedures as set forth in chapter one of the City
Code, the approving authority may revoke permits for the operation of any
kennel that has been found to be in violation of this section.



   (10)   Indoor firing or archery range provided such facility meet
the following criteria:



   a.   It is located five hundred (500) feet, measured from the
closest point of the facility to the property line of a school or day care
center, residential dwelling, place of worship, hospital or other health care
facility offering overnight care.



   b.   Located in an enclosed building that absorbs and contains all
sound from the discharge of a firearm through the use of sound deflection,
absorbent baffles barriers, or other sound emission control devices.



   c.   Construction of interior and exterior walls, ceiling, and floor
that is incapable of being penetrated or in any manner allow the ricochet or
redirection of a projectile that in doing so could inflict harm on a range
user or member of the public.



   d.   Maintain filtration and disposal systems for the removal of
lead and other heavy metals meeting OSHA standards and Chapter 20, Article IV
sewerage and waste discharge standards of the Marion City Code.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(804), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-5, § 2(804.3), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-02-19-2,
§ 2, 2-19-08; Ord. No. O-11-05-17-2, 5-17-11; Ord. No. O-11-12-06-2,
12-6-11; Ord. No. O-12-06-19-2, §§ 2, 3, 6-19-12; Ord. No. O-15-1-20-1, §
3, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-205.4  Accessory uses.




   The following uses are permitted as an accessory use within the C-2
General Business District:





   (1)   Textile recycling container.





      a.   Location.  No more than two (2) textile recycling
containers shall be permitted in a retail shopping center containing eight or
more businesses with an individual storefront, except that no more than one
(1) container shall be permitted per property where the business owning such
container is located on the same property.





      b.   Application.  An application shall be required for a
textile recycling container when the party owning such container is not
located on the same property.  The application shall require the following
information:





         i.   The name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant.





         ii.   The address where the textile recycling container
is proposed to be located.





         iii.   A site plan indicating the proposed location of
the textile recycling container that demonstrates compliance with Marion city
code.





         iv.   A written and notarized statement from the
property owner or authorized property management agent authorizing the
placement of such container on the property, and statement acknowledging
their understanding of their responsibility and enforcement provisions
contained in subsection (1)(e) below.





         v.   Payment of an application fee as designated by city
council.





      c.   Design.





         i.   The name, address, and telephone number of the
party responsible for both the ownership and maintenance of the textile
recycling container shall be clearly posted on the outside of the container. 





         ii.   A sign shall be permanently affixed to the front
of the container providing detailed instructions for the disposal of
discarded items and the type of items accepted.





         iii.   The textile recycling container shall be placed
on a durable all-weather surface such as concrete or asphalt.





         iv.   A textile recycling container including any pad or
elevating device shall not exceed six and one-half (6.5) feet in height, six
(6) feet in width and five (5) feet in depth.





         v.   The textile recycling container shall be setback a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from all public rights-of-way and any adjoining
property.





         vi.   The textile recycling container shall not be
located within a required parking space.





         vii.   The textile recycling container shall be
constructed of painted metal or other durable outdoor material.





         viii.   The textile recycling container shall be fully
enclosed and securely locked at all times so as to prevent access by
unauthorized persons.





         ix.   The textile recycling container shall at all times
be maintained in good repair, in a clean condition and free of rust, graffiti
and unauthorized writing, painting, drawing, or other  inscriptions.





         x.   No textile recycling container shall be used for
advertising or for promotional purposes except to the extent provided in
(1)(c)(i) and (ii) above.





      d.   Maintenance.





         i.   All items shall be placed inside the textile
recycling container and shall not be allowed to accumulate outside the same.





         ii.   Any material including unintended material and/or
refuse left in the vicinity of a textile recycling container shall be
promptly removed by the container provider.





      e.   Responsibility.





         i.   Both the provider owning the textile recycling
container and the property owner where the textile recycling container is
located shall be subject to the enforcement provisions contained in chapter
one of the Marion city code.





         ii.   Any property upon which the standards and
regulations of this section have been violated twice (2) within a twelve (12)
month time period shall be immediately removed from the site where the
violation occurred, and no other textile recycling container shall be
permitted for a twelve (12) month period.




(Ord. No. O-15-11-17-6, § 2, 11-17-15)



Sec. 21-206. M-1 industrial district.



Sec. 21-206.1. Intent.



   This district is established to provide areas for manufacturing,
warehousing, and similar uses.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(805), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-206.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the M-1 industrial zoning district the following uses are
permitted:



   (1)   Contractor's plants or storage yards.



   (2)   Commercial recreation conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.



   (3)   Industrial equipment machinery repair and service.



   (4)   Lumber yards, building materials storage.



   (5)   Machine shops.



   (6)   Plumbing shops and their accessory storage yards.



   (7)   Radio and television stations and masts.



   (8)   Signs, as regulated by article VII, section 21-131.



   (9)   Tire recapping shops.



   (10)   Trucking terminals.



      (a)   Wholesale establishments for storage of oil, fuel oil
and gasoline.



      (b)   Temporary retail sales for itinerant merchants as
defined in section 10-172 of the Marion City Code provided that the temporary
sales last no longer than seven (7) consecutive days and are not held more
than once per quarter. See section 21-86 for parking requirements.



   (11)   One residential unit to serve as accessory living quarters to
a permitted principal use.



   (12)   Furniture and textile manufacturing.



   (13)   Computer, data processing, data storage, telemarketing, or
other similar technology-based use.



   (14)   Any industrial use deemed by the planning director to be
similar in nature to a permitted use listed in this section or any light
industrial use that by design and function would not be classified as a heavy
industrial use.



   (15)   Boarding kennel or animal shelter



      a.   Property is located no less than five hundred (500) feet
from any residential zoning district.



      b.   All activity is located on property no less than two (2)
acres in size.



      c.   All kennels shall be contained within a fully enclosed
building or designed in a manner that would prohibit outdoor access between
dusk and dawn.



      d.   The setback requirement for any outdoor animal enclosure
shall include the following:



         i.   The front yard setback shall be the same or greater
than the principal building.



         ii.   Side and rear yard setbacks shall have a minimum
twenty (20) foot setback from the property line.



         iii.   A solid twenty (20) foot wide landscape buffer
yard utilizing a double row of evergreen trees no less than eight (8) feet in
height at installation and no less than twenty (20) feet in height at
maturity shall be installed and maintained in perpetuity between any outdoor
enclosure and an adjacent property line, or no less than fifty (50) feet with
a solid opaque fence.



         iv.   All outdoor enclosures shall be screened by a
solid or opaque fence a minimum of six (6) feet in height.



         v.   No outdoor animal enclosure shall be located any
closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any structure occupied as a
residential use existing at the time of approval.



      e.   The facility shall be maintained and operated in such a
manner that all animal odors, noise, refuse and/or other onsite activities
deemed as a public nuisance and/or hazard shall not be detectable beyond the
property line in which the animal shelter or kennel is located.



      f.   A waste management plan that demonstrates compliance with
applicable state and local regulations and which ensures sanitary handling of
animal waste and prevents contamination or pollution of adjacent lands or
water bodies shall be submitted to and approved by the administrator prior to
establishment of such uses.



      g.   All animal waste shall not be stored within one hundred
(100) feet or any property line.



      h.   Kennels shall at all times maintain a sanitary and humane
environment pursuant to all applicable state and local regulations.



      i.   The facility operates in compliance with all other
applicable city codes including but not limited to chapter 3 Animals as may
be amended.



      j.   A sign clearly visible and located at the entrance of the
building/facility shall be posted containing twenty-four (24) hour emergency
contact information for the facility including no fewer than two (2)
telephone numbers where the persons responsible for the facility may be
contacted at any hour of the day or night. The sign shall comply with
regulations established for signs in section 21-131 of this Code.



      k.   The approving authority may impose additional conditions
upon the operation of any kennel, including but not limited to hours of
operation, the size and scale of a kennel, or the number of animals to be
housed within a kennel.



      1.   The city shall conduct an inspection as deemed necessary
of a facility and shall report any violation to the approving authority.
After reviewing the findings of the administrator and upon conclusion of the
kennel operator's due process procedures as set forth in chapter one of the
City Code, the approving authority may revoke permits for the operation of
any kennel that has been found to be in violation of this section.



   (16)   Adult/Child Day Care Facility.



      a.   All outdoor activity areas are screened and/or are
enclosed by six-foot high fence.



      b.   Facility has a primary entrance separate from any
industrial or manufacturing land use activity located within the same
building, and all accessible points of ingress or egress of the adult/child
day care facility are equipped with security and safety features. 



      c.   Located in a Traditional Redevelopment Overlay Area
identified in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, as may be amended, or where
such land use is ancillary to and directly serves the employees of an
approved use within the zoning district.



   (17)   Indoor firing or archery range.



      a.   It is located five hundred (500) feet, measured form the
closest point of the facility to the property line of a school or day care
center, residential dwelling, place of worship, hospital or other health care
facility offering overnight care.



      b.   Located in an enclosed building that absorbs and contains
all sound from the discharge of a firearm through the use of sound
deflection, absorbent baffles barriers, or other sound emission control
devices.



      c.   Construction of interior and exterior walls, ceiling, and
floor that is incapable of being penetrated or in any manner allow the
ricochet or re-direction of a projectile that in doing so could inflict harm
on a range user or member of the public.



      d.   Maintain filtration and disposal systems for the removal
of lead and other heavy metals meeting OSHA standards and Chapter 20, Article
IV sewerage and waste discharge standards of the Marion City Code.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(805), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-10-05-18-1, § 3, 5-18-10; Ord. No. O-11-12-06-2, § 4,
12-6-11; Ord. No. O-12-08-21-2, § 3; Ord. No. O-15-1-20-1, § 4, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-206.3. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, section 21-303.2. of this chapter:



   (1)   Automobile wrecking, junk and salvage yards provided that:



   (A)   All motor vehicles stored or kept in such yards shall be so
kept that they will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed
and so that they will not constitute a place or places in which rats, mice,
or other vermin may be harbored, reared, or propagated.



   (B)   Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote the
breeding of vermin, such operation shall be permitted no closer than two
hundred (200) feet from any established residential zone.



   (C)   All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall
be conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence, screen, or wall,
excepting driveway area, from eight (8) to twelve (12) feet in height.
Storage between the road and street and such fence, screen, or wall is
expressly prohibited. Any fence, screen, or wall for screening purposes shall
be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition.



   (D)   All such yards shall be so maintained as to be in sanitary
condition and so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety.



   (E)   The number of vehicular access driveways permitted on any
single street frontage shall be limited to:



   1.   One driveway where the parcel to be used as a maximum road or
street frontage of one hundred (100) feet or less.



   2.   Two (2) driveways where the road or street frontage exceeds one
hundred (100) feet. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be limited to
twenty-five (25) feet in width.



   (F)   For the purposes of this section, an inoperable or junked
motor vehicle shall not be deemed to be viewed from a public roadway if it is
stored on a site that is the subject of an approved screening plan, as
defined herein and approved by the body issuing the permit, or within an
enclosed structure which visually conceals the inoperable motor vehicles.



   (G)   In order to maintain safety for pedestrian and vehicle
traffic, vehicles associated with automobile repair shops, automobile sales,
tire sales and services, towing and wrecking service businesses may not be
parked, displayed, stored or repaired within four (4) feet of the curb or the
edge of the road if no curb exists.



   (H)   On-site traffic areas shall be provided and arranged in such a
manner as to provide easily identifiable ingress and egress, adequate
customer and employee parking, access for emergency vehicles, and adequate
turnarounds such that backward movement onto the public roadways is avoided.



   (I)   Inoperable motor vehicles shall not be stored in the customer
or employee parking spaces required per the off-street parking requirements
set out in section 21-86.



   (J)   The provisions contained in chapter 9, article III concerning
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles continue to apply.



   (K)   Automobile graveyards, automobile wrecking, junkyards and
salvage yards must obtain a permit from the zoning office.



   (L)   Those junk yards or automobile graveyards lawfully existing at
the time that subsection (F) through (L) of section 21-206.3(1) of this
chapter are adopted shall have five (5) years from the adoption of the
ordinance to come into full compliance with the provisions in subsections
21-206.3(1)(F) through (L).



   (2)   Manufacturing and processing operations provided, however,
that no permit shall be issued except in conformance with article XII,
subsection 21-206.3. of this chapter and further provided that these uses are
subject to such conditions as the board shall require in order to prevent
smoke, odor, noise, dust or other efforts that would be detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare of the community.



   (A)   Where in the opinion of the board engineering data or other
studies are needed to determine the possible adverse effects of a proposed
industry on the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the board may
require the applicant to submit such data or other studies prepared by
competent engineers or other technical people.



   (3)   Planned unit developments, in accordance with the requirements
in section 21-255.



   (4)   Trade lots and/or flea markets located totally within an
existing structure.



   (5)   Commercial recreation conducted in open, partially enclosed or
screened facilities.



   (6)   Any industrial use deemed by the planning director to be
similar in nature to any industrial use that by design and function would be
classified as a heavy industrial use.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(805), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08; Ord. No. O-10-05-18-1,  3, 5-18-10)



Sec. 21-207. O-I office and institutional district.



Sec. 21-207.1. Intent.



   This district is established to provide areas for hospitals, doctor
offices, schools, and similar uses.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(806), 01-17-06 Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02,  4,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-207.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the O-I office and institutional district the following uses are
permitted:



   (1)   Offices (business and professional).



   (2)   Hospital, medical and dental offices (excluding animal
hospitals).



   (3)   Medical and dental laboratories.



   (4)   Medical, dental, optical, pharmaceutical and hospital
supplies, but excluding warehousing activities.



   (5)   Opticians and optical services.



   (6)   Public elementary, high schools and schools of higher learning.



   (7)   Other health care facilities, nursing homes and rehabilitation
centers.



   (8)   Public buildings and utilities necessary for service of the
immediate vicinity.



   (9)   Allied health professionals and services.



   (10)   Retail pharmacies (restricted to medical and health related
items for sale).



   (11)   Cafeterias, gift or variety shops, soda bars and incidental
retail uses conducted solely for employees, patients, patrons, or visitors on
the premises of a hospital or public school building only and without
exterior advertising display.



   (12)   Signs as regulated in article VII, section 21-131.



   (13)   Community and/or recreational centers, senior centers



   (14)   Temporary retail sales for itinerant merchants as defined in
section 10-172 of the Marion City Code provided that the temporary sale last
no longer than seven (7) consecutive days and are not held more than once per
quarter.



   (15)   Churches or similar places of worship, including
single-family parish houses or parsonages.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(806), 01-17-06 Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02,  4,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6), 1-15-08)



Sec. 21-207.3. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, subsection 21-303.2 of this chapter.



   (1)   Heliports.



   (2)   Planned unit developments, in accordance with the requirements
in section 21-255.



   (3)   Public safety/emergency related facilities.



   (4)   Shelter/mission provided that:



   (A)   Any shelter shall comply fully with the requirements of
applicable state, county, and city codes, ordinances, and regulations; and



   (B)   Any shelter shall be contained within the structure of, and
operated by, a not-for-profit corporation and/ or charitable organization; and



   (C)   All shelters must operate in a safe, clean and orderly manner.



   (D)   The applicant must state maximum capacity for overnight stay
at time of application. Such capacity shall be approved by the board of
adjustment with recommendations from the Marion Fire Chief.



   (E)   Three (3) parking space shall be required per ten (10)
residents at maximum capacity.



   (F)   A retail establishment may be included on the premises if the
purpose and profit are to benefit the shelter and other nonprofits. Such
retail establishment shall not exceed the size (square footage of gross floor
area) of the shelter. In addition to required parking for the shelter, there
shall be one (1) parking space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor space associated with the retail use.




   (5)   Planned unit development.




(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3, § 1(806), 01-17-06 Ord. No. O-06-06-06-02, § 4,
6-6-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, § 1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-15-11-17-2, § 2,
11-17-15)



Sec. 21-208. B-1 neighborhood business district.



Sec. 21-208.1. Intent.



   This district is established primarily to serve the needs of the
surrounding residential neighborhoods by providing goods and services that
are day-to-day needs, generally classed by merchants as convenience goods and
services. Businesses that tend to be a nuisance to immediately surrounding
residential developments are excluded, even though the goods or services
offered are in the convenience classification. This district should be
located at the intersection of major streets or where higher volume traffic
patterns permit such development. In no case shall a structure that is
greater than two thousand (2,000) gross square feet be used for any purpose
other than residential in the B-1 neighborhood business district.



(Ord. No. O-06-20-17-3,  1(807), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-208.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the B-1 neighborhood business district, a building or land shall
be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Antique shops.



   (2)   Automatic laundries.



   (3)   Bakeries.



   (4)   Banks.



   (5)   Barber and beauty shops.



   (6)   Bed and breakfast home.



   (7)   Book store.



   (8)   Boutiques.



   (9)   Computer sales and services.



   (10)   Churches.



   (11)   Craft shops.



   (12)   Day care.



   (13)   Delicatessens.



   (14)   Drug stores.



   (15)   Flower shops.



   (16)   Gift shops.



   (17)   Convenience grocery stores.



   (18)   Hardware stores.



   (19)   Jewelry stores.



   (20)   Photographer's studios.



   (21)   Radio, appliance and television sales and repair.



   (22)   Restaurant or caf.



   (23)   Single-family dwellings (excluding mobile homes)



   (24)   Multifamily dwelling of eight (8) of less units.



   (25)   Manufacture and sales of septic tanks, provided that no
mixing of concrete shall be permitted.



(Ord. No. O-06-20-17-3,  1(807), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-208.3. Open storage.



   Open storage is permitted as an accessory use in the B-1 neighborhood
business district, provided that the open storage meets the following
requirements.



   (1)   The open storage is accessory to the principal use of the
property.



   (2)   The open storage area shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the
total area of the footprint of the principal building. All additional open
storage shall be located on the side of the building or in the rear of the
property and shall be completely screened.



   (3)   The open storage of junked or inoperable vehicles, auto parts
or similar materials, raw materials, scrap or waste shall be prohibited
unless such materials are completely screened.



   (4)   All required screening shall be six (6) feet in height and
constructed in such a manner that visually conceals the open storage from the
public right-of-way and adjacent properties.



(Ord. No. O-06-20-17-3,  1(807), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-208.4. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, section 21-303.2 of this chapter:



   (1)   Auto repair shops up to two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet in size provided that appropriate measures are taken to prevent
noise from traveling to neighboring residential properties.



   (2)   Mini-storage units provided that appropriate measures are
taken to prevent lighting from shining or reflecting on neighboring
residential properties.



(Ord. No. O-06-20-17-3,  1(807), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-209. (PR) parks and recreation zoning district.



Sec. 21-209.1. Intent.



   The intent of the PR district is to accommodate recreational
facilities, supportive services and uses.



(Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  2(21-209), 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-209.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the PR parks and recreation district the following uses are
permitted:



   (A)   Public and private active and passive recreational areas.



   (B)   Public or private parks.



   (C)   Activities for conservation of natural resources and the
environment.



   (D)   Health, recreation and exercise facilities.



   (E)   Public boat launching and fishing facilities.



   (F)   Bicycle and pedestrian trail systems.



   (G)   Equestrian paths or trail systems.



   (H)   Playground, ball fields, game courts, swimming pool and other
similar uses.



   (I)   Picnic area, picnic shelter, pavilion, and other similar uses.



   (J)   Golf course and driving range.



   (K)   Municipal water and sewer supply systems.



   (L)   Conference center, meeting hall, community building,
recreation center, or similar use.



(Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  2(21-209), 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-209.3. Special exception.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, planning and zoning board, section 21-303, powers and duties
of the board, and section 21-303.2, special exceptions.



   (A)   Campgrounds subject to the provisions of article VII, general
provisions, division 9, campgrounds.



   (B)   Telecommunication towers subject to the provisions of chapter
17.5, telecommunications, of the City Code.



(Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  2, 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-210. R-3 mixed use residential district.



Sec. 21-210.1. Intent.



   The R-3 Mixed Use Residential District is intended to provide
opportunities for flexible residential land uses that can provide
alternative, affordable housing options for residents of the city.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-3, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-210.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the R-3 Mixed Use Residential District, a building or land shall
be used for the following purposes.



   (1)   All uses permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential and
R-2 Neighborhood Residential Zoning Districts.



   (2)   One (1) Class A or Class B manufactured home per residential
lot, provided that:



      (A)   It is the principal structure on the lot, and no other
residential structure is located on the same lot;



      (B)   The towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting
lights shall be removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy and
shall not be included in the length and width measurements of the
manufactured home;



      (C)   The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the building inspector that the manufactured home was built after June 15,
1976 in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act.  The applicant may evidence of the construction date
of the home and compliance with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act using one (1) of the following methods:



         1.   A HUD seal mounted on the outside of the home; or



         2.   An original HUD data plate on the inside of the
home; or



         3.   A third party inspection report by a state licensed
engineer or architect; or



         4.   A verification letter from either the manufacturer
or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
demonstrating the home’s compliance with this subsection.



         5.   A Certificate of Title issued by an official State
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) office that indicates the date of
manufacture of the home.



      (D)   The manufactured home complies with all other municipal
building and zoning codes, and is set up in accordance with the standards
established by the North Carolina Department of Insurance;



      (E)   The manufactured home shall have a continuous
underpinning of either masonry materials or other product suitable for the
purpose of underpinning and installed under the perimeter, unpierced except
for required ventilation and access prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy;



      (F)   The exterior siding shall consist predominantly of
vinyl, aluminum, wood, hardboard, or other non-reflective material comparable
in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly
used in standard residential construction including but not limited to
manufactured home construction;



      (G)   All attachments, including but not limited to stairs,
steps, porches, decks, and/or other additions to the manufactured home, shall
meet or exceed the standards of the North Carolina Residential Building Code;



      (H)   Structural additions that alter the original shape of
the structure shall be architecturally compatible with the original building,
and have exterior siding and roofing with the color, material and appearance
similar and complimentary in appearance to the predominant materials used in
manufactured home construction or materials commonly used in conventional
residential construction. Unfinished metal roofing and/or siding shall be
prohibited; and



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-3, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-210.3. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, subsection 21-303.2 of this chapter:



   (1)   Manufactured home parks subject to the following requirements:



      (A)   Class A and Class B manufactured homes are permitted
within a manufactured home park.  Class C manufactured homes, travel
trailers, park models, and/or any other vehicle that do not meet the U.S.
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Department standards for manufactured
home construction and not already existing at the time of the effective
ordinance are prohibited.  Each manufactured home within a park shall be
located in a designated manufactured home site;



      (B)   The minimum area for a manufactured home park shall be
two (2) acres;



      (C)   The maximum density shall be eight (8) manufactured home
sites per acre;



      (D)   No less than five (5) manufactured home sites shall be
delineated on an approved site plan and made available at first occupancy;



      (E)   The minimum lot size for individual manufactured home
site shall be forty (40) feet by eighty (80) feet;



      (F)   Each manufactured home including structural additions
shall be spaced no less than ten (10) feet apart except where the NC
Department of Insurance requires greater separation, the stricter provision
shall apply;



      (G)   All manufactured home sites shall abut upon a driveway
of not less than twenty (20) feet in width.  All driveways shall have
unobstructed access to a public street or highway and shall be hard surfaced,
or of properly compacted gravel, well marked and lighted by the mobile home
park owner;



      (H)   There shall be a minimum of two (2) off-street parking
spaces for each manufactured home site, which shall be on the same site as
the manufactured home served;



      (I)   A densely planted buffer yard, consisting of evergreen
trees shall be located along all sides of the manufactured home park, but
shall not extend beyond the established setback line along any street.  The
buffer yard shall include evergreen species that reach no less than twelve
(12) feet at mature height. Minimum plant size and installation shall conform
to the landscape standards of this chapter.  This planting requirement may
be modified by the board where adequate buffering exists in the form of
vegetation and/or terrain;



      (J)   Each manufactured home shall be set up and installed on
a manufactured home site within the manufactured home park in accordance with
all applicable State of North Carolina regulations for the installation of
manufactured homes adopted and published by the North Carolina Department of
Insurance;



      (K)   Each manufactured home or manufactured home site shall
have a county-issued 911 address plaque or other city approved permanent
address plaque identifying the home’s physical address prominently
displayed and visible from the driveway;



      (L)   The towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting
lights shall be removed after placement on the lot and prior to the issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy and shall not be included in the length and
width measurements of the manufactured home;



      (M)   The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the building inspector that the manufactured home was built after June 15,
1976 in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act.  The applicant may evidence of the construction date
of the home and compliance with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act using one (1) of the following methods:



         1.   A HUD seal mounted on the outside of the home; or



         2.   An original HUD data plate on the inside of the
home; or



         3.   A third party inspection report by a state licensed
engineer or architect; or



         4.   A verification letter from either the manufacturer
or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
demonstrating the home’s compliance with this subsection.



         5.   A Certificate of Title issued by an official State
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) office that indicates the date of
manufacture of the home.



      (N)   Each manufactured home shall have a continuous
underpinning of either masonry materials or other product suitable for the
purpose of underpinning and installed under the perimeter, unpierced except
for required ventilation and access prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy;



      (O)   Exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl,
aluminum, wood, hardboard, or other non-reflective material comparable in
composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used
in standard residential construction including but not limited to
manufactured home construction;



      (P)   All attachments, including but not limited to stairs,
steps, porches, decks, and/or other additions to the manufactured home, shall
meet or exceed the standards of the North Carolina Residential Building Code;



      (Q)   Structural additions that alter the original shape of
the structure shall be architecturally compatible with the original building,
and have exterior siding and roofing with the color, material and appearance
similar and complimentary in appearance to the predominant materials used in
the original manufactured home construction or materials commonly used in
conventional residential construction. Unfinished metal roofing and/or siding
shall be prohibited; and



      (R)   The grounds of a manufactured home park shall be kept
free of trash, liter, and debris.  Grounds, buildings, and storage areas
shall be properly maintained to prevent the infestation of rodents, vermin,
and insects.  It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park
owner to maintain the park in accordance with these standards and all other
applicable Marion City Code requirements at all times.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-3, § 3, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-211. R-4 multi-family residential district.



Sec. 21-211.1. Intent.



   The R-4 Multi-Family Residential District is intended to provide
opportunities for land area greater than two acres in size for large scale
multi-family housing developments and other residential housing development
that may include ancillary land uses for assisted or group living
accommodations.  Such districts should be located in close proximity to
non-residential districts to provide convenient access to goods and services,
as well as employment, education, and recreational opportunities, and serve
as a transition between non-residential and lower density residential land
uses.



(Ord. No. O-15-1-20-4, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-211.2. Permitted uses.



   Within the R-4 Multi-Family Residential District, a building or land
shall be used for the following purposes.



   (1)   All uses permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-3.



   (2)   Attached residential land uses having twenty (20) units per
acre or less; including:



      (A)   Multi-family residential housing including senior
housing.



      (B)   Group care facility.



      (C)   Assisted living facility including ancillary land uses
that serve residents.



      (D)   Dormitories.



      (E)   Orphanages.



      (F)   Condominiums or attached single-family residential.



(Ord. No. O-15-1-20-4, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-211.3. Special exceptions.



   The following uses are permitted as special exceptions as provided for
in article XII, subsection 21-303.2 of this chapter:



   (1)   Any residential use having more than twenty (20) units per
acre.



(Ord. No. O-15-1-20-4, § 2, 1-20-15)



Secs. 21-212--21-220. Reserved.



ARTICLE IX
OVERLAY DISTRICTS



Sec. 21-221. Intent.



   It is the intent of this article to define specific overlay districts
in the City of Marion. The standards for overlay districts are in addition to
the general use district.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(900), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-222. D-O downtown overlay district.



   The downtown overlay district (D-O) is established to provide
development and design standards for the entire downtown and Main Street
corridor, which are in addition to underlying general use districts. Within
the overlay district there exist multiple general use districts. Each parcel
retains the same requirements for its designated general use district in
addition to the standards set forth for the downtown overlay district. Where
noted, the uses and standards of the D-O supersede those uses and standards
of the underlying districts.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(900), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-222.1. Purpose.



   The purpose for the D-O is to enhance the aesthetic, functional and
economic qualities of and emphasize the importance of the significant
downtown area and to enhance and protect significant properties despite their
varying general-use zoning districts in:



   (1)   Defining and protecting the downtown architectural,
environmental and visual character;



   (2)   Providing for the safe and efficient movement of vehicles and
pedestrians; and



   (3)   Contributing to the physical, social and economic well-being
of the downtown Marion.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(900), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-222.2. Design standards.



   (1)    Facades. In no case shall a new structure, addition, or
facade improvement have metal siding. Recommended sidings include masonry,
stone, stucco, or other traditional materials.



   (2)   Awnings.



   (A)   Awnings should have a clearing of at least nine (9) feet above
ground level and may project over sidewalk if properly anchored.



   (B)   Awnings should fit the store front opening and emphasize
building proportions.



   (C)   Awnings should not obscure or damage important architectural
building details.



   (D)   Awnings should align with others on the block.



   (E)   Awning should be mounted to align with top edge of transom or
fit framing between clerestory and display window.



   (F)   Awnings should coordinate with the color scheme of entire
building and surrounding structures.



   (G)   Awnings may be of flexible material or fixed, however fabric
awnings are preferred.



   (H)   Awnings create a visual interest to the building, provide
shade, shelter and add variety to the streetscape.



   (I)   Awnings should be positioned to emphasize special shapes or
details of the facade, draw attention to an entry, or emphasize a display
window.



   (3)   Windows. Boarding or bricking of windows is prohibited.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(900), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-222.3 Exemption to design standards.




The Marion Business Association or other advisory committee designated by the
Marion City Council serving as the Façade Grant Committee may grant an
exemption to Section 21-222.2 Design Standards above as part of an approved
grant application in order to allow greater flexibility in design which is
determined by the Committee to meet or exceed the purpose of the Downtown
Overlay District.




(Ord. No. O-16-06-07-1, § 2, 6-7-16)



Secs. 21-223--21-230. Reserved.



ARTICLE IX.5
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS



Sec. 21-231. Purpose.



   The dimensional development standards in this chapter establish lot
sizes and certain restrictions for all residential and nonresidential
development. These standards allow for variety in housing and building types
while striving to maintain and enhance the overall character of neighborhoods
and commercial areas within the City of Marion. Standards established in this
section are based on recommendations made in Marion’s 2012 Comprehensive
Land Use Plan, and are specific to both the type of land use and the zoning
district in which it is established.  Separate standards are established to
regulate residential and nonresidential development in each district. This
approach to district development standards implements the Comprehensive Plan
and has several public benefits:



   (1)   It allows for development that is more sensitive to the
environment and allows for the preservation of open and natural areas.



   (2)   It promotes quality site layout and energy-efficient
development.



   (3)   It promotes affordable and life-cycle housing.



   (4)   It promotes development intensities that match existing and
proposed infrastructure investments.



   (5)   It promotes infill development that is consistent in character
and scale with established neighborhoods.



   (6)   It promotes compact land development that supports alternative
transportation, such as bicycling, walking, and public transit.



   (7)   It promotes market-based development decisions while
protecting shared public interests.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-7, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-232. Dimensional standards general.



   (1)   Maximum residential density.



      (A)   All residential density and non-residential intensity
shall meet the standards as set forth below.



      (B)   The North Carolina Department of Health is authorized to
require a larger minimum lot size when public water or wastewater service is
not available or utilized.



      (C)   No individual accessory structure shall exceed two
thousand (2,000) square feet within the R-1 or R-2 single-family residential
lot.  All accessory structures shall meet the primary structure setback
unless otherwise indicated in this chapter.



      (D)   No building shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height
unless written approval is provided by the City of Marion fire chief in order
to determine the following:



         1.   If the height of the structure exceeds the fire
fighting capacity of the fire department; and



         2.   To determine if the structure meets fire safety
standards per the North Carolina Building Code.



   (2)   Street thoroughfare density bonus.



      An increase in the maximum residential density may be granted for
exceptional residential projects that abut a major or minor street
thoroughfare in an effort to encourage infill development while preserving
traditional single-family neighborhoods.



      An increase of 20% maximum residential density is permitted in
all residential zoning districts with the exception of the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District, if the following conditions are met:



      (A)   The residential project is of exceptional design and
quality that enhances the aesthetic appearance of the roadway corridor;



      (B)   It is located along a major or minor street thoroughfare
with a right-of-way greater than 50 feet in width;



      (C)   The parcel maintains at least 80 feet of street frontage
along the said street thoroughfare;



      (D)   There are no more than two centralized driveways per
public roadway frontage that are constructed in a manner that provides direct
access to all dwelling units within the development.



   (3)   Steep slope dimensional standards.



      (A)   Where the average natural slope is between fifteen
percent (15%) and twenty-five percent (25%) dimensional requirements are as
follows:



 

Average Cross Slope
 

Between
15% and 25%

 

Between
25.1% and 40%

 

Greater than 40%



Average Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
 

12,000

 

25,000

 

1 acre



Minimum Lot Size 80% of Lots (square feet)
 

12,700

 

28,000

 

48,000



Minimum Lot Size (square feet)
 

9,000

 

14,000

 

25,000



Minimum Lot Street Frontage (Feet)
 

70

 

100

 

140



Minimum Lot Frontage Cul-de-sac.
 

45

 

55

 

70



Minimum Average lot Width
 

70

 

100

 

130




 



      (B)   Flag lot.



         1.   In exceptional cases City Council may approve flag
lots where it is impractical to serve an isolated lot by a public street.



         2.   The street frontage of a flag lot shall have a
minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet providing an access strip between two
(2) regular lots to the isolated parcel.



         3.   The area of such strip shall be excluded in
computing the lot area and width, and the length of such strip shall not
exceed three hundred (300) feet.



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-7, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-232.1. Dimensional standards by residential district.



   (A)   R-1 single family residential dimensional standards. All
residential development in R-1 shall meet the standards in the table below,
except that, any legally established lot of record created prior to the
effective date of this ordinance may be developed with a single family
residence provided all other provisions of the city code are met. For
illustrations, lot dimensions, and required yards for each land use type, see
section 21-232.2.



 

Residential Property Dimensional Standards
 

R-1



Residential Density (units per acre)
 

6



Minimum Lot Size ( square feet)
 

10,000



Minimum Average Lot Width (feet)
 

70



Minimum Public Street Frontage (feet)
 

35



Minimum Public Street Frontage Corner Lot (feet)
 

50




 



   (B)   R-2 neighborhood residential dimensional standards. All
residential development in R-2 shall meet the standards in the table below,
except that, any legally established lot of record created prior to the
effective date of this ordinance may be developed with a single family
residence provided all other provisions of the city code are met. For
illustrations, lot dimensions, and required yards for each land use type, see
section 21-232.2.



 

Residential Property Dimensional Standards
 

R2





Residential Density (units per acre)
 

6



Multifamily/PRD (units per acre)
 

10



Minimum Lot Size (square feet)
 

7,000



Minimum Average Lot Width (feet)
 

50



Mill Village Overlay

Minimum Lot Size (square feet)
 

5,000



Mill Village Overlay

Minimum Average Lot Width (feet)
 

50



Minimum Public Street Frontage (feet)
 

35



Minimum Public Street Frontage Corner Lot (feet)
 

50





 



   (C)   R-3 mixed-use residential dimensional standards. All
residential development in R-3 shall meet the standards in the table below,
except that, any legally established lot of record created prior to the
effective date of this ordinance may be developed with a single family
residence provided all other provisions of the city code are met. For
illustrations, lot dimensions, and required yards for each land use type, see
section 21-232.2.



 

Residential Property Dimensional Standards
 

R-3



Residential Density (units per acre)
 

10



Multifamily/ PRD (units per acre)
 

16



Minimum Lot Size (square feet)
 

5,000



Minimum Average Lot Width (feet)
 

40



Minimum Public Street Frontage (feet)
 

35



Minimum Public Street Frontage Corner Lot (feet)
 

50




 



   (D)   R-4 multi-family residential dimensional standards. All
residential development in R-4 shall meet the standards in the table below,
except that, any legally established lot of record created prior to the
effective date of this ordinance may be developed with a single family
residence provided all other provisions of the city code are met. For
illustrations, lot dimensions, and required yards for each land use type, see
section 21-232.2.



 

Residential Property Dimensional Standards
 

R-4



Residential Density (units per acre)
 

20







Minimum Average Lot Width (feet)
 

100



Minimum Public Street Frontage (feet)
 

50



Minimum Public Street Frontage Corner Lot (feet)
 

80




 



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-7, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-232.2. Residential development standards.



   (A)   Single-family detached house.



      (1)   General description. A single-family detached house is a
dwelling unit of any design including but not limited to site-built, modular,
or manufactured located on an individual lot with yards on all four sides of
the house.  Vehicular access can take place from the front, side, or rear of
the lot.



      (2)   Development standards. Unless otherwise provided for
within the City Code, a single-family home, including site built, modular, or
manufactured design shall be permitted in accordance with the following
development standards table.



Table 21-232.2 Single-Family Dwelling Development Standards By District.



 

Residential Property Dimensional Standards
 

R1

 

R2

 

R3

 

MVO

 

R4





Street Frontage
 



 



 



 



 





Minimum Public Street Frontage (ref. Chapter 16 16-55.)
 

35 ft.

 

50 ft.



Minimum Public Street Frontage Corner Lot

(ref. Sec. 16-55.)
 

50 ft.

 

80 ft.



Minimum Yard Setbacks
 



 



 



 



 





Front Yard Setback
 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

35 ft.



Rear Yard Setback
 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

25 ft.



Side Yard Setback
 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.



Maximum Building Height
 



 



 



 



 





Maximum Building Height Principal Building
 

35 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

45 ft



Maximum Building Height Accessory Building or Structure
 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

35 ft.





 



(Ord. No. O-15-01-20-7, § 2, 1-20-15)



Sec. 21-233. C-1 central business.



   Minimum lot area: NA



   Minimum yard requirements: NA



   Maximum building height: NA



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. IX.5), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  3, 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-234. C-2 general business.



   Minimum lot area:



   Lot area: 4



   Lot width: NA



   Minimum yard requirements:



   Front yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet.



   Side yard setback: NA



   Rear yard setback: NA



   Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. IX.5), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  3, 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-235. M-1 industrial.



   Minimum lot size:



   Lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.



   Lot width: One hundred (100) feet.



   Minimum yard requirements:



   Front yard setback: Twenty-five (25) feet.



   Side yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet.



   Rear yard setback: Twenty-five (25) feet 5 .



   Maximum building height: Fifty (50) feet 6 .



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. IX.5), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  3, 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-236. O-I office and institutional.



   Minimum lot size:



   Lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.



   Lot width: Eighty (80) feet.



   Minimum yard requirements:



   Front yard setback: Twenty-five (25) feet.



   Side yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet.



   Rear yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet.



   Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. IX.5), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  3, 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-237. B-1 neighborhood business.



   Minimum lot size:



   Lot area: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.



   Lot width: Eighty (80) feet.



   Minimum yard requirements:



   Front yard setback: Twenty-five (25) feet.



   Side yard setback: Ten (10) feet.



   Rear yard setback: Ten (10) feet.



   Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet.



   Maximum gross floor space: Two thousand (2,000) square feet.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. IX.5), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  3, 8-19-08)



Sec. 21-238. PR parks and recreation.



   Minimum lot size: N/A



   Minimum yard requirements:



   Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet for all building(s) and accessory
structures.



   Side yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet for all building(s) and accessory
structures contiguous to a residential zoning district.



   Rear yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet for all building(s) and accessory
structures contiguous to a residential zoning district.



   Maximum building height: Thirty-five (35) feet.



   Maximum gross floor space: Two thousand (2,000) square feet 7



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. IX.5), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3, 
1(6), 1-15-08; Ord. No. O-08-08-19-4,  3, 8-19-08)



Secs. 21-239--21-250. Reserved.



ARTICLE X
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS



Sec. 21-251. Intent.



   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter is mandatory except
that under the specific conditions enumerated in the following sections the
requirements may be varied or modified as so stated.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(art. X), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-252. Front yard setbacks for dwellings.



   The front yard setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall
not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings, located
either wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such
lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side
of the street, is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the
setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than
the average of the setbacks of the aforementioned existing buildings.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1000), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-253. Side and rear yard setback.



   Where a side or rear yard abuts a street, the setback requirement for
said street yard shall be the same as the front yard setback requirements for
abutting property on the side street. Where a side or rear yard abuts an
alley, the setback requirement shall be the same as the side or rear yard
setback requirement set forth in article IX, dimensional requirements and
shall be measured from the edge of the alley right-of-way.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1001), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-254. Projections into required open space.



   Every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to
the sky unobstructed, except as follows:



   (1)   The ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices,
buttresses, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of
the above shall project into a minimum side yard more than twenty-four (24)
inches.



   (2)   Open or enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and
balconies projecting into a minimum yard not more than three and one-half (3
) feet, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted
by the zoning administrator where same are so placed as not to obstruct the
light and ventilation.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1002), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-255. Planned unit development.



   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage and provide for
flexibility and innovation in the design and location of structures and land
development, to provide for the most efficient use of land resources, and to
provide an opportunity to develop land areas in a manner different from the
standard arrangement of one (1) principal building on one (1) lot. It is
further intended that a planned unit development will be in harmony with the
character of the district in which it is located.



   Planned unit development defined. See section 21-21.



   Land development standards. The following land development standards
shall apply for all planned unit developments. These planned unit
developments may be located only in certain specified districts as special
exceptions, subject to a finding by the board that the following conditions
exists:



   (1)   Ownership control. The land in a planned unit development
shall be under single ownership or management by the applicant before final
approval and/or construction, or proper assurances (legal title or execution
of a binding sale agreement) shall be provided that the development can be
successfully completed by the applicant.



   (2)   Density requirements. There are no density requirements for
nonresidential uses as long as the proposed project does not violate the
intent of the district in which it is located. The proposed residential
density of the planned unit development shall conform to that permitted in
the district in which the development is located as indicated in article VI,
applications of regulations. If the planned unit development lies in more
than one (1) district, the number of allowable dwelling units must be
separately calculated for each portion of the planned unit development that
is in a separate district, and must then be combined to determine the number
of dwelling units allowable in the entire planned unit development.



   (3)   Frontage requirement. Planned unit developments shall have
access to a highway or road suitable for the scale and density of development
being proposed.



   (4)   Minimum requirements.



   (A)   Required distance between buildings. The minimum distance
between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet or as otherwise specified by the
board to ensure adequate air, light, privacy, and space for emergency
vehicles.



   (B)   Every dwelling unit shall have access to a public or private
street, walkway or other area dedicated to common use, and there shall be
provision for adequate vehicular circulation to all development properties,
in order to ensure acceptable levels of access for emergency vehicles.



   (5)   Privacy. Each development shall provide reasonable visual and
acoustical privacy for all dwelling units. Fences, insulation, walks,
barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection
and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants and
adjacent properties for screening of objectionable views or uses, and for
reduction of noise. Multi-level buildings shall be located in such a way as
to dissipate any adverse impact on adjoining low rise buildings and shall not
invade the privacy of the occupants of such low rise buildings.



   (6)   Perimeter requirements. Structures located on the perimeter of
the development must be set back from property lines and right-of-way of
abutting streets in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance
controlling the district within which the property is situated.



   (7)   Plans and accompanying documentation to ensure that the water
and sewer systems proposed for the planned unit development have been
approved by the appropriate local and state agencies shall be submitted as
part of the application.



   (8)   Preliminary plans shall include parking provisions for all
proposed uses within the planned unit development in accordance with section
21-86 of article VII, general provisions. When more than one use is located
in the planned unit development, the minimum required parking shall be the
sum of the required parking for each use within the development.



   (9)   Any pedestrian and bicycle path circulation system and its
related walkways shall be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicle and
pedestrian traffic.



   (10)   Layout of parking areas, service areas, entrances, exits,
yards, courts and landscaping, and control of signs, lighting, noise or other
potentially adverse influences shall be such as to protect the character
within the zoning district and desirable character in any adjoining district.



   (11)   Conveyance and maintenance of open space, recreational areas
and communally owned facilities shall be in accordance with the Unit
Ownership Act (Chapter 47-A of the North Carolina General Statutes) and/or
any other appropriate mechanisms acceptable to the board.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1003), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-256. Right-of-way.



   Street and highway right-of-way shall not be determined as a part of a
lot or any required yard or open space.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1004), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-257. Fences and walls.



   In any district the following regulations shall apply for any wall or
fence (either natural or manmade):



   (1)   Fences and walls may be permitted in a rear yard adjacent to
the lot line provided such fences and walls do not exceed eight (8) feet in
height.



   (2)   Fences and walls may be permitted in a side and/or front yard
adjacent to the lot line provided such fences and walls do not exceed six (6)
feet in height.



   (3)   On a corner lot, no fence or wall located along a property
line shall exceed six (6) feet in height if it is located adjacent to a front
or side lot line of any adjoining property.



   (4)   Fences and walls used to enclose the areas listed in (A),
below, or located in the districts listed in (B) through (D), below, shall
not exceed twelve (12) twelve feet in height and may be located adjacent to a
property line. However, no such fence or wall shall exceed the height limits
as set forth in (1) and (2) of this section when located in a side yard or if
adjacent to a street right-of-way line unless such fence or wall is set back
at least ten (10) feet from the lot line or the street right-of-way line:



   (A)   Recreational areas such as swimming pools, basketball courts,
handball courts, and tennis courts.



   (B)   C-2 general business district.



   (C)   M-1 industrial district.



   (D)   O-I office and institutional district.



   (5)   Retaining walls built specifically to keep a bank of earth
from sliding or water from flooding shall be permitted anywhere on the
property as needed provided it meets the requirements of the North Carolina
Building Code.



   (6)   No fence, wall or other obstruction shall be placed so as to
obstruct vision to a public street from any public or private drive.



   (7)   No fence or wall shall be permitted within a publicly
dedicated street right-of-way.



   (8)   All fence and wall heights shall be measured from ground level
at base of fence or wall.



   (9)   All fences shall be constructed with the finished surface
facing the exterior of the property with support posts placed to the inside,
except in cases where the fence posts are an integral part of the fence
design.



   (10)   Any fence constructed, maintained, or operated with barbed
wire, razor wire, electric fencing or other similar material with the ability
to cause harm is prohibited, except within the industrial zoning district.
Where permitted, such material shall be located no less than six (6) feet
from the ground and shall be angled away from any immediately adjacent
sidewalk, public street, or residential zoning district and shall be located
entirely inside the property.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1005), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-258--21-270. Reserved.



ARTICLE XI
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Sec. 21-271. Intent.



   It is the intent of this chapter that all questions arising in
connection with the enforcement or the interpretation of this chapter shall
be first presented to the zoning administrator and that such questions shall
be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the zoning
administrator and that from the decision of the board of adjustment, recourse
shall be taken to the courts as provided by law. It is further the intent of
this chapter that the duties of the city council in connection with this
chapter shall not include hearing and passing on disputed questions which
might arise in connection with the enforcement or interpretation of this
chapter, but the procedures for determining such questions shall be as stated
in this chapter, and, unless otherwise specified, the duties of the city
council in connection with this chapter shall be holding a public hearing and
voting upon any proposed amendment or repeal of this chapter as provided by
law, approving or rescinding approval of vested rights as provided in section
21-275 of this chapter, enacting moratoria on development approvals as
provided in section 21-276 of this chapter and establishing fees related to
this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1100), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-272. Zoning administrator.



   The Marion City Manager shall appoint a zoning administrator whose duty
it shall be to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-01,  1(1101), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec.  21-273. Zoning permit required.



   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered nor shall the use of any building or land be changed
(except as allowed by G.S. 160A-392) until the zoning administrator shall
have issued a zoning permit. No zoning permit shall be issued except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter except after written order
from the board of adjustment. The fee for the permit is to be determined by
the city council.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1102), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-273.1. Application for zoning permits.



   All applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by one (1)
set of plans. The plans shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with
subsection 21-273.2.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1102), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-273.2. Plan review.



   (1)    Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to:



   (A)   Provide site-specific information on a particular site's
capacity to support a proposed development.



   (B)   Insure compliance with the standards and requirements of the
City of Marion as they relate to individual cases.



   (C)   Document and record plans to insure compliance with approved
plans as well as to update the CGIS (city's geographical information system.)



   (D)   Provide a coordinated and timely review procedure by which to
insure comprehensive and equitable enforcement of the minimum standards of
the City of Marion.



   (E)   Promote and preserve the health, safety, and general welfare
of the people.



   (2)    Applicability and requirements.



   (A)   Plot plan required. No zoning or building permit for a
single-family or two-family dwelling, accessory structures and additions
involving fifty (50) percent or less increase of total square footage of a
structure on a single lot shall be issued until a plot plan has been
submitted and approved. Plot plans shall be drawn to scale and shall include
the following information:



   1.   The location and dimensions of proposed and existing structures.



   2.   The location of existing and proposed driveway, sidewalks,
streets and rights-of-way.



   (B)   Site plan required. No other zoning or building permit shall
be issued on a lot until a site plan has been approved submitted and reviewed
for the development. No new or amended site plan shall be required if an
adequate site plan is already on file, no increase in or rearrangement of
parking is proposed or required, and no increase in impervious surface is
proposed or required. Site plans submitted for approval must be drawn to a
scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet by an
engineer, land surveyor, architect or other qualified professional and shall
show the following information on one (1) or more sheets:



   1.   Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures
and setbacks from right-of-way and property lines. If no right-of-way exist,
indicate distance from traveled way.



   2.   Location of all utilities (water and sewer lines, manholes,
power lines, streetlights, and drainage structures) Include diameter and
materials used on new water and sewer lines.



   3.   Location of internal and external streets, rights-of-way,
sidewalks, entrances and exits.



   4.   Parking lots indicating individual spaces, loading zones, and
handicap parking. Adequate information to determine parking requirements.



   5.   Landscape plan as required by section 21-156.



   6.   Location of dumpsters and other refuse areas including
screening/ buffering plan.



   7.   Location and picture of proposed and existing signage as well
as sign permits



   8.   Pervious to nonpervious calculations.



   9.   All water, sewer, drainage, erosion control and street
facilities plans (including driveway permit) shall be submitted to the
appropriate official or agency prior to the final approval of the site plan
(if applicable.)



   (3)    Procedures. The zoning administrator shall review all plans
and insure compliance with the City of Marion's Codes and Ordinances. If the
use is a special exception then the site plan will be forwarded to the
planning board and the board of adjustment. If the proposed use is a
permitted use, the zoning administrator will review, insure compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter and issue a zoning permit upon
approval.



   For large-scale developments, a technical review committee (TRC) will
review the plan to insure consistency with the City of Marion's codes,
ordinances, and operational concerns. The technical review committee consists
of the zoning administrator, building inspector, and representatives from
each appropriate department.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1102), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-273.3. Construction progress.



   If no substantial construction progress has been made within six (6)
months of the date of issuance of the zoning permit, or if the work
authorized is suspended for a period of one (1) year, the permit becomes
invalid.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1102), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-274. Certificate of occupancy required.



   A certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is
required in advance of:



   (1)   Occupancy or use of a building thereafter erected, altered, or
moved.



   (2)   A change of use of any building or land.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1103), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-274.1. Application for occupancy permit.



   A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a
building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a zoning
permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or
structural alteration of such building, or part, shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to
the applicable provisions of this chapter. If the certificate of occupancy is
denied, the zoning administrator shall state in writing the reasons for
refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all
certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator
and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary
or tenancy interest in the building or land involved.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1103), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-274.2. Remedies.



   In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the zoning administrator, or any other appropriate
city authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in
additional to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1103), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-275. Establishment of vested rights.



   (1)    A vested right shall be deemed established with respect to
any property upon the valid approval or conditional approval of a
site-specific development plan by the city council, following notice and a
public hearing, in accordance with procedures outlined in this section and
G.S. 160A-385.1. Such vested right shall confer upon the landowner the right
to undertake the development and use of the property under the terms and
conditions of the approved site-specific development plan and shall preclude
any zoning action of the City of Marion that would change, alter, impair,
prevent, diminish or otherwise delay the development or use of the property
as set forth in the approved plan. The establishment of a vested right shall
not preclude, however, the application of overlay zoning that imposes
additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity
of use; nor shall it preclude the application of ordinances or regulations
that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land
use regulations by the City of Marion including, but not limited to,
building, fire, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes. Otherwise, any
applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with respect to
property for which a vested right has been established only upon the
expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with paragraph
(3) of this section.



   (2)    Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this
section:



   (A)   Landowner. Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real
property, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns and personal
representative of such owner. The landowner may allow a person holding a
valid option to purchase to act as his agent or representative for purposes
of submitting a proposed site specific development plan in a manner allowed
by this chapter.



   (B)   Property. All real property subject to zoning regulations and
restriction by the City of Marion.



   (C)   Site specific development plan. A plan that has been submitted
to the City of Marion by a landowner describing with reasonable certainty the
type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property. Such
a plan is hereby defined as the information and review procedures required
for the approval of a special exception as contained in article XII of this
chapter.



   (D)   Vested right. The right to undertake and complete the
development and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved
site specific development plan.



   (3)    Establishment, duration and termination of a vested right.



   (A)   In order to establish a vested right, a landowner shall submit
a site specific development plan as outlined in this section and any
applicable fee as established by the city council. The applicant must
indicate at the time of application, on a form to be provided by the city,
that a zoning vested right is being sought. Each map, plat, site plan or
other document submitted evidencing a site specific development plan shall
contain the following notation: "APPROVAL OF THIS PLAN ESTABLISHES A VESTED
RIGHT UNDER G.S. 160A-385.1. UNLESS TERMINATED AT AN EARLIER DATE, THE ZONING
VESTED RIGHT SHALL BE VALID UNTIL ________."



   (B)   Landowners electing to pursue the vested rights option will be
subject to review procedures as specified in subsection 21-303.2, special
exceptions, except that the approval authority for vested rights applications
filed under this section shall be the city council. The city council, in
considering vested rights applications (and their termination, as provided
below), shall act in a quasi-judicial capacity. The city council may approve
a site specific development plan under such terms and conditions as may be
determined necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
Failure of the landowner to comply with the approved terms and conditions
will result in forfeiture of vested rights approval.



   (C)   A right which as been vested shall remain vested for a period
of two (2) years, and shall not be extended by any amendment or modification
of the approved site specific development plan. A right which has been vested
shall expire or terminate as follows:



   1.   At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to
buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been
filed;



   2.   With the written consent of the affected landowner;



   3.   Upon findings by the city council, by ordinance and after
notice and a public hearing, that natural or manmade hazards on or in the
immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare if the project were to
proceed in accordance with said approval;



   4.   To the extent that the affected landowner receives compensation
for all costs, expenses and other losses incurred including, but not limited
to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural,
planning, marketing, legal and other consultant's fees incurred after
approval of the site specific development plan, together with interest
thereon at the legal rate until paid, but not including any diminution in the
value of the property which is caused by such action;



   5.   Upon findings by the city council, by ordinance and after
notice and a public hearing, that the landowner or his representative
intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material
misrepresentations which affected the approval of the site specific
development plan;



   6.   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or
regulation which precludes development as contemplated in the approval site
specific development plan, in which case the city council may modify the
affected provisions upon a finding, by ordinance and after notice and a
public hearing, that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental
effect on the approved site specific development plan.



   (4)    The Marion City Council may rescind the approval of a site
specific development plan for failure to comply with applicable terms and
conditions as specified in the approval of said plan or as specified by this
chapter.



   (5)    Upon issuance of a building permit, the provisions of G.S.
160A-418 and G.S. 160A-422 shall apply, except that a permit shall not expire
or be revoked because of the running of time which a vested right under this
section is outstanding.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1104), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-276. Adoption of moratoria on development approvals.



   Per G.S. 160A-381, the city council may adopt temporary moratoria on
any City of Marion development approval required by law. The duration of any
moratorium shall be reasonable in light of the specific conditions that
warrant imposition of the moratorium and may not exceed the period of time
necessary to correct, modify, or resolve such conditions. Except in cases of
imminent and substantial threat to public health or safety, before adopting
an ordinance imposing a development moratorium with a duration of sixty (60)
days or any shorter period, the city council shall hold a public hearing and
shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area not less than seven (7) days before the date set for
the hearing. A development moratorium with a duration of sixty-one (61) days
or longer, and any extension of a moratorium so that the total duration is
sixty-one (61) days or longer, is subject to the notice and hearing
requirements of G.S. 160A-364. Absent an imminent threat to public health or
safety, a development moratorium adopted pursuant to this section shall not
apply to any project for which a valid building permit issued pursuant to
G.S. 160A-417 is outstanding, to any project for which a special exception
application has been accepted under this chapter, to development set forth in
a site-specific development plan approved pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1 and
this chapter, to development for which substantial expenditures have already
been made in good faith reliance on a prior valid administrative or
quasi-judicial permit or approval, or to preliminary or final subdivision
plats that have been accepted for review by the City of Marion prior to the
call for public hearing to adopt the moratorium. Any preliminary subdivision
plat accepted for review by the city prior to the call for public hearing, if
subsequently approved, shall be allowed to proceed to final plat approval
without being subject to the moratorium.



   Any ordinance establishing a development moratorium must expressly
include at the time of adoption each of the following:



   (1)   A clear statement of the problems or conditions necessitating
the moratorium and what courses of action, alternative to a moratorium, were
considered by the city and why those alternative courses of action were not
deemed adequate.



   (2)   A clear statement of the development approvals subject to the
moratorium and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems
or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.



   (3)   An express date for termination of the moratorium and a
statement setting forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address
the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.



   (4)   A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for those
actions, proposed to be taken by the city during the duration of the
moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the
moratorium.



   No moratorium may be subsequently renewed or extended for any
additional period unless the city shall have taken all reasonable and
feasible steps proposed to be taken by the city in its ordinance establishing
the moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of
the moratorium and unless new facts and conditions warrant an extension. Any
ordinance renewing or extending a development moratorium must expressly
include, at the time of adoption, the findings set forth in subdivisions (1)
through (4) of this section, including what new facts or conditions warrant
the extension.



   Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a moratorium on development
approvals required by law may apply to the appropriate division of the
general court of justice for an order enjoining the enforcement of the
moratorium, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue that order.
Actions brought pursuant to this section shall be set down for immediate
hearing, and subsequent proceedings in those actions shall be accorded
priority by the trial and appellate courts. In any such action, the city
shall have the burden of showing compliance with the procedural requirements
of this subsection.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1105), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-277--21-300. Reserved.



ARTICLE XII
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD



Sec. 21-301. Establishment of board.



   The Marion City Council has, by ordinance, created the planning and
zoning board, hereafter referred to as the "board," as authorized by G.S.
160A-361. Said board performs the duties of a planning board as allowed by
the North Carolina General Statutes and the Marion Zoning Ordinance. Under
the provisions of G.S. 160A-388 the board also performs the duties of a board
of adjustment as outlined by the North Carolina General Statutes and the
Marion Zoning Ordinance. Composition, organization and proceedings of the
board shall be as established in the ordinance creating said board and in the
adopted by-laws or rules of procedure of said board. Depending on the
particular duties it must perform, the board may be referred to in this
chapter as the "planning board" or the "board of adjustment".



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1200), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-302. Appeals from decision of the zoning administrator.



   Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, or board of the City of Marion affected by any decision
of the zoning administrator or other city official based on this chapter.
Such appeal shall be filed in accordance with the adopted by-laws or rules of
procedure of the board. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to
the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board, after
the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator and on due
cause shown.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1203), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-303. Powers and duties of the board.



   The board shall have the following powers and duties:



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1204), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-303.1. Administrative review.



   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning
administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1204), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-303.2. Special exceptions.



   To hear and decide only such special exception as the board is
specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of this chapter. To decide
such questions as are involved in determining whether a special exception
should be granted. To grant special exceptions with such conditions and
safeguards when not in harmony with the intent of this chapter. A special
exception may be granted by the board only after it makes the following
written findings:



   (1)   That the board is empowered under a specific section of this
chapter to grant the special exception and that the granting of the special
exception will not adversely affect the public interest.



   (2)   That the proposed special exception complies with all specific
rules governing the individual special exception and that satisfactory
provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following wherever
applicable:



   (A)   Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures with
particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety, convenience,
traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe.



   (B)   Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the
items in (1) and (2) above.



   (C)   Off-street parking and loading areas where required with
particular attention to the items in one (1) above and to the economic,
noise, glare or odor effects of the special exception on adjoining properties
and generally in the district.



   (D)   Utilities, with reference to location, availability and
compatibility.



   (E)   Screening and buffering, with reference to type, dimensions,
and character.



   (F)   Sign, if any, and proposed exterior lighting, with reference
to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district.



   (G)   Required yards and other open spaces.



   (H)   General compatibility with adjacent property and other
property in the district.



   (I)   Relation of the special exception to applicable elements if
the city's planning program (see (3) below).



   (J)   Appearance of the special exception relative to location,
structures, and design (see (3), below).



   (3)   The board shall request the Marion Planning Board to review
and make recommendations concerning the special exception relative to the
following considerations:



   (A)   Relation of the special exception to applicable elements of
the city's planning program.



   (B)   Appearance of the special exception relative to location,
structures, and design.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1204), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-303.3. Variances.



   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms
of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such
variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon
a finding by the board that the following conditions exist:



   (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining
to the particular place or property in question because of its size, shape or
topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same
district.



   (2)   Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the
applicant any special privileges that are denied to other residents of the
district in which the property is located.



   (3)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of
the district in which the property is located.



   (4)   The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and
intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to
the general welfare.



   (5)   The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of
the applicant.



   (6)   The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make
possible the legal use of the land, building and structure.



   (7)   The variance is not a request to permit a use of land,
building, or structure which is not permitted by right or by special
exception in the district involved.



   In granting a variance the board may prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violations of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation which shall be punishable under sections
1-10--1-10.17 of this Code. The existence of a non-conforming use of
neighboring buildings or structures in the same district or of permitted or
nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the
requested variance.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1204), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-304. Appeals from the board.



   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the board, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the
City of Marion may, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the board, but not thereafter, present to a court of
competent jurisdiction a petition duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the ground of
illegality, whereupon such decision of said board shall be subject to review
by certiorari as provided by law.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1205), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-305. Fees for variances, appeals, and special exceptions.



   The Marion City Council shall establish a fee schedule for each
application for a variance, special exception or appeal, to cover the
necessary administrative costs and advertising.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1206), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-306--21-309. Reserved.



ARTICLE XII.5.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



Sec. 21-310. Purpose.



   The historical heritage of Marion is one (1) of the city's most valued
and important assets. The conservation of and preservation of historic
districts and landmarks stabilize and increase property values in their areas
and strengthen the overall economy of the city. The purpose of establishing
local historic districts and landmarks is to encourage the restoration,
preservation, rehabilitation and conservation of historically,
architecturally, and archaeologically significant areas, structures,
buildings, sites, objects and their surroundings, and to review new
construction design to ensure compatibility with the character of the
district and to safeguard against any potentially adverse influences which
may cause the decline, decay, or total destruction of these important assets.
In addition, the preservation of historic districts and landmarks provides
for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of Marion and the
state as a whole.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-310.1. Definitions.



   For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:



   Alteration. Any change because of construction, repair, maintenance or
otherwise to buildings located within a historic district or to buildings
designated as a historic landmark.



   Archeological resource. Material evidence of past human activity which
is found below the surface of the ground or water, portions of which may be
visible above the surface.



   Building. Any structure, place or any other construction build for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels or any part of such
structure when subdivided by division walls or party walls extending to or
above the roof and without openings in such separate walls.



   Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the
historic preservation commission for work proposed in a historic district or
to or on a historic landmark.



   Commission. The historic preservation commission of the City of Marion,
as established in this chapter 21 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Marion.



   Construction. The erection of any onsite improvements on any parcel of
ground located within a historic district or on or to a historic landmark,
whether the site is presently improved, unimproved or becomes unimproved by
demolition, destruction of the improvements located thereon by fire,
windstorm or other casualty after the adoption of the ordinance from which
this article derives.



   Demolition. The complete or constructive removal by an applicant of a
building on any historic landmark or in any historic district.



   Designation. The creation of a historic district or a historic landmark
through the passage of an ordinance by the appropriate governing body.



   Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general
design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other
structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material
and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other
appurtenant fixtures. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, exterior
architectural features shall be construed to mean the style, material, size
and location of all such signs.



   Historic district. An overlay district established by the Marion City
Council for an area deemed to be of special significance in terms of its
history, prehistory, architecture, and/or culture, and to possess integrity
of design, setting, materials, feeling and/or association.



   Historic landmark. Any building, structure, site, artifact above or
below ground, area or object which is designated as a historic landmark by
ordinance of the city council due to its special significance in terms of its
historical, pre-historical, architectural or cultural importance and its
possession of integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling
and/or association.



   Ordinary repairs and maintenance. Work done on a building to prevent it
from deterioration or to replace any part thereof in order to correct any
deterioration, decay or damage to a building or any part thereof in order to
restore such building as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such
deterioration, decay or damage.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-311. Jurisdiction of historic preservation commission.



   There is hereby established a commission which shall be known as the
Marion Historic Preservation Commission. Its jurisdiction shall include the
City of Marion as shown on the official zoning map of the city.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-311.1. Number of members, method of appointment, composition of
commission, criteria for appointment, term of office, reimbursement.



   The commission shall be a five-member commission appointed by the city
council. A majority of the members of the commission shall have demonstrated
special interest, experience or education in history, architecture,
archaeology or related fields; and all the members shall reside within the
territorial jurisdiction of the City of Marion, the limits of which are shown
on the official zoning map of the City of Marion, North Carolina.



   Members shall be appointed for four-year staggered terms. In the case
of a vacancy occurring during a term, such vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of such term.



   The commission shall serve without compensation except that they shall
be reimbursed for actual expenses incident to the performance of their duties
within the limits of any funds available to the commission.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-311.2. Rules of procedure, design guidelines and meetings.



   The historic preservation commission shall develop and adopt rules of
procedure that govern the conduct of its business in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance. Such rules of procedure shall also include as
an appendix "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and
Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" and the
"McDowell County Design Guidelines" including photographs, illustrations,
descriptions and other similar material interpreting the criteria for
determining appropriateness. The design guidelines shall be placed on file in
the City of Marion Planning and Development office and made available to the
general public during the regular city office business hours.



   Specific provisions shall be made in the commission's rules of
procedure for commission meetings following the filing of a proposal on which
the commission is required to pass. Such specific provisions shall be made in
order that a proposal be brought before the commission:



   (a)   Within a reasonable time;



   (b)   In a manner which is conducive to commission consideration; and



   (c)   In a manner which will facilitate commission action.



   The commission shall meet at regularly scheduled times and at such
other times as the commission may determine or at the call of its chairman as
provided for in its rules of procedure.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-311.3. Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the historic preservation commission shall be
to:



   (a)   Undertake an inventory of properties of historical,
prehistorical, architectural, and/or cultural significance;



   (b)   Recommend to the city council areas to be designated by
ordinance as "historic districts"; and individual structures, buildings,
sites, areas, or objects to be designated by ordinance as "landmarks";



   (c)   Recommend to the governing board that designation of any area
as a historic district or part thereof, or designation of any building,
structure, site, area, or object as a landmark, be revoked or removed for
cause;



   (d)   Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation
element as part of the municipality's comprehensive plan; and



   (e)   Review and act upon proposals for alterations, demolitions, or
new construction within historic districts, or for the alteration or
demolition of designated landmarks.



   The Marion Historic Preservation Commission shall exercise such other
powers and perform such other duties or activities as are required elsewhere
by the Marion Zoning Ordinance or the General Statutes of North Carolina or
as assigned by the Marion City Council.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-312. Historic designation process.



   (1)    Properties previously designated by county. Properties listed
on the National Register of Historic Places as a landmark or as a historic
district as of the date of this ordinance are hereby designated historic
properties under this article.



   (2)    Initiation of historic designation process. The designation
process under this article shall be initiated by the submission of an
application requesting historic designation to the department of planning and
development services, on a form prescribed by the director, by either the
owner of the proposed historic property, his authorized agent, Marion City
Council, or the historic preservation commission. The applicant shall provide
information, which illustrates that the property meets the criteria for
listing as set forth in this article. The information submitted must include
sufficient preliminary information to enable staff's review for an initial
determination that the property meets the minimum eligibility criteria. The
proposal shall include a legal description of the property, a statement
explaining the historic, architectural, archaeological, or cultural
significance, photographs of the property, and any other materials or
documents that may be used in evaluation of the subject site.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-313. Historic district and landmark establishment.



   Historic districts and landmarks are established through the
application of an overlay district which are zoning districts that are
applied only in conjunction with other zoning districts, and may grant
additional use or development requirements upon the underlying zoning
controlling the use and development of a lot to ensure the compatibility and
appropriateness of exterior design within the historic district or for the
landmark.



   Overlay districts can be applied to any zoning districts and the
boundaries of such overlay shall be shown on the official zoning map of the
City of Marion as an "HD historic district". An overlay district can be
initiated as an amendment by city council, planning board, historic
preservation commission, a property owner, or his/her agent.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-313.1. Designation of historic districts.



   The city council may adopt, amend, reject, or repeal ordinances
designating historic districts when adoption or amendment is pursuant to the
following procedure:



   (a)   An investigation and report describing the historical,
architectural, or archaeological significance of the buildings, structures,
features, sites or surroundings included in any such proposed district, and
the description of the boundaries of such district has been prepared.



   (b)   The North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, acting
through the state historic preservation officer or his or her designee, shall
make an analysis of and recommendations concerning such report and
description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the department to submit its
written analysis and recommendations to the city council within thirty (30)
calendar days after a written request for such analysis has been received by
the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources shall relieve the city of
any responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and the city council may at
any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning
ordinance.



   (c)   Historic districts shall consist of areas which are deemed to
be of special significance in terms of their history, prehistory,
architecture and/or culture, and to possess integrity of design, setting,
materials, feeling, and association. The area, buildings, structures, sites,
or objects shall be significant elements of cultural, social, economic,
political, or architectural history of the city or of the archaeological
history or prehistory of the city. The conservation of such a district will
provide for the education, pleasure and enhancement of the quality of life of
all residents of the city.



   (d)   The historic preservation commission, planning board, and city
council shall each hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance to
designate the boundaries of a historic district in accordance with the
procedures set forth in article XIII, section 21-321, amendments.



   (e)   Following the city council designation and approval of a
historic district, the area so designated shall be labeled "HD" on the
official zoning map.



   (f)   With respect to any changes in the boundaries of such district
subsequent to its initial establishment or the creation of additional
districts within the city, the investigative studies and reports shall be
prepared by the historic preservation commission and shall be referred to the
city council for its review and comment. Changes in the boundaries of an
initial district or proposals for additional districts shall also be
submitted to the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources in
accordance with the provisions as stated in subsection (b) above.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-313.2. Designation of landmarks.



   The city council may adopt, amend, reject, or repeal ordinances
designating historic landmarks that meet the following criteria, when those
ordinances contain the following elements and when adoption or amendment is
pursuant to the following procedure:



   (a)   Criteria for designation: No building, structure, site, area,
or object shall be recommended for designation as a historic landmark unless
it is deemed and found by the historic preservation commission to be of
special significance in terms of its historical, prehistorical,
architectural, archaeological, and for cultural importance, and to possess
integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or
association.



   (b)   Elements of ordinances designating historic landmarks:
Ordinances designating historic landmarks shall contain the following
elements:



   1.   Describe each property designated in the ordinance, including
the approximate area of the property so designated.



   2.   List the name or names of the owner or owners of the property.



   3.   Describe those elements of the property that are integral to
its historical, prehistorical, architectural, archaeological and/or cultural
significance.



   4.   Describe the nature of the commission's jurisdiction over the
interior, if any, and those interior features of the property to be reviewed
for certificates of appropriateness if they are to be changed.



   5.   Require, for each building, structure, site, area, or object
designated as an historic landmark that the waiting period set forth in the
general statutes be observed prior to its demolition.



   6.   Provide any other information the city council deems necessary
within the authority conferred by the general statutes.



   (c)   Procedure for adopting or amending historic landmark
ordinances: Ordinances designating historic landmarks shall be adopted and
amended according to the following procedure:



   1.   The historic preservation commission shall make, or cause to be
made, an investigation and report on the historical, prehistorical,
architectural archaeological and/or cultural significance of each building,
structure, site, area, or object proposed for designation. Applications
prepared by owners will be judged by the same criteria as those prepared by
the commission. Such reports shall contain the following information:



   a.   The name of the property to be considered for designation both
common and historic names, if they can be determined.



   b.   The name and address of the current property owner.



   c.   The location of the property proposed to be designated
historic, including the street address and tax map and parcel numbers.



   d.   The date of construction and of any later alterations, if any.



   e.   An assessment of the significance of the site or structure
pursuant to subsection (a), criteria for designation.



   f.   An architectural or archaeological description of the area of
the site or structure proposed to be designated. If outbuildings or other
appurtenant features are proposed to be designated, the report shall contain
a description of those features.



   g.   A historical discussion of the site or structure within its
type, period, and locality.



   h.   Color photographs consistent with the U.S. Department of
Interior's format guidelines that clearly document the appearance, condition,
and elements of the building, structure, or object proposed to be designated,
including views of all facades, pertinent details and surrounding environment.



   i.   A map showing the location of the property, including any
outbuildings and appurtenant features.



   j.   A clear description of the boundaries.



   2.   The commission shall forward its recommendation to the city
council. The commission shall refer the report to the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources.



   3.   The North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources, acting
through the state historic preservation officer or his or her designee, may
make an analysis of and recommendations concerning the report. If the
department does not submit its written comments or recommendations in
connection with any proposed designation within thirty (30) calendar days
after a written request for such analysis has been received by the
department, the commission and the city council shall be relieved of any
responsibility to consider such comments.



   4.   The historic preservation commission and the city council shall
each hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance in accordance with the
procedures set forth in article XIII, section 21-321, amendments.



   5.   Following the public hearings, the city council may adopt the
ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems
necessary, or reject the proposed ordinance.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314. Certificates of appropriateness; required.



   (a)    No exterior portion of any building or other structure
(including masonry, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or
other appurtenant features) nor above-ground utility structure nor any type
of outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or
demolished on a landmark, or within a historic district, until after an
application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior features has
been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission.



   Exterior features shall include the architectural style, general design
and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure,
including the color, the kind and texture of the building material, the size
and scale of the building and the type and style of all windows, doors, light
fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of outdoor
advertising signs, exterior features shall be construed to mean the style,
material, size and location of all such signs.



   (b)    Such a certificate shall be issued by the commission prior to
the issuance of a zoning permit or other permit granted for purposes of
constructing, altering, moving or demolishing structures. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a zoning permit is required.
Therefore, a certificate of appropriateness is a prerequisite to the issuance
of such a zoning permit or such other permits. Any such zoning permits or
such other permits not issued in conformity with this section shall be
invalid.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.1. Criteria to determine appropriateness.



   The following review criteria, along with companion design guidelines
and the guidelines of the Secretary of the Interior, shall be considered,
where relevant, to make findings of fact indicating the extent to which the
application for a certificate of appropriateness is or is not congruous with
the historic aspects of the designated landmark or district:



   (a)   Building height.



   (b)   Walls.



   (c)   Proportion of width to height of the total building facade.



   (d)   Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern and sizes of
any elements of fenestration.



   (e)   Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance between adjacent
buildings.



   (f)   Building materials.



   (g)   Surface textures.



   (h)   Color.



   (i)   Expression of architectural detailing.



   (j)   Roof shapes.



   (k)   Scale.



   (l)   Orientation of the building to the street.



   (m)   Ground cover or paving.



   (n)   Signs.



   (o)   Exterior lighting and appurtenant features.



   The commission shall adopt principles and guidelines interpreting these
criteria for new construction, alterations, additions, moving and demolition
of landmarks or properties in a historic district.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.2. Reconstruction.



   (a)    Reconstruction of substantially damaged historic sites. When
a designated historic building, structure, object, or site has been
substantially damaged, the historic preservation commission shall determine
through an evaluation of architectural integrity, whether the building,
structure, object, or site can be reconstructed using the following criteria:



   1.   Whether there is sufficient evidence such as
photo-documentation, scaled drawings, or other physical evidence to
accurately depict the form and detail of the original resource.



   2.   Whether the original construction materials, or substitute
materials that are sufficiently similar so as to convey the original
qualities of construction, are readily available.



   3.   Whether the interior spaces are especially significant to the
form and function of the building. If so, the historic preservation
commission shall define the parameters necessary to adequately convey those
interior spatial characteristics as requirements in the reconstruction effort.



   4.   Whether the applicant has demonstrated a commitment to the
reconstruction effort by making every reasonable effort to preserve or
salvage the remaining significant features of the property.



   5.   Whether there are other unique factors or circumstances that
would make reconstruction desirable.



   If the historic preservation commission determines that a historic
designated structure within a historic district or landmark may be
reconstructed, the property owner may submit a reconstruction plan for
consideration based on the criteria enumerated in this article. If the
property owner chooses not to reconstruct, the historic preservation
commission may recommend repeal of the historic designation using the
procedure established in this article.



   (b)    Reconstruction criteria. Reconstruction of a designated
historic structure within a historic district or landmark shall be carried
out in accordance with the following criteria:



   1.   Reconstruction shall be used to depict nonsurviving portions of
a structure when such reconstruction is essential to the public understanding
of the landmark or historic district, and documentary and physical evidence
is available to permit accurate reconstruction.



   2.   Reconstruction of a historic contributing structure within a
historic district or landmark in its historic location shall be preceded by a
thorough archaeological investigation identifying and evaluating those
features and artifacts, which are essential to an accurate reconstruction. If
such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.



   3.   Reconstruction shall include measures preserving any remaining
historic materials, features, and spatial relationships.



   4.   Reconstruction shall be based on the accurate duplication of
historic features and elements substantiated by documentary or physical
evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different
features from other historic landmarks or contributing structures within a
historic district. A reconstructed contributing structure within a historic
district or landmark shall re-create the appearance of the non-surviving
historic site in materials, design, colors, and texture.



   5.   All "reconstructions" shall be clearly documented as being
contemporary re-creations.



   (c)    Amendment or repeal of designation. A historic designation
pursuant to this article may only be amended or rescinded by complying with
the same procedures as the original approval. However, the director of
planning and development service's report need only contain a recommendation
to grant or deny the repeal or amendment, and the reasons therefor.



   1.   The historic preservation commission recommending repeal of the
designation shall be based on competent and substantial evidence supporting
the repeal.



   2.   Final approval of repeal shall come from the city council.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.3. Demolition of designated landmark or building.



   (a)    An application for a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing the relocation, demolition, or destruction of a designated
landmark or a building, structure or site within a historic district may not
be denied except as provided in paragraph (b) below. However, the effective
date of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to three hundred
sixty-five (365) days from the date of approval. The maximum period of delay
authorized by this section shall be reduced by the commission where it finds
that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of
all beneficial use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay.
During such period the commission shall negotiate with the owner and with any
other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building or site.



   (b)    An application for a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, site or structure
determined by the state historic preservation officer as having statewide
significance as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic
Places may be denied except where:



   1.   The commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme
hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue
of the denial; or



   2.   The city has adopted a demolition ordinance under article VI,
dwellings unfit for human habitation and abandoned structures, chapter 4,
buildings and building regulations.



   (c)    If the commission has voted to recommend designation of a
property as a landmark or designation of an area as a district, and final
designation has not been made by the city council, the demolition or
destruction of any building, site or structure located on the property of the
proposed landmark or in the proposed district may be delayed by the
commission for a period of up to one hundred eighty (180) days or until the
city council takes final action on the designation, whichever comes first.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.4. Land use, interior arrangement, maintenance, emergency repairs
not considered.



   (a)    Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a property owner
from making any use of his or her property not prohibited by other statutes,
ordinances or regulations.



   (b)    The commission may enter, solely in performance of its
official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for
examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee, or agent of the
commission may enter any private building or structure without express
consent of the owner or occupant thereof.



   (c)    Except as provided in paragraph (d) below, the commission
shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement and shall take no action
except to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
moving or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, outdoor
advertising signs, or other significant features which would be incongruous
with the special character of a landmark or of the district.



   (d)    Notwithstanding paragraph (c) above, the jurisdiction of the
commission over interior spaces shall be limited to specific interior
features of architectural, artistic or historical significance in publicly
owned designated landmarks; and of privately owned historic landmarks for
which consent for interior review has been given by the owner. Said consent
of any owner for interior review shall bind future owners and/or successors
in title, provided such consent has been filed in the office of the register
of deeds and indexed accordingly to the name of the owner of the property in
the grantee and grantor indexes. The landmark designation shall specify the
interior features to be reviewed and the specific nature of the commission's
jurisdiction over the interior.



   (e)    The ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature of a landmark, or in a historic district which does not
involve a change in design, material, color or outer appearance thereof,
shall not be prevented by the requirements pertaining to the designated
landmark or historic district.



   (f)    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the
maintenance or, in the event of an emergency, the immediate restoration of
any existing above-ground utility structure without approval by the
commission.



   (g)    The construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
moving or demolition of any exterior architectural features, which the city
building inspector or similar official shall certify is required for public
safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, shall not be prevented by
the requirements pertaining to the landmark, or the historic district.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.5. Hearing procedures.



   (a)    The historic preservation commission shall receive
applications for certificates of appropriateness as required under this
section. The commission shall review such application according to the review
criteria, the design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation and Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings and shall approve or disapprove such application as provided in
paragraph (d) of this subsection.



   (b)    Prior to issuance or denial of a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall take such action as may reasonably be
required to inform the owners of any property likely to be materially
affected by the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an
opportunity to be heard. A written notice of the proposal shall be sent to
the applicant and to owners of property (i.e., lots, parcels or tracts of
land) within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property or properties.



   (c)    In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold
a public hearing concerning an application for a certificate of
appropriateness.



   (d)    The historic preservation commission's final action on an
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be by the passage of a
motion to take one (1) of the following actions:



   1.   Approve the application for a certificate of appropriateness as
proposed;



   2.   Approve the application for a certificate of appropriateness
subject to specific conditions and/or modifications of the proposal presented
in the application for a certificate of appropriateness;



   3.   Disapprove the application for a certificate of appropriateness
as proposed or modified.



   (e)    Any aggrieved party may appeal the historic preservation
commission's action in granting or denying a certificate, which shall be
submitted in writing to the city council within thirty (30) days of the
commission's final action.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.6. Minor works.



   A certificate of appropriateness application, when determined to
involve a minor work, may be reviewed and approved, by the planning director
or his or her designee.



      "Minor works" are defined as those exterior changes that do not
involve substantial alterations, additions or removals that could impair the
integrity of the landmark or property within a historic district.



   An application may receive a certificate of appropriateness from the
planning director or his or her designee if it falls under the list of minor
works provided in the historic preservation commission rules of procedure. If
the planning director or his or her designee does not issue a certificate of
appropriateness, the applicant will be advised to make a formal application
to the historic preservation commission. No application may be denied without
formal action by the historic preservation commission.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.7. Certificate issuance; expiration; enforcement.



   (a)    Passage of a motion to approve, with or without modification,
an application shall constitute the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness by the historic preservation commission. The application and
the duly approved minutes of the commission shall constitute the written
documentation of such issuances. Following the meeting a certificate shall be
mailed to the property for which a certificate has been issued. The
certificate shall be posted on the premises, in a location visible from the
street, while the work is in progress. Minutes of a historic preservation
commission meeting shall be approved before the end of the next meeting.



   (b)    A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period
of six (6) months from the date of issuance for the purpose of obtaining a
zoning permit or other permit for constructing or altering structures. A
certificate of appropriateness shall expire six (6) months after the date of
issuance if the work authorized by the certificate has not been commenced. If
after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of six (6) months,
the permit therefore shall immediately expire.



   (c)    Compliance with certificates of appropriateness shall be
enforced by the planning director or his or her designee. Failure to comply
with a certificate of appropriateness shall be a violation of the zoning
ordinance. The enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent
the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.



   (d)    In case any building, structure, site, area or object
designated as a landmark or located within a historic district is about to be
demolished whether as a result of deliberate neglect or otherwise, materially
altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed, except in compliance with the
ordinance, the commission or other party aggrieved by such action may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful
action.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-314.8. Conditions for certain approvals.



   (a)    In the event that the commission, in considering an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, finds that a building or
structure for which a zoning permit is requested is to be an authentic
restoration or reconstruction which existed at the same location but does not
meet zoning requirements, said building or structure may be authorized to be
restored or reconstructed at the same location provided the following:



   1.   The zoning board of adjustment authorizes a variance to the
location and placement of the building or structure and no use other than
that permitted in the district in which the property is located is permitted.



   2.   Conditions and approvals set by the board of adjustment are
attached to the historic preservation commission's approval and included in
any certificate of appropriateness related thereto.



   (b)    If the commission finds that an application for a certificate
of appropriateness includes any porches, steps, fences, walls or other items
extending over, on or within public rights-of-way is necessary for the
authentic restoration, reconstruction or maintenance of a historic landmark,
and will not impede or block pedestrian traffic or constitute a hazard to
public safety, such findings shall be transmitted to the city council for its
consideration in authorizing or denying such encroachments into such
rights-of-way.



   (c)    If the city council authorizes an encroachment, any items
restored, reconstructed or maintained on, over or within a public
right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the owner, and the owner shall
agree to protect and hold the City of Marion harmless against any and all
liability, cost damage or expense suffered as a result of the restoration,
reconstruction or maintenance thereof.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-315. Nonconforming structures; exemption from flood hazard
requirements.



   (1)    Authority to continue nonconforming structures. Nonconforming
structures that are federally or state designated as historic shall be
permitted to continue in accordance with chapter 8, flood hazard management,
of the Marion City Code.



   (2)    Exemption from flood elevation requirements. Structures that
are federally or state designated as historic shall be exempt from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood elevation requirements in
accordance with chapter 8, flood hazard management, of the Marion City Code.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-316. Authority to prevent demolition, alteration or violation of
ordinance.



   If any building, structure, site, area or object designated a historic
landmark is about to be demolished, whether as the result of deliberate
neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled or removed, except in
compliance with the ordinance enacted under authority of this chapter, the
city or the commission may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful demolition, material alteration, remodeling or removal,
to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any legal act or
conduct with respect to such historic landmark.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Sec. 21-317. Civil penalty.



   Unless otherwise provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Marion or in state law, persons violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be assessed a civil penalty as provided in chapter 1 of the Marion City
Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. O-09-03-24-2,  2, 3-24-09)



Secs. 21-318--21-320. Reserved.



ARTICLE XIII
AMENDMENTS



Sec. 21-321. Amendments.



   This chapter, including the official zoning map, may be amended from
time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have
been proposed by, or shall have first been submitted to, the City of Marion
Planning Board for review and recommendations. The planning board shall have
forty-five (45) days from its first consideration (at a meeting) of a
proposed amendment within which to submit its report. If the planning board
fails to submit a report within the forty-five-day period, it shall be deemed
to have approved the proposed amendment. The planning board shall advise and
comment on whether the proposed amendment is consistent with any adopted land
use or comprehensive plan and any other officially adopted plan that is
applicable. The planning board shall provide a written recommendation to the
city council that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed
appropriate by the planning board, but a comment by the planning board that a
proposed amendment is inconsistent with the land use or comprehensive plan
shall not preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the
city council. The city council is not bound by the recommendations, if any of
the planning board.



   A statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall
be prepared for each petition for small-scale rezonings.



   A planning board member shall not vote on recommendations regarding any
zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered
is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable
financial impact on the member.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1300), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-321.1. Public hearing.



   A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adoption of
any proposed amendment to this chapter. Notice of such public hearing shall
be provided as required by G.S. 160A-364 and G.S. 160A-384, as outlined below:



   (1)   Newspaper notice. A notice of such public hearing shall be
given once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Marion, said notices to be published the first
time not less than ten (10) days and not more than twenty-five (25) days
prior to the date established for such public hearing.



   (2)   Mailed notice. When an amendment to the official zoning map
(zoning map amendment) is proposed, the owner of that parcel of land, as
shown on the county tax listing, that is the subject of a proposed zoning
amendment, and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land
as shown on the county tax listing, shall be mailed a notice of a public
hearing on the proposed amendment by first class mail at the last addresses
listed for such owners on the county tax abstracts. Such notice must be
deposited in the mail at least ten (10) but not more than twenty-five (25)
days prior to the date of the public hearing. The person or persons mailing
such notices shall certify to the city council that fact, and such
certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.



   (3)   Alternative to mailed notice. The first class mail notice
required in subsection (2), above, shall not be required if the zoning map
amendment directly affects more than fifty (50) properties, owned by a total
of at least fifty (50) different property owners, and the city elects to use
the expanded published notice provided for in this subsection (3). In this
instance, the city may elect to either make the mailed notice provided for in
subsection (2), above, or may as an alternative elect to publish notice of
the hearing as required by G.S. 160A-364 (and enumerated in subsection (1),
above), but provided that each advertisement shall not be less than one-half
( ) of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective
for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the
newspaper which publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of
the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most
recent property tax listing for the affected property shall be notified
according to the provisions of subsection (2), above.



   (4)   Posted notice. When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the
city shall prominently post a notice of the public hearing on the site
proposed for rezoning or on an adjacent public street or highway
right-of-way. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map
amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the city
shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1300), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-321.2. Action on zoning amendments.



   Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the city council
shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is consistent with an
adopted land use or comprehensive plan and explaining why the city council
considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. That
statement is not subject to judicial review.



   A city council member shall not vote on any zoning map or text
amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably
likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial
impact on the member.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1300), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-321.3. Protests.



   In the case of a qualified protest against an amendment to the official
zoning map, such amendment shall not become effective except by favorable
vote of three-fourths ( 3/4) of all members of the city council. For the
purposes of this section, vacant positions on the city council and members
who are excused from voting shall not be considered "members of the city
council" for calculation of the requisite supermajority. To qualify as a
protest under this section, the petition must be signed by the owners of
either (i) twenty (20) percent or more of the area included in the proposed
change or (ii) five (5) percent of a 100-foot-wide buffer extending along the
entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned. A
street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100-foot buffer
area as long as that street right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet wide or
less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed
zoning map amendment, the 100-foot buffer shall be measured from the property
line of that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may
rely on the county tax listing to determine the "owners" of potentially
qualifying areas. The foregoing provisions concerning protests shall not be
applicable to any amendment which initially zones property added to the
territorial coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise.



   No protest against any amendment to this chapter, including the
official zoning map, shall be valid or effective for the purposes of this
section and G.S. 160A-385 unless it shall be in the form of a written
petition actually bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property
owners and stating that the signers do protest the proposed amendment, and
unless it shall have been received by the city clerk in sufficient time to
allow the city at least two (2) normal work days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, before the date established for a public hearing
on the proposed change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy
of the petition. The city council may, by ordinance, require that all protest
petitions be on a form prescribed and furnished by the city, and such form
may prescribe any reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the city
to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. A person who has
signed a protest petition may withdraw his or her name from the petition at
any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning amendment. Only those
protest petitions that meet the qualifying standards set forth in this
section and G.S. 160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment
shall trigger the supermajority voting requirement.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1300), 01-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-322. Fees for amendments.



   The Marion City Council shall establish a fee schedule for each
application for an amendment to cover the cost of advertising and other
administrative expenses involved.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1301), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-323--21-340. Reserved.



ARTICLE XIV
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



Sec. 21-341. Conflicting regulations.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the City of Marion. It is not intended
to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances
of the city, or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties.
However, if the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances
of the City of Marion or with easements, covenants or agreements between
parties, the more restrictive of that imposing the higher standards shall
govern.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1400), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Sec. 21-342. Validity.



   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid such declaration shall not affect
the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than that
part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1401), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-343--21-350. Reserved.



ARTICLE XV
PENALTY AND EFFECTIVE DATE



Sec. 21-351. Effective date.



   This chapter was adopted by the Marion City Council on February 19,
1974, and shall take effect on the first day of April, 1974. This chapter
shall include all amendments duly adopted after April 1, 1974.



(Ord. No. O-06-01-17-3,  1(1501), 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-08-01-15-3,  1(6),
1-15-08)



Secs. 21-352--21-360. Reserved.



 


Notes

4 
Total ground area covered by principal structure and accessory structures
shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area.

5 
If the industrial lot abuts a residential zoned lot the setback will be
twenty-five (25) feet; otherwise there will be no setback requirements.

6 
No building shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height unless written permission
is first secured from the city fire chief in order to determine: (1) If the
height of the structure exceeds the fire fighting capacity of the fire
department; (2) To determine if the structure meets fire safety standards
(including fire escapes, etc.), and further provided that the depth of the
front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by
five (5) for each additional story.

7 
No building shall exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor
space without special exception approval by the board of adjustment.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2015 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE



1982 CODE



   This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the
1982 Code, as updated through September 7, 1982, which are included herein.
Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been
omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent
nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the
table immediately following this table.



 


1982 Code Section

 

Section  this Code






1-1002

 

1-5




1-1004, 1-1005

 

1-9, 1-10




1-1006

 

1-15




2-1001--2-1003

 

2-66--2-68




2-1004, 2-1005

 

2-52, 2-53




2-1006

 

2-51




2-1011--2-1013

 

2-26




2-1014

 

2-27




2-1016, 2-1017

 

2-28, 2-29




2-1021--2-1024

 

2-30--2-33




2-1025

 

2-69




2-1026, 2-1027

 

2-34, 2-35




2-1031

 

1-4




2-1032

 

1-6




2-2001--2-2005

 

2-81--2-85




2-2007

 

2-87




2-2011--2-2015

 

2-116--2-120




2-2021--2-2026

 

2-131--2-136




2-2031, 2-2032

 

2-101, 2-102




2-2034

 

2-104




2-2041--2-2044

 

2-151--2-154




2-4001

 

2-137




2-4011--2-4025

 

10-26--10-40




3-1011, 3-1012

 

14-26, 14-27




3-1016, 3-1017

 

14-29, 14-30




3-1019

 

14-31




3-1021

 

14-32




3-1023

 

14-33




3-1031

 

14-51




3-1034

 

14-52




3-1041--3-1046

 

14-71--14-76




3-1051, 3-1052

 

14-78, 14-79




3-2001--3-2018

 

7-2--7-19




3-2021--3-2025

 

7-36--7-39, 7-41




3-3001--3-3003

 

6-26--6-28




4-1001, 4-1002

 

15-26, 15-27




4-1003--4-1005

 

15-61--15-63




4-1006

 

15-131




4-1007--4-1011

 

15-64--15-68




4-1026

 

15-51




4-1029

 

15-132




4-1030--4-1032

 

15-1--15-3




4-1033--4-1035

 

15-111--15-113




4-1047

 

14-77




4-3001, 4-3002

 

5-1, 5-2




4-3004--4-3005

 

5-6




4-3006, 4-3007

 

5-7, 5-8




4-3009--4-3011

 

5-9--5-11




5-1001--5-1010

 

20-21--20-30




5-1011

 

20-42




5-1021--5-1023

 

20-31--20-33




5-1024--5-1029

 

20-35--20-39




5-1030--5-1034

 

20-43--20-48




5-2001

 

20-61




5-2002--5-2006

 

20-64--20-68




5-2007

 

20-1




5-2008--5-2010

 

20-69--20-71




5-2033

 

20-63




6-1001

 

17-1




6-1002, 6-1003

 

17-41, 17-42




6-1005

 

17-44




6-1010

 

17-46




6-1014

 

17-47




6-1016

 

17-45




6-1017

 

17-6




6-1021

 

17-3, 17-4




6-1023

 

17-3




6-1027, 6-1028

 

17-61, 17-62




6-1030

 

17-2





 

17-66




6-1032, 6-1033

 

17-13, 17-14




6-1034, 6-1035

 

17-11, 17-12




6-1041

 

17-65




6-1042

 

17-7




6-1043

 

17-20




6-1061, 6-1062

 

10-91, 10-92




6-1063

 

10-94




6-1064

 

10-93




6-1065

 

10-76




6-1068

 

10-95




6-1071

 

10-111




6-1072--6-1074

 

10-126--10-128




6-1075

 

10-113




6-1076

 

10-129




6-1077

 

10-112




6-1078

 

10-114




6-2001--6-2007

 

15-133--15-139




6-2011--6-2019

 

15-86--15-94




6-2021--6-2023

 

15-156--15-158




6-2024

 

15-162




6-2025--6-2027

 

15-159--15-161




6-2028

 

15-163




7-1001

 

18-1




7-1021--7-1026

 

18-2--18-7




7-1031

 

18-28




7-1032, 7-1033

 

18-26, 18-27




7-1034--7-1044

 

18-29--18-39




7-1051, 7-1052

 

18-91, 18-92




7-1061--7-1065

 

18-106--18-110




7-1071, 7-1072

 

18-126, 18-127




7-1081

 

18-128




7-1082--7-1085

 

18-141--18-144




7-1086, 7-1087

 

18-56, 18-57




7-1091--7-1108

 

18-58--18-75




7-1111--7-1118

 

18-161--18-168




7-1121--7-1131

 

18-186--18-196




7-1141--7-1147

 

18-216--18-222




7-1151--7-1158

 

18-223--18-230




7-1171--7-1176

 

18-231--18-236




7-1181--7-1186

 

18-237--18-242




7-1190--7-1195

 

18-256--18-261




8-1002, 8-1003

 

11-2, 11-3




8-1008, 8-1009

 

11-4, 11-5




8-1011

 

11-5




8-1013

 

11-6




8-1015, 8-1017

 

11-7, 11-9




8-1021, 8-1022

 

11-10, 11-11




8-1023, 8-1024

 

11-12




8-1025, 8-1026

 

11-13, 11-14




8-4001, 8-4002

 

9-121, 9-122




8-4003

 

9-124




8-5001--8-5004

 

9-1--9-4




8-5005

 

15-69




8-5006

 

9-5




8-6001--8-6003

 

7-56--7-58




8-6005--8-6007

 

7-59--7-61




8-6010, 8-6011

 

11-15




9-1001--9-1008

 

4-51--4-58




9-1012(a)-- 9-1012(d)

 

4-76--4-79




9-1013--9-1019

 

4-80--4-86




9-2001, 9-2002

 

4-26, 4-27




9-2003

 

4-30




9-2004

 

4-29




9-2005

 

4-28




9-2006

 

4-27




9-2007--9-2009

 

4-31--4-33




9-2011, 9-2012

 

4-106, 4-107




9-2013--9-2018

 

4-109--4-114




9-2019

 

4-108




9-3001--9-3004

 

16-1--16-4




9-3011

 

16-5




9-3021--9-3026

 

16-6--16-11




9-3027--9-3030

 

16-31--16-34




9-3036--9-3048

 

16-51--16-63




9-3056--9-3060

 

16-81--16-85




9-3066, 9-3067

 

16-101, 16-102




9-3071

 

16-121




9-3073

 

16-136





 



ORDINANCES



   This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances
adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through September 7, 1982, which are
included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into
the 1982 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which
precede September 7, 1982, but which were never included in the 1982 Code, as
supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been
omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.



 

Ordinance of
 
Section
 
Section this Code




10-6-77
 
1--4
 
18-197--18-200


7-5-79
 
2, 3
 
9-123


3-22-83
 
 
 
18-39


6-7-83
 
1--4
 
4-87


 
 
1--4
 
14.5-1


2-21-84
 
3
 
20-1


2-4-86
 
8-2001--8-2018
 
3-1--3-18


2-18-86
 
2
 
13-26


 
 
3
 
13-27, 13-28


 
 
4, 5
 
13-29, 13-30


5-20-86
 
1
 
15-70--15-73


8-5-86(4)
 
1--4
 
18-262


9-2-86
 
1
 
18-63


 
 
 
 
18-169


10-7-86
 
1, 2
 
15-139, 15-140


1-6-87
 
1, 2
 
19-1, 19-2


 
 
3
 
19-26


 
 
3.1--3.4
 
19-27--19-30


 
 
4--6
 
19-51--19-53


 
 
7
 
19-31


 
 
8, 9
 
19-3, 19-4


 
 
10
 
19-32


 
 
11
 
19-5


6-16-87
 
1--4
 
12-26--12-29


6-25-87
 
1
 
9-26


 
 
1.1
 
9-27


 
 
2.1--2.6
 
9-28--9-31, 9-33


 
 
3.1--3.4
 
9-34


 
 
3.5
 
9-35


 
 
4--6
 
9-36--9-38


 
 
6.1--6.3
 
9-39--9-41


 
 
7
 
9-42


 
 
7.1
 
9-42


 
 
8
 
9-43


8-18-87
 
 
 
20-34


10-29-87
 
Art. I,  A--D
 
8-1--8-4


 
 
Art. II
 
8-5


 
 
Art. III,  A--H
 
8-6--8-13


 
 
Art. IV,  A--D
 
8-31--8-34


 
 
Art. V,  A--E
 
8-51--8-55


2-2-88
 
 
 
9-125--9-127


3-8-88
 
1
 
8-7


4-19-88
 
1
 
9-34


5-3-88
 
 
 
20-36


10-4-88
 
1, 2
 
10-91, 10-92


 
 
3
 
10-94


 
 
4
 
10-93


 
 
5
 
10-76


 
 
7
 
10-95


11-22-88
 
 
 
5-4


 
 
 
 
17-1--17-20


 
 
 
 
17-41--17-47


 
 
 
 
17-61--17-66


1-17-89
 
 
 
18-76


2-21-89
 
 
 
15-63


4-18-89
 
1
 
9-26


5-16-89
 
2
 
10-27


5-17-89
 
 
 
20-33


6-20-89(1)
 
1
 
14.5-67


 
 
Art. II, Art. III
 
14.5-28, 14.5-29


 
 
400
 
14.5-27


 
 
500
 
14.5-46


 
 
501, 502
 
14.5-30, 14.5-31


 
 
503, 504
 
14.5-65, 14.5-66


 
 
600, 601
 
14.5-69, 14.5-70


 
 
700--707
 
14.5-46--14.5-53


 
 
709
 
14.5-68


 
 
800
 
14.5-32


 
 
801
 
14.5-34


 
 
802
 
14.5-33


6-20-89(2)
 
Art. I, Art. II
 
14.5-82, 14.5-83


9-18-89
 
1--7
 
4-87


 
 
4
 
4-1


 
 
5
 
14.5-1, 14.5-2


10-3-89
 
1, 2
 
15-134


2-6-90
 
1--3
 
20-41


4-3-90
 
1--6
 
20-81--20-103


5-8-90
 
1--25
 
10-26--10-50


6-5-90
 
Art. I,  A--D
 
8-1--8-4


 
 
Art. II
 
8-5


 
 
Art. III,  A--H
 
8-6--8-13


 
 
Art. IV,  A--E
 
8-31--8-35


 
 
Art. V,  A--E
 
8-51--8-55


11-6-90
 
1--7
 
20-121--20-127


1-8-91
 
1--7
 
Adopting Ord., p. vii


1-8-91
 
1--3
 
10-151


2-5-91
 
1--3
 
20-33.1


2-5-91
 
I 1
 
20-21


 
 
2
 
20-24


 
 
3
 
20-25


 
 
4--8
 
20-26--20-30


 
 
9
 
20-42


 
 
II 1--3
 
20-31--20-33


 
 
4--9
 
20-35--20-40


 
 
10
 
20-43


 
 
11
 
20-44, 20-45


 
 
12--14
 
20-46--20-48


 
 
III 1
 
20-61


 
 
2
 
20-64


 
 
3--6
 
20-65--20-68


 
 
7
 
20-1(a)


 
 
8
 
20-69


 
 
9
 
20-70, 20-71


 
 
IV 1, 2
 
20-2


3-5-91
 
1--4
 
15-4


4-16-91
 
1
 
11-17


5-7-91
 
1
 
12-1


6-16-91
 
1--5
 
20-29.5


8-18-92
 
1
 
2-83,


 
 
 
 
14-27


9-8-92
 
1--3
 
20-3


2-2-93
 
1
 
11-18


4-20-93
 
 
 
App. A,  100--400


 
 
 
 
App. A,  706, 707


 
 
 
 
App. A,  802--806


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1001


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1003


 
 
  Dltd
 
App. A,  1006


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1101


 
 
  Added
 
App. A,  1104


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1200


 
 
  Dltd
 
App. A,  1201, 1202


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1203


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1206


 
 
 
 
App. A,  1301


6-8-93
 
1--15
 
9-61--9-75


6-22-93
 
 
 
App. A,  707


 
 
  Rpld
 
14.5-26--14.5-34,


 
 
 
 
14.5-46--14.5-53,


 
 
 
 
14.5-65--14.5-70,


 
 
 
 
14.5-82, 14.5-83


9-21-93
 
 
 
App. A,  706


11-2-93
 
1
 
7-20, 7-21


3-8-94
 
 
 
11-19


7-19-94
 
 
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
App. A,  702


 
 
 
 
App. A,  806


9-6-94
 
1    Added
 
10-112(6), (7)


2-21-95
 
1
 
20-35


6-6-95
 
1
 
4-58


 
 
 
 
4-82(a), (b)


 
 
 
 
4-87(d)


10-3-95
 
 
 
11-16


2-4-97
 
1    Added
 
18-223(a)(15)


4-22-97
 
1, 2
 
18-243


5-6-97
 
1
 
9-124


7-22-97
 
1
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
App. A,  702.2


 
 
 
 
App. A,  706


 
 
  Added
 
App. A,  801.3


8-19-97
 
1
 
App. A,  803.4


9-2-97
 
1
 
18-256--18-261


 
 
  Rpld
 
18-262


10-7-97
 
1    Added
 
1-16--1-21


 
 
2    Added
 
18-244


3-17-98
 
1    Added
 
20-3(d)


5-5-98(1)
 
 
 
1-20


5-5-98(2)
 
1    Rpld
 
18-240


 
 
  Added
 
18-240


5-19-98(1)
 
1    Added
 
15-74


5-19-98(2)
 
1
 
20-33.1(c)


8-18-98
 
1
 
15-139


9-22-98
 
1
 
9-4(c)


 
 
2
 
9-26


 
 
3
 
9-28


 
 
4
 
9-29


 
 
5
 
9-30(1)


 
 
7
 
9-33


 
 
8
 
9-35


 
 
9
 
9-37


 
 
10
 
9-42(a)


5-18-99
 
 
 
15-5


9-7-99
 
1    Added
 
11-9(4), (5)


9-21-99
 
1
 
20-29, 20-29.5,


 
 
 
 
20-34


4-20-00
 
1--6    Added
 
17.5-26--17.5-31,


 
 
7--13
 
17.5-56--17.5-62,


 
 
15--17
 
17.5-86--17.5-88,


 
 
19
 
17.5-31


6-6-00
 
1    Added
 
9-128


6-20-00
 
1
 
9-34


7-18-00
 
1--23    Added
 
4.5-26--4.5-47


5-8-01
 
2
 
15-134(a)(2)


5-22-01
 
2
 
15-134(a)(3)


8-21-01
 
2
 
13-26




 



 

Ordinance Number
 
Adoption Date
 
Section
 
Section this Code




O-01-09-18-1
 
9-18-01
 
2    Added
 
9-150--9-153


O-01-09-18-1(2)
 
9-18-01
 
2
 
App. A,  400


O-01-10-02-2
 
10-2-01
 
2
 
18-256(6)


 
 
 
 
3
 
18-258


O-01-10-23-1
 
10-23-01
 
1    Added
 
2-54


 
 
10-8-02
 
2
 
7-58


O-02-03-19-1
 
3-19-02
 
2    Added
 
10-171--10-183


O-02-03-19-02
 
3-19-02
 
2
 
App. A,  1005


 
 
4-2-02
 
2
 
App. A,  706


O-02-04-16-2
 
4-16-02
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  804.3(4)


O-02-06-18-1
 
6-18-02
 
  Added
 
10-191--10-204


O-02-06-18-08
 
6-18-02
 
2
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  802.2(6)


O-02-07-16-01
 
7-16-02
 
2
 
App. A,  706


O-02-08-06-01
 
8-6-02
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  707


O-02-09-03-1
 
9-3-02
 
2
 
App. A,  706.11(1)


O-02-10-08-2
 
10-8-02
 
2
 
20-29.5(a)


O-02-10-22-1
 
10-22-02
 
2
 
2-26(a)


O-02-11-19-1
 
11-19-02
 
2
 
App. A,  1500


O-02-11-19-3
 
11-19-02
 
2    Added
 
1-16(d)


 
 
 
 
3
 
1-20


O-02-11-19-4
 
11-19-02
 
2
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  708


O-03-01-21-1
 
1-21-03
 
2    Added
 
4-125--4-140


O-03-02-18-1
 
2-18-03
 
2
 
10-94


O-03-02-18-2
 
2-18-03
 
2
 
10-128


O-03-02-18-3
 
2-18-03
 
2
 
17-44


O-03-02-18-4
 
2-18-03
 
2    Added
 
17-63.5


O-03-03-04-01
 
3-4-03
 
2
 
App. A,  805.2


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  806.2


O-03-03-04-02
 
3-4-03
 
2
 
App. A,  1102


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  1102.1


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  1102.2


O-03-03-18-03
 
3-18-03
 
2
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  1001


O-03-03-18-04
 
3-18-03
 
2
 
App. A,  900


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  901


O-03-04-01-1
 
4-1-03
 
2
 
App. A,  803.2(46)


O-03-06-17-02
 
6-17-03
 
2
 
App. A,  901.2(2)


O-03-08-19-2
 
8-19-03
 
2
 
18-91


O-03-08-19-03
 
8-19-03
 
2
 
App. A,  702


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  703


O-03-09-02-1
 
9-2-03
 
2
 
18-39


O-03-10-07-01
 
10-7-03
 
1
 
App. A


O-03-10-21-01
 
10-21-03
 
1
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
2
 
App. A,  700


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  702


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  705


 
 
 
 
5(708)
 
App. A,  710


 
 
 
 
6(710)
 
App. A,  708


 
 
 
 
7
 
App. A,  805.3


 
 
 
 
8
 
App. A,  804.2


 
 
 
 
9
 
App. A,  1500(3)


 
 
 
 
10
 
App. A,  1500.1(5), (6)


 
 
 
 
11
 
App. A,  1500.2


O-03-10-21-02
 
10-21-03
 
1
 
1-3


 
 
 
 
2
 
9-65


 
 
 
 
3
 
9-66


 
 
 
 
4
 
9-74


O-03-11-18-01
 
11-18-03
 
2
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  806.3(4)


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  806.2(15)


O-03-11-19-2
 
11-19-03
 
2    Dltd
 
10-175


O-04-01-20-01
 
1-20-04
 
2
 
App. A,  706.11(2)(F)


O-04-02-17-1
 
2-17-04
 
2
 
9-31


O-04-02-17-03
 
2-17-04
 
2
 
16-5


 
 
 
 
3
 
16-6


 
 
 
 
4
 
16-8


 
 
 
 
5    Rnbd
 
16-31


 
 
 
 
    as
 
16-30


 
 
 
 
6    Added
 
16-31


 
 
 
 
7
 
16-32(a)


O-04-03-02-1
 
3-2-04
 
2
 
1-16(a)


O-04-03-02-2
 
3-2-04
 
2
 
18-261


O-04-03-07-2
 
3-7-06
 
2
 
17-6(a)


O-04-03-16-3
 
3-16-04
 
2
 
2-83


 
 
 
 
3
 
2-131


 
 
 
 
4
 
2-134


 
 
 
 
5
 
2-151


O-04-03-16-04
 
3-16-04
 
2
 
App. A,  400


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  702


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  802.3(12)


 
 
7-20-04
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  807


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A, Art. IX.5


O-04-08-03-2
 
8-3-04
 
2    Added
 
12-2


O-04-08-17-07
 
8-17-04
 
2
 
App. A,  706.12(1)(L)


O-04-09-07-02
 
9-7-04
 
2
 
App. A,  706.1(10)


O-04-09-07-03
 
9-7-04
 
2
 
App. A,  807.4(2)


O-04-12-07-1
 
12-7-04
 
1
 
2-54


O-05-02-15-01
 
2-15-05
 
2    Added
 
13-51--13-55


O-05-03-01-1
 
3-1-05
 
2    Added
 
12-51


O-05-03-01-2
 
3-1-05
 
2
 
15-158


O-05-03-22-1
 
3-22-05
 
2    Dltd
 
App. A,  803.4(1)


 
 
 
 
3    Added
 
App. A,  803.2(47)


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  804.3(3)


O-05-04-19-01
 
4-19-05
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  706.11(1)(P)


O-05-05-17-1
 
5-17-05
 
2    Added
 
12-26.1


O-05-05-17-02
 
5-17-05
 
2
 
App. A,  706.11(1)(D)


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  706.1


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  706.11(3)


O-05-06-21-04
 
6-21-05
 
2
 
15-137


 
 
 
 
3
 
15-132


O-05-06-21-5
 
6-21-05
 
2
 
18-197--18-200


O-05-10-18-1
 
10-18-05
 
2
 
App. A,  702


 
 
 
 
3    Added
 
App. A,  804.2(33)


O-05-11-15-1
 
11-15-05
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  807.2(25)


O-05-12-06-2
 
12-6-05
 
2 (12-51--12-57)    Added
 
12-61--12-67


O-06-01-17-1
 
1-17-06
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  500(7)


O-06-01-17-3
 
1-17-06
 
1
 
App. A


 
 
 
 
2
 
4.5-36


 
 
 
 
3
 
13-28


 
 
 
 
4
 
Ch. 16


O-06-03-07-3
 
3-7-06
 
2    Added
 
18-256(7)


 
 
 
 
3
 
18-258


O-06-03-07-5
 
3-7-06
 
2
 
9-121--9-124, 9-124.2--9-128


O-06-04-04-1
 
4-4-06
 
2
 
4-125


O-06-04-04-3
 
4-4-06
 
2
 
17-63.5


O-06-05-02-2
 
5-2-06
 
2
 
18-256(7)


 
 
 
 
3
 
18-258


O-06-05-16-3
 
5-16-06
 
2    Added
 
App. A,  707.1(3)


O-06-06-06-2
 
6-6-06
 
2
 
App. A,  802.3(5)


 
 
 
 
3
 
App. A,  803.2(15)


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  806.3(3)


O-06-06-06-3
 
6-6-06
 
2
 
App. A,  706.1


 
 
 
 
 
 
App. A,  706.11(1)(M)


 
 
 
 
    Added
 
App. A,  706.12(2)(K)


O-06-11-07-1
 
11-7-06
 
2    Added
 
11-20


O-06-11-21-4
 
11-21-06
 
2
 
App. A,  706.2(2)(A)


 
 
 
 
 
 
App. A,  706.3


 
 
 
 
 
 
App. A,  706.11(1)(D), (E)


 
 
 
 
 
 
App. A,  706.12(4)(B), (C)


O-06-12-12-3
 
12-12-06
 
2
 
18-244


O-06-15-04-03
 
6-15-04
 
2
 
App. A,  705


 
 
 
 
3(708)
 
App. A,  710


 
 
 
 
4
 
App. A,  805.3(1)


O-06-20-17-1
 
10-17-06
 
2
 
App. A,  807.3


O-07-01-02-1
 
1-2-07
 
2
 
20-29.5(a)


O-07-01-16-05
 
1-16-07
 
2
 
App. A,  709


O-07-02-06-1
 
2-6-07
 
2
 
18-223


O-07-02-06-2
 
2-6-07
 
2
 
18-61


O-07-02-20-2
 
2-20-07
 
2    Added
 
18-230.1


O-07-03-06-2
 
3-6-07
 
2
 
3-1--3-18


O-07-07-17-1
 
7-17-07
 
2
 
18-61


O-07-07-17-2
 
7-17-07
 
2
 
18-223


 
 
9-18-07(Ord.)
 
2    Dltd
 
20-48


 
 
 
 
    Added
 
20-48--20-54


O-07-08-18-2
 
9-18-07
 
2
 
21-4


 
 
 
 
(801.2)
 
21-8.1(b)(3)


O-07-11-20-1
 
11-20-07
 
2(706)
 
21-7.6


O-08-01-15-3
 
1-15-08
 
1(1)
 
1-3


 
 
 
 
(2)
 
1-10


 
 
 
 
(3)    Dltd
 
1-11, 1-12, 1-16--1-28, 4.5-48, 6-28, 8-13, 12-29, 12-51(j), 12-52(k), 15-48,
15-91, 15-140, 17-20, 17.5-86--17.5-88, 18-200, 18-244, 18-261, 19-5


 
 
 
 
(4)
 
4.5-33


 
 
 
 
(5)    Dltd
 
21-15


 
 
 
 
(6)    Rnbd
 
App. A


 
 
 
 
    as
 
Ch. 21


O-08-01-15-5
 
1-15-08
 
2(400)
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
(711)    Added
 
21-196


 
 
 
 
(804.3)    Added
 
21-205.3(7)


O-08-01-15-9
 
1-15-08
 
2    Dltd
 
10-26--10-50


 
 
 
 
    Added
 
10-11--10-42


O-08-02-05-12
 
2-5-08
 
2
 
3-1--3-18


O-08-02-19-2
 
2-19-08
 
2
 
21-4, 21-8.4(c)(5)


O-08-02-19-3
 
2-19-08
 
2    Dltd
 
3-8.1


O-08-04-15-1
 
4-15-08
 
1
 
10-174, 10-182


O-08-04-15-2
 
4-15-08
 
2(801.2)    Added
 
21-202(5)a.--c.


O-08-06-17-10
 
6-17-08
 
2
 
21-156


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-86--21-9021-21


O-08-06-17-11
 
6-17-08
 
2
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-171


O-08-07-15-1
 
7-15-08
 
2    Dltd
 
20-81--20-103


 
 
 
 
    Added
 
20-81--20-120.1


O-08-07-15-2
 
7-15-08
 
1
 
Ch. 8


O-08-08-19-4
 
8-19-08
 
2    Added
 
21-209--21-209.3


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-238


O-08-09-02-2
 
8-2-08
 
1
 
1-10.5


O-08-09-02-1
 
9-2-08
 
1    Added
 
12-3


O-08-09-16-1
 
9-16-08
 
2
 
3-4.3


O-09-02-17-4
 
2-17-09
 
2    Added
 
3-8.1


O-09-03-24-2
 
3-24-09
 
2    Added
 
21-310--21-317


O-09-03-24-3
 
3-24-09
 
2
 
21-21


O-09-05-19-5
 
5-19-09
 
2
 
17-5


O-09-07-21-2
 
7-21-09
 
2
 
20-36(c)


O-09-08-4-3
 
8-4-09
 
2
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-171


O-09-08-18-3
 
8-18-09
 
2
 
11-6


O-09-08-18-4
 
8-18-09
 
2
 
19-26, 19-27


O-09-09-15-1
 
9-15-09
 
2
 
21-21


O-09-09-15-6
 
9-15-09
 
2
 
21-156--21-158


O-09-09-15-7
 
9-15-09
 
1    Dltd
 
19-1--19-5, 19-26--19-32, 19-51--19-53


 
 
 
 
    Added
 
19-1--19-5, 19-26--19-32, 19-40, 19-41, 19-51--19-53


O-10-04-20-3
 
4-20-10
 
2    Dltd
 
18-258


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
18-258


O-10-05-04-2
 
5-4-10
 
1    Dltd
 
11-18


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
11-18


O-10-05-18-1
 
5-18-10
 
2
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-206.2. 21-206.3


O-10-06-01-1
 
6-1-10
 
2    Dltd
 
10-11--10-42


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
10-11--10-42


O-10-06-15-4
 
6-15-10
 
2    Added
 
18-266


O-10-06-15-5
 
6-15-10
 
1
 
7-2


 
 
 
 
2    Dltd
 
14-28


O-10-08-17-2
 
8-17-10
 
1
 
21-171


O-10-12-14-2
 
12-14-10
 
1
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
2
 
21-204.2


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-205.2


O-11-01-18-1
 
1-18-11
 
1
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
2
 
21-204.2


O-11-01-18-2
 
1-18-11
 
1
 
8-76


 
 
 
 
2
 
8-77


O-11-05-03-3
 
5-3-11
 
2
 
10-76


O-11-05-17-2
 
5-17-11
 
2
 
21-205.3


O-11-06-07-5
 
6-7-11
 
2    Dltd
 
1-10.10


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
1-10.10


O-11-06-21-3
 
6-21-11
 
2    Dltd
 
9-34


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
9-34


O-11-09-06-2
 
9-6-11
 
2    Dltd
 
9-102


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
9-102


O-11-09-20-1
 
9-20-11
 
2
 
18-223


O-11-09-20-3
 
9-20-11
 
3    Added
 
10-152


O-11-11-01-1
 
11-1-11
 
2    Dltd
 
11-16


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
11-16


O-11-12-06-2
 
12-6-11
 
2
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-205.3


 
 
 
 
4
 
21-206.2


O-12-03-06-2
 
3-6-12
 
2    Dltd
 
15-4115-47


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
15-4115-52


O-12-03-06-4
 
3-6-12
 
2    Dltd
 
9-35


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
9-35


O-12-06-19-5
 
6-19-12
 
2    Dltd
 
1-10.6


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
1-10.6


O-12-06-19-4
 
6-19-12
 
2    Dltd
 
9-124.1


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
9-124.1


O-12-06-19-7
 
6-19-12
 
2, 3
 
21-205.3


O-12-8-21-6
 
8-21-12
 
2    Dltd
 
11-8


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
11-8


O-12-08-21-2
 
8-21-12
 
2
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-206.2


 
 
 
 
4
 
21-204.2


O-12-09-18-2
 
9-18-12
 
2
 
21-171


O-13-01-15-2
 
1-15-13
 
2    Added
 
20-55 - 20-60.11


O-13-01-15-3
 
1-15-13
 
2    Dltd
 
9-101 – 9-104


 
 
 
 
      Added
 
9-101 - 9-108


O-13-06-18-3
 
6-18-13
 
2
 
21-203.3


O-13-11-19-2
 
11-19-13
 
2
 
11-16


O-14-05-06-1
 
5-6-14
 
2    Dltd
 
21-131 – 21-131.12


 
 
 
 
2    Added
 
21-131 – 21-142


O-14-06-17-6
 
6-17-14
 
2
 
1-10.9


 
 
 
 
3
 
1-10.10


O-14-07-15-01
 
7-15-14
 
2
 
21-171


O-14-11-18-3
 
11-18-14
 
2
 
2-26


O-14-11-18-4
 
11-18-14
 
2
 
21-135


O-15-01-06-3
 
1-6-15
 
3    Dltd
 
15-131 – 15-140


 
 
 
 
    Added
 
15-131 – 15-152


O-15-1-20-1
 
1-20-15
 
2
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-205.3


 
 
 
 
4
 
21-206.2


O-15-01-20-2
 
1-20-15
 
2
 
21-31, 21-133.3, 21-203.1, 21-203.2


 
 
 
 
3
 
21-21


 
 
 
 
4
 
21-203.2


 
 
 
 
5
 
21-203.3


 
 
 
 
6    Added
 
21-73


O-15-01-20-3
 
1-20-15
 
2    Added
 
21-210 – 21-210.2


 
 
 
 
3    Added
 
21-210.3


O-15-1-20-4
 
1-20-15
 
2    Added
 
21-211 – 21-211.3


O-15-1-20-6
 
1-20-15
 
1
 
21-161


O-15-01-20-7
 
1-20-15
 
2    Dltd
 
21-231, 21-232


 
 
 
 
2    Added
 
21-231 – 21-232.2


O-15-03-17-2
 
3-17-15
 
2    Added
 
14-53


O-15-07-21-3
 
7-21-15
 
2
 

21-21





 
 
 
3
 

21-131 - 21-142




O-15-09-15-1

 
9-15-15
 
1
 

7-40





 
 
 
2
 

7-41




O-15-10-06-5

 
10-6-15
 
2    Dltd
 

5-3





 
 
 
2    Added
 

5-3





 
 
 
3    Dltd
 

5-12





 
 
 
3    Added
 

5-12




O-15-11-17-1

 
11-17-15
 
2    Dltd
 

10-11 - 10-42





 
 
 
2    Added 
 

10-11 - 10-34





 
 
 
4    Dltd
 

10-56 - 10-61




O-15-11-17-2

 
11-17-15
 
2
 

21-207.3




O-15-11-17-4

 
11-17-15
 
1
 

17.5-62




O-15-11-17-6

 
11-17-15
 
1
 

21-21





 
 
 
2
 

21-205.4




O-15-12-01-1

 
12-1-15
 
2
 

17-6




O-16-03-01-1

 
3-1-16
 
2    Dltd
 

11-17





 
 
 
2    Added
 

11-17





 
 
 
3    Dltd
 

12-51, 12-52





 
 
 
3    Added
 

12-51, 12-52




O-16-05-17-1

 
5-17-16
 
2
 

21-4.5




O-16-06-07-1

 
6-7-16
 
2
 

21-222.3




O-16-08-16-4

 
8-16-16
 
2    Dltd
 

1-10.17





 
 
 
2    Added
 

1-10.17




O-16-12-06-1

 
12-6-16
 
2
 

21-204.2





 
 
 
3
 

21-204.4




O-17-02-07-1

 
2-7-17
 
2    Dltd
 

15-146





 
 
 
2    Added
 

15-146




O-17-03-21-3

 
3-21-17
 
1
 

12-51





 
 
 
2
 

12-52




O-17-06-06-1

 
6-6-17
 
2    Dltd
 

9-32





 
 
 
2    Added
 

9-32




O-17-06-20-7

 
6-20-17
 
2    Dltd
 

12-51, 12-52





 


 

2    Added

 

12-51





 
 
 
 
 






 



SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE



   This table shows the location within Part II, Special Acts, of the
Session Laws included herein.



 

Year
 
Section
 
Disposition


1981
 
1
 
1


1983
 
1.1
 
2



 



STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE



   This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in
the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or
related matters.



 


G.S. Section

 

Section  this Code






1-539.1(b)

 

Ch. 19




1-593

 

1-3




ch. 7A

 

8-55




7A-227

 

4-130




7A-228

 

4-130




12-2

 

1-9




12-3

 

1-3




14-4

 

1-10





 

1-10(a)





 

9-124.1





 

10-41





 

12-51





 

12-52





 

15-152





 

20-101(a)




14-4(a)

 

1-10.12




14-4(b)

 

1-10.12




14-50.1

 

7-56




14-127

 

11-12





 

15-3




14-132

 

11-12





 

15-3




14-132.1

 

Ch. 15, Art. IV




14-145

 

11-13




14-146

 

15-3




14-148

 

5-6




14-149

 

5-6




14-190.1

 

11-4




14-190.9

 

11-3




14-202.10

 

4.5-27




14-203

 

11-5




14-225.1

 

Ch. 15, Art. IV




14-234

 

2-51




14-269

 

11-15





 

11-16




14-269(b)

 

11-16




14-269.6

 

11-15




14-277

 

14-79




14-277.2

 

15-162




14-283

 

7-56




14-284.1

 

7-56





 

9-41




14-286

 

7-16





 

7-17





 

11-12




14-288.4

 

11-2




14-288.12

 

Ch. 6




14-317

 

10-76




14-362

 

11-10




14-362.1

 

11-10




14-399

 

15-86




14-399 et seq.

 

Ch. 9, Art. II




14-399.1

 

15-86




14-409.40

 

11-16




14-410

 

7-61




14-414

 

7-58




14-415.11

 

11-16




14-415.23

 

11-16




14-444

 

11-2




Ch. 15

 

21-131.11





 

21-131.12




15-27.2

 

3-9




Ch. 18B

 

21-204.2, 21-204.4




18B-101

 

11-17(a)




18B-401

 

Ch. 17




18B-1001

 

11-17(a)




19-1 et seq.

 

11-3, 11-4




20-10

 

Ch. 17




20-37

 

Ch. 17





 

Ch. 17, Art. III




20-37.7

 

10-176




20-87

 

Ch. 17




20-101

 

Ch. 17




20-121

 

15-1




20-122

 

15-1




20-125

 

11-11




20-134

 

18-219




20-141

 

18-91




20-153

 

18-106




20-157

 

7-14




20-158

 

Ch. 18, Art. II




20-158.1

 

18-38




20-161 et seq.

 

Ch. 18, Art. VI




20-162

 

18-223




20-162.1

 

18-39




20-165.1

 

18-126




20-169

 

Ch. 15, Art. IV




20-172

 

18-161




20-173

 

18-162




20-174

 

18-165




20-174.1

 

Ch. 15, Art. IV





 

15-133





 

18-169




20-219.11

 

9-69




20-257

 

7-19




20-280

 

Ch. 17




20-356 et seq.

 

15-2




42-29

 

4-130




42-30

 

4-130




Ch. 47-A

 

21-255




54-099.99

 

10-40(e)




65-13

 

5-1





 

5-6




65-37 et seq.

 

Ch. 5




65-46 et seq.

 

Ch. 5




67-4.1 et seq.

 

3-1





 

3-4.2





 

3-4.3





 

3-5




67-4.1(c)

 

3-4.2





 

3-4.3





 

3-6




67-12

 

3-4




69-1 et seq.

 

Ch. 7





 

7-5




69-39

 

7-13




Ch. 90, Art. 5

 

11-19(b)




Ch. 91A

 

10-151




91A-12

 

10-151




Ch. 93B

 

10-20




Ch. 99E, Art. 3

 

12-61




104E-1 et seq.

 

Ch. 9, Art. II




Ch. 105

 

10-200




Ch. 105, Art. 3

 

10-192




Ch. 105, Art. 22A

 

18-266




Ch. 105, Subch. I 

 

10-192




Ch. 105, Subch. 1, Art. 9   

 

10-198





 

10-199




105-109

 

10-40





 

10-41




105-164.16

 

10-196




105-249

 

10-19




105-249.1

 

10-19




105-304

 

18-266




113-300.2

 

3-18




121-5

 

10-30





 

10-39




Ch. 130A, Art. 9

 

8-26




130A-34

 

Ch. 9




130A-184 et seq.

 

3-2




130A-200

 

3-5




130A-251

 

Ch. 15, Art. IV




130A-251 et seq.

 

15-133




130A-290 et seq.

 

Ch. 9, Art. II




130A-290(a)(6)

 

8-26




130A-290(a)(35)

 

8-26




130A-290(a)(36)

 

8-26




130A-333

 

Ch. 20, Art. IV




130A-390

 

5-1




136-18.3

 

Ch. 9, Art. II




136-66.1 et seq.

 

Ch. 15





 

Ch. 15, Art. II




136-71.6 et seq.

 

Ch. 18, Art. V




136-91

 

Ch. 9, Art. II





 

15-135




136-93   

 

Ch. 15, Art. II, Div. 3





 

Ch. 19




136-141

 

9-74




134-143(1)

 

1-13




136-143(3)

 

1-13




136-143(4)

 

1-13




Ch. 143, Art. 21   

 

20-117




Ch. 143, Art. 21, Pt. 6   

 

8-1




143-138

 

4-27




143-138(d)

 

4-26(b)




143-143.15

 

8-77




143-151.13

 

4-51




143-151.26 et seq.   

 

4-106




143-151.29

 

4-108




143-151.31

 

4-108




143-151.35

 

4-113




143-152

 

20-40




143-213(18)

 

20-82




143-215.1

 

20-82





 

20-94(g), (h), (i)





 

20-97




143.215.1(b)

 

20-97




143-215.3(a)(14)

 

20-82




143-215.6B

 

20-117




153A-121, Art. 6   

 

12-62




153A-123

 

17.5-87




153A-275

 

20-81




153A-351

 

7-20




153A-364

 

7-20




159-7 et seq.

 

2-133(2)




159-24   

 

Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6




159-25

 

2-133





 

2-137




160-411

 

7-20




Ch. 160A, Art. 7, Pt. 2   

 

Char.,  4.1




Ch. 160A, Art. 8

 

8-1




Ch. 160A, Art. 10   

 

Char.,  5.1(d)





 

Char.,  5.1(f)





 

4-129




Ch. 160A, Art. 19

 

21-1




Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 3   

 

8-1





 

21-1




Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 5   

 

8-1




Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 6   

 

4-128





 

4-136





 

4-137





 

4-140




Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 8   

 

8-1




160A-59

 

2-35




160A-63

 

2-34




160A-64

 

2-68




160A-67

 

2-66




160A-69

 

2-27





 

2-33




160A-70

 

2-27





 

2-69




160A-71

 

2-26




160A-74

 

2-29




160A-75

 

2-29




160A-76

 

4-30




160A-76(b)

 

7-36




160A-77

 

1-1





 

1-2




160A-79

 

1-1





 

1-2




160A-147

 

2-81





 

2-82




160A-147 et seq.

 

Ch. 2




160A-148

 

2-83





 

2-86




160A-162

 

2-87





 

2-119





 

2-136





 

2-154




160A-171   

 

Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5




160A-173   

 

Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4




160A-174

 

17.5-28




160A-174(a)

 

Ch. 9




160A-175

 

1-10





 

1-10.8





 

12-51





 

12-52




160A-175(d)

 

10-41




160A-178

 

Ch. 10, Art. V




160A-179

 

11-6




160A-181

 

Ch. 10, Art. IV




160A-183

 

Ch. 7, Art. III




160A-184

 

Ch. 9, Art. IV




160A-188

 

3-18




160A-189

 

11-16




160A-190

 

11-16




160A-192

 

Ch. 9, Art. II





 

Ch. 9, Art. V





 

15-90




160A-193

 

Ch. 9, Art. II




160A-194

 

4-106





 

Ch. 10





 

Ch. 10, Art. II





 

Ch. 10, Art. IV




160A-206 et seq.

 

Ch. 10




160A-207

 

10-40(a)(3)





 

10-42




160A-211

 

Ch. 10, Art. II




160A-217

 

15-63




160A-238

 

Ch. 8




160A-281

 

14-26




160A-281 et seq.

 

Ch. 14




160A-282

 

Ch. 14, Art. IV




160A-291 et seq.

 

Ch. 7




160A-292

 

7-4




160A-296

 

Ch. 15, Art. II




160A-296(a)(2)

 

15-135




160A-301(a)

 

18-237




160A-303

 

9-62




160A-303.1

 

Ch. 9, Art. II





 

Ch. 9, Art. V





 

9-4





 

15-90





 

15-135




160A-303.2

 

9-62




160A-303.2(a)

 

1-13




160A-304

 

Ch. 17





 

17-63.5




160A-311 et seq.

 

Ch. 9, Art. II




160A-312

 

20-81




160A-317

 

20-24





 

20-64




160A-341

 

Ch. 5




160A-348

 

Ch. 5




160A-350 et seq.

 

Ch. 12




160A-360 et seq.

 

Ch. 13





 

Ch. 21




160A-361

 

13-30





 

21-301




160A-363

 

13-29




160A-364

 

21-276





 

21-321




160A-371

 

Ch. 16





 

16-1




160A-381

 

21-276




160A-381 et seq.

 

Ch. 21




160A-384

 

21-13




160A-385

 

21-13




160A-385.1

 

21-275





 

21-276




160A-388

 

13-28





 

21-301




160A-392

 

21-273




160A-400.14(a)

 

4-127




160A-411--160A-438   

 

Ch. 4




160A-411

 

4-51




160A-412

 

4-52




160A-415

 

4-53




160A-417

 

Ch. 4, Art. IV





 

12-276




160A-418

 

4-85





 

21-275




160A-420

 

4-55




160A-421

 

4-57




160A-422

 

4-84





 

21-275




160A-423

 

4-55




160A-424

 

4-57




160A-433

 

4-54




160A-435

 

7-1




160A-442

 

4-139




160A-446(f)

 

4-135




160A-458.1

 

Ch. 8




166A-8

 

Ch. 6





 


