1
Town of Matthews, North Carolina Charter
Section
1. An act to incorporate the Town of Matthews, in the County of Mecklenburg
2. An act to amend the Charter of Town of Matthews
3. An act to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews in the County of Mecklenburg
4. An act to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews
5. An act to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews in the County of Mecklenburg
6. An act to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews so as to provide for the holding of a primary for the
nomination of candidates for the general municipal election
7. An ordinance to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews to provide that the Mayor shall be given the right
to vote on all matters before the Council
8. An ordinance to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews to increase the Board of Commissioners from
five to six
9. An ordinance to amend the Charter of the Town of Matthews to adopt the Council-Manager form of
government
10. An ordinance amending the Charter of the Town of Matthews implementing four-year staggered terms for the
Board of Commissioners of the Town of Matthews, North Carolina
§ 1. AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS, IN THE COUNTY OF MECKLENBURG
Section 1. That the Town of Matthews, in the County of Mecklenburg is hereby created a corporate body with all the
rights, privileges and franchises, and subject to all of the provisions contained in Chapter one hundred and eleven of
Battle's Revisal, except as may be hereinafter modified.
Section 2. That the four officers of said incorporation shall consist of a mayor, four commissioners and marshal, and
shall be W.T. Carpenter, Mayor; Dr. J. Bruner, J.T. Barrett, E.J. Funderburk, G.W. Barnes, and J.S. Reid,
Commissioners; and T.M. Chambers, Constable, who shall hold their offices until their successors are duly elected at
their next regular municipal election for the towns of this state and qualified.
Section 3. The limit and boundaries of said town shall be three-fourths of a mile square, taking the depot house of the
Carolina Central Railroad as the center.
Section 4. That said Commissioners shall have the power to levy a tax not to exceed sixteen and two-thirds cents on
the one-hundred dollars' valuation of property, and fifty cents on the poll, and shall have the power to levy a tax upon
all subject of state taxation within the corporate limits not to exceed one-half of the state tax, and shall have the power
to tax dogs and abate all nuisance and may impose such fines or imprisonment as may be necessary therefor, not
exceeding fifty dollars fine or thirty days imprisonment.
Section 5. It shall be the duty of the Commissioners to expend the money so collected upon the improvement of the
streets and for other purposes for the benefit of said town, and all persons residing in said limits may be exempted by
said Commissioners from working the public roads.
Section 6. Said Commissioners shall have the power to elect a suitable person for the secretary and treasurer of the
Board, who shall give bond in such sum as Commissioners shall require.
Section 7. The Mayor of said town shall have all the jurisdiction of a justice of the peace within its corporate
limits and the Marshal shall have all the power and privileges, and be entitled to such fees as constables now are.
(Private Laws of 1879, Chapter 60) (Ratified 3-8-1879)
2
§ 2. AN ACT TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS
Section 1. That the Charter of the Town of Matthews, being Chapter sixty (60) of the laws of one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-nine be amended as follows; to wit: The said town shall have all the powers, privileges and
franchises that are conferred upon the Town of Thomasville, by an act of the General Assembly, entitled an act ___,
ratified the ___day of ___eighteen hundred and seventy-seven; and by sections twenty-eight (28), thirty-two (32) and
thirty-three (33), contained in an act of the General Assembly, entitled “an act to amend the laws in relation to the
Town of Tarboro,” ratified ___day of ___, eighteen hundred and seventy-seven.
Section 2. That the boundaries of the said town of Matthews shall be extended as follows, to wit: Beginning at
the intersection of the present corporate line and railroad, thence with the railroad to the line of Messrs. Shelly and
Abernathy, thence with the line to the corporate of Pleasant Hill Church and thence with the line of the said church and
Abernathy to the corner of said land, thence a direct line to the corner of the church land on T.A. Squire's line,
including all of the church land and cemetery, thence a direct line to the corner of the present incorporation, known as
the Maple corner, and the land embraced within said boundaries shall hereafter form a part of the Town of Matthews.
Section 3. That nothing in this act shall be construed as repealing the law heretofore passed prohibiting the sale of
intoxicating liquors within two miles of the said Pleasant Hill Church.
(Private Laws of 1883, Chapter 121) (Ratified 3-9-1883)
§ 3. AN ACT TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS IN THE COUNTY OF
MECKLENBURG.
Section 1. That the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Matthews in the County of Mecklenburg shall have the
power to prescribe fire limits for the said town, within which it shall be unlawful to erect any wooden building, or to
alter or repair any wooden building now within the limits so established, except by permission of the said Board of
Commissioners, and the Board of Commissioners may refuse to grant said permission whenever in their judgment the
erection or repair of the wooden building, as proposed, will endanger the safety of adjoining properties, or otherwise be
detrimental to the interest of the said town.
Section 2. It shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners of said town to require, by an ordinance to
that effect, all persons owning or controlling any lot upon which there is stagnant water, which is detrimental to the
health of the community, to drain the said lot, and if the person owning or in possession of the said lot or land, upon
which said stagnant water is, shall refuse after ten-days notice to drain his said lot as required, then it shall be the duty
of the Board of Commissioners to cause the lot to be drained in a proper manner and the owner of the said lot shall be
liable for the expense incurred in doing this work, and the Board of Commissioners may recover the same of him by
civil action.
Section 3. That the Board of Commissioners shall have power to enforce the provisions of this act by proper
ordinances, and they may ordain that any person erecting or repairing or altering a wooden building within the fire
limits prescribed by them, or allowing stagnant water to remain on his lot after due notice to drain the same, shall be
liable to a penalty to be fixed by the Board of Commissioners for each day the building so erected, altered, or repaired
contrary to the ordinance shall remain within the fire limits, and for each day the said stagnant water remain after due
notice to drain the lot upon which it is located.
Section 4. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to use or erect any engine or steam boiler within
the fire limits of the Town of Matthews, except by permission of the Board of Commissioners who may refuse such
permission whenever in their opinion the use of said boiler and engine will endanger the safety of the people of the said
town or be prejudicial to their health and comfort.
(Private Laws of 1897, Chapter 216) (Ratified 3-8-1897)
3
§ 4. AN ACT TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS.
Section 1. That the Charter of the Town of Matthews, being Chapter sixty (60) of the Private Laws of one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-nine (1879), as amended by Chapter one hundred and twenty- one (121) of the Private Laws
of one thousand eight hundred and eighty-three (1883) and any subsequent acts, be and the same is hereby further
amended as follows, to wit: That the Commissioners of said town shall have all the powers, franchises, privileges and
authority conferred upon the Board of Aldermen of the City of Charlotte by Chapter three hundred and fifty-three (353)
of the Private Laws of one thousand and eight hundred and ninety-one (1891), as amended by Chapter two hundred and
thirty-six (236) of the Private Laws of one thousand eight hundred and ninety-three (1893).
Section 2. That the said Commissioners and other officers of the said town shall have all the powers, rights, privileges
and franchises, and be subject to all the duties and obligations conferred and imposed upon municipal officers by
Chapter seventy-three (73) of the Revisal of one thousand nine hundred and five (1905), not inconsistent with the other
provisions of the Charter by the said Commissioners.
Section 3. That the Commissioners of said town shall have the power and authority to create and establish fire limits in
said town, within which no wooden or other combustible building or structure shall be erected or repaired, except in
accordance with the ordinance of said town adopted or to be adopted by the said Commissioners.
(Private Laws of 1907, Chapter 368) (Ratified 3-7-07)
§ 5. AN ACT TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS, IN THE COUNTY OF
MECKLENBURG.
Section 1. The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Matthews, in the County of Mecklenburg, shall have power to
levy a tax not to exceed fifty cents on the one hundred dollars valuation of property.
Section 2. The Board of Commissioners of said town shall pass ordinances establishing and defining the fire limits of
said town, and within such limits so established, no frame or wooden buildings shall thereafter be erected. The Board
of Commissioners may change the fire limits at any time.
Section 3. At the regular municipal election to be held in said town on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in May,
one thousand nine hundred and eleven, and every two years thereafter, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of
said town a cotton weigher, who shall give such bond, take such oath, perform such duties and receive such
compensation as is now prescribed by law.
The Board of Commissioners shall fill any vacancy in the office of cotton weigher occurring by death, resignation or
otherwise.
Section 4. In order to provide for the repairing, improvement and keeping in order of the sidewalks of said
town, the Board may from time to time lay off and establish districts, and divide the sidewalks into districts for their
repair and improvement and may from time to time establish the grade of the sidewalk in said districts, and the width
thereof and the building line. They may by ordinance provide the character of the sidewalks to be established in the
several districts. Every owner of a lot which shall front on any street on which a sidewalk has been established and
graded shall improve in such manner as the Board may direct such sidewalk as far as it may extend along such lot, and
on failure to do so within twenty days by nonresident of the County of Mecklenburg to his or her agent, or if personal
service of said notice cannot be had on such owner or agent, then after publication of a notice by the Town Marshal for
thirty days in some newspaper published in Mecklenburg County, calling on them to make such repairs or
improvements the Board may cause the same to be repaired with either bricks, stone, gravel or cement, at their
discretion, as in such district provided, and one- half of said expense shall be a lien upon said lot or lots; and if not paid
within sixty days after completion of said repairs and improvements, such lot may be sold under the same rules and
regulations, rights of redemptions and savings as are prescribed by the general laws of the State for the sale of land for
unpaid taxes, or an action in the nature of an action of foreclosure may be instituted in the courts against said owner,
4
and any judgment rendered thereon shall be a lien upon the lot or interest therein for the satisfaction of the amount due
the town by the owner, as aforesaid: Provided however, that if the owner or his agent shall elect to make such repair or
improvement of the sidewalk in front of his property as the Commissioners may direct, at his own cost, and shall
promptly complete the same to the satisfaction of the said Board of Commissioners, then out of the General Fund of the
town there shall be paid to the said owner, or his agent, one-half the cost incurred by him in the making of such repair
or improvement.
Section 5. That the Board of Commissioners may submit to the qualified voters of the said town, at the municipal
election in May, the question whether or not the town shall borrow a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars, to be
used for the improvement of streets and sidewalks, or to provide water for the public use, or such other public purpose,
as the Board of Commissioners may approve.
At such elections, if ordered by the Board of Commissioners, those favoring the borrowing of the money shall vote a
ticket upon which is printed the words “For bonds,” and those opposed to the borrowing of such sum shall vote a ticket
upon which shall be printed the words “Against bonds”.
If by a vote of the qualified voters the Board of Commissioners are authorized to borrow said sum of money, the Board
of Commissioners may issue the bond or bonds of the town of Matthews, which bond or bonds shall bear interest at a
rate not exceeding six percent per annum, payable semi-annually, and the bond or bonds so issued shall be payable not
more than twenty years from date, and it shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners to provide by taxation for the
payment of the interest on said bonds as the same may become due, and to provide for the payment of the principal
money at the maturity of said bonds.
The election herein provided for shall be held under the rules and regulations prescribed for the holding of the
municipal election, and the result be certified by the proper officers of the Board of Commissioners of the town, who
shall make on the minutes of their proceeding a record of the result of such election, and this certificate so recorded
shall be conclusive evidence of the result of such election.
(Private Laws of 1911, Chapter 172) (Ratified 2-7-11)
§ 6. AN ACT TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS SO AS TO PROVIDE FOR
THE HOLDING O F A PRIMARY FOR THE NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES FO R THE
GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTION.
Section 1. That the Charter of the Town of Matthews in Mecklenburg County, being Chapter 60 of the Private Laws of
1879, as amended by Chapter 121 of the Private Laws of 1883, and Chapter 368 of the Private Laws of 1907, and
Chapter 172 of the Private Laws of 1911, is further amended in the following respects so as to provide for a primary for
the nomination of the elective officials of the Town of Matthews:
(1) Nomination by Primaries. All candidates to be voted for at all general municipal elections, at which time
a mayor, commissioners, or any other elective officers are to be elected under the provisions of the Town of Matthews
City Charter, shall be nominated by a primary election, and no other names shall be placed upon the general ballot
except those nominated in such primary in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
(2) How Primaries Held. The primary election for such nominations shall be held on the second Saturday of
April preceding general municipal elections. The judges and other officers of elections appointed for the general
municipal election shall, whenever practicable be the judges of the primary election, and it shall be held at the same
place and in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations and subject to the same conditions, and the polls
to be opened and closed at the same hours, as are required for the general election.
(3) Notice of Candidacy. Any person desiring to become a candidate for nomination by the primary for the
office of mayor or commissioner or any other elective office shall, at least 10 days prior to the primary election, file
with the clerk a statement of such candidacy in substantially the following form:
5
“State of North Carolina - County of ________ I, __________ , hereby give notice that I reside at ________Street,
Town of ________, County of __________, State of North Carolina; that I am a candidate for nomination to the
office of (mayor, or town commissioner, or other office) to be voted upon at the primary election to be held on the
second Saturday of April, 19__ , and I hereby request that my name be printed upon the official ballot for the
nomination by such primary election for such office. (Signed)________”
And he shall at the time pay to the Clerk, to be turned over to the Town Treasurer, the sum of five dollars ($5.00).
(4) Publication of Names. Immediately upon the expiration of the time for filing the petition of candidates,
the Town Clerk shall cause to be published for three successive days in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the
town, in proper form, the names of the persons as they are to appear upon the primary ballots.
(5) Ballots Prepared. The Clerk shall thereupon cause the primary ballots to be printed, authenticated with a
facsimile of his signature. Upon the ballot the names of the candidates for mayor, arranged alphabetically shall be
placed, with a square at the left of each name and immediately below the words, “vote for one.” Following the names,
likewise arranged in alphabetical order, shall appear the names of the candidates for the commissioners, with a square at
the left of each name, and below the names of such candidates shall appear the words, “vote for five.” Like provision
shall be made for the names of candidates for each elective office provided by the Matthews Town Charter. The
ballots shall be printed upon plain, substantial white paper, and shall be headed: “Candidates for nomination for Mayor
and Commissioners of the Town of Matthews, North Carolina, at the primary election,” but shall have no party
designation or mark whatever.
(6) Form of Ballots. The ballots shall be in substantially the following form:
“(Place a cross in the square preceding the names of parties you favor as candidates for the respective positions.)
Official primary ballot. Candidates for nomination for Mayor and Commissioners and other offices (naming
them) of the Town of Matthews, North Carolina, at the primary election.
For Mayor (naming candidates). (Vote for one.)
For Commissioners (names of candidates). (Vote for five.)
Official ballot. Attest:
(Signature) Town Clerk”
(7) Distribution of Ballots. Having caused ballots to be printed the Town Clerk shall cause to be delivered
at each polling place a number of ballots equal to twice the number of votes cast in such polling precinct at the last
general municipal election for mayor.
(8) Who Entitled to Vote. The persons who are qualified to vote at the succeeding municipal election shall
be qualified to vote at such primary election, and shall be subject to challenge made by any resident of the town, under
such rules as may be prescribed by the Board of Commissioners, and such challenge shall be passed upon by the judges
of election and registrars: Provided however, that the law applicable to challenge at a general municipal election shall
be applicable to challenge made at such primary election.
(9) Ballots counted. Judges of election shall, immediately upon the closing of the polls, count the ballots and
ascertain the number of votes cast in such precincts for each of the candidates, and make return thereof to the Town
Clerk, upon blanks to be furnished by the Clerk, within six hours of the closing of the polls.
(10) Returns canvassed. On the day following the primary election the Town Clerk, under the supervision and
direction of the Mayor, shall canvass such returns so received from all the polling precincts, and shall make and publish
in some newspaper of general circulation in the town, at least once, the result thereof. The canvass by the Town Clerk
shall be publicly made.
6
(11) Who to be Candidates. The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for mayor, and the six
candidates receiving the highest number of votes for commissioners, and the two candidates receiving the highest
number of votes for any other elective office, shall be candidates, and only candidates whose names shall be placed
upon the ballots for mayor, commissioners and other elective offices at the next succeeding general municipal election.
Provided, however, if any candidate for mayor receives a majority of all the votes cast for the office of mayor, or if five
candidates for commissioner receive a majority of all the votes cast for the office of commissioner, then only the names
of the five candidates receiving a majority of all the votes cast for commissioner shall be placed upon the ballot for the
mayor or commissioner at the next succeeding general municipal election.
(Session Laws of 1951, Chapter 179) (Ratified 3-6-51)
§ 7. AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS TO PROVIDE THAT
THE MAYOR SHALL BE GIVEN THE RIGHT TO VOTE ON ALL MATTERS BEFORE THE COUNCIL.
Section 1. Pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the Town of Matthews as set forth in Chapter
60 of the 1879 Private Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to provide that the Mayor shall
be given the right to vote on all matters before the Council in accordance with Part 3 of Article 5 of G.S. Chapter
160A and any Charter provisions not in conflict therewith.
(Ord. 169, passed 9-12-83; Ord. 185A, passed 12-15-83)
§ 8. AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS TO INCREASE THE
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS FROM FIVE TO SIX.
Section 1. Pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the Town of Matthews as set forth in Chapter
60 of the 1879 Private Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to increase the Board of
Commissioners from five to six in accordance with Part 2 of Article 5 of G.S. 160A and any Charter provisions not in
conflict therewith. (Ord. 168, passed 9-12-83; Ord. 185B, passed 12-15-83)
§ 9. AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS TO ADOPT THE
COUNCIL-MANAGER FROM OF GOVERNMENT.
Section 1. Pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the Town of Matthews as set forth in Chapter
60 of the 1879 Private Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to provide that the town shall
operate under the Council-Manager form of government in accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of G.S. Chapter 160A
and any Charter provisions not in conflict therewith.
(Ord. 167, passed 9-12-83; Ord. 378, passed 11-24-86)
§ 10. AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS
IMPLEMENTING FOUR-YEAR STAGGERED TERMS FOR THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE
TOWN OF MATTHEWS, NORTH CAROLINA.
Section 1. Pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the Town of Matthews as set forth in Chapter
60 of the 1879 Private Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to provide that the members of
the Town Board of Commissioners shall hereafter be elected for four-year terms on a staggered basis as follows:
At the regular municipal election to be held in 1993, the three candidates who receive the highest number of votes
shall be elected for four-year terms, while the three candidates who receive the next highest number of votes shall be
7
elected for two-year terms. Beginning at the regular municipal election to be held in 1995 and every four years
thereafter, three members of the Town Board of Commissioners shall be elected to serve four-year terms.
Beginning at the regular municipal election to be held in 1997 and every four years thereafter, three members of the
governing body shall be elected to serve for four-year terms.
(Ord. 263, passed 2-25-85; Ord. 270A, passed 3-25-85; Ord. 295, passed - - 85; Ord. 690, passed 9-9-91)
§ 11. AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF MATTHEWS, ESTABLISHING
TWO-YEAR TERMS FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF
MATTHEWS, NORTH CAROLINA.
Section 1. Pursuant to G.S. 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the Town of Matthews as set forth in Chapter 60
of the 1879 Private Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to provide that the
members of the Town Board of Commissioners shall hereafter be elected for two-year terms as follows: At the regular
municipal election to be held in 1997, the three candidates elected at said election shall be elected for two year terms.
Section 2. This Ordinance shall take effect only if approved by a vote of the people of the Town of Matthews, said vote
to be held on November 5, 1996.
(Ord. 902, passed 9-9-96)
1
Chapter 10. General Provisions
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Rules of interpretation
10.07 Severability
10.08 Reference to other sections
10.09 Reference to offices
10.10 Errors and omissions
10.11 Official time
10.12 Reasonable time
10.13 Ordinances repealed
10.14 Ordinances unaffected
10.15 Effective date of ordinances
10.16 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.17 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.18 Section histories; statutory references
10.19 Copy of code to be kept on file
10.20 Altering or tampering with code prohibited
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Matthews shall be designated as the Code of
Matthews, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition
and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPL ICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending
or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for
reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However,
technical words and phrases having peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according
to their technical import.
2
(B) For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNTY. Mecklenburg County, North Carolina.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office, employee,
commission, or department of this town unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or
receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of North Carolina.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a
capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, OR, MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Matthews, North Carolina.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
Statutory reference:
Similar statutory definitions, see G.S. § 10-3
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainly
repugnant to the intent of the Board of Commissioners or of the context of the same ordinance:
(A) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.
(B) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy
as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an
authorized agent or deputy.
(C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
3
(D) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class
enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to
the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this town
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions
or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words
necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such
intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform
with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were
contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this town for
the transaction of all town business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice
to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day
and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
(A) This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining
to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
4
(B) No resolution of the Board of Commissioners not specifically mentioned herein is hereby repealed. ('72
Code, § 1-2)
(C) The repeal provided for in division (A) of this section shall not affect any offense or act committed or done
or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this code; nor shall a repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
by the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or
any contract or obligation assumed by the town; nor shall a repeal affect the administrative ordinances or
resolutions of the Board of Commissioners not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code; nor
shall a repeal affect any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners
to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall a repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in the town; nor
shall a repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; nor shall a repeal affect any
ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the town; nor shall a repeal affect any
ordinance providing for local improvements and assessments therefor; nor shall a repeal affect any ordinance
dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision of land either within or without the town; nor shall a repeal affect
any ordinance extending the boundaries of the town; nor shall a repeal be construed as repealing any sewer and
water policy of the town or the provision for payment to the town for services rendered by the town or at its
direction, regardless of the nature of those services; nor shall a repeal affect any ordinance, resolution, pact or
other agreement establishing membership or participation of the town or any of its officials in any council of
local government or any similarly constituted cooperative bodies or agencies; nor shall a repeal be construed to
revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this
code. ('72 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in
this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the Board of Commissioners requiring publication shall take effect from and after the
due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance,
the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication
of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under
any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly
provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal
shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
5
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) Any and all additions or amendments to this code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so
that reference to “The Code of the Town of Matthews” shall be understood and intended to include those
additions and amendments. ('72 Code, § 1-4)
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with
reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in
concise form above the ordinance.
(C) In case of the amendment of any section of this code for which a penalty is not provided, the general
penalty as provided in § 10.99 shall apply to the section as amended; or in case an amendment contains
provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in
the same chapter, the penalty so provided in that other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended,
unless that penalty is specifically repealed therein. ('72 Code, § 1-6)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the
most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord.
10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads
substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. § 160A-69) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85).
(2) If a G.S. cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that
the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 31.10 MAYOR.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)
Statutory reference: For the powers and duties of the Mayor, see G.S. § 160A-67
§ 10.19 COPY OF CODE TO BE KEPT ON FILE.
(A) A copy of this code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in
any other form as the Town Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Town Clerk,
or someone authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which
indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of this code when the same have
been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this code all provisions which may be from time to
time repealed by the Board of Commissioners. This copy of such code shall be available for all persons desiring
to examine the same and shall be considered the official code of the town. ('72 Code, § 1-5)
(B) The code of ordinances described herein shall be published in printed form for distribution. A copy
thereof is available for public inspection at the office of the Town Clerk. ('72 Code, § 1-9)
6
§ 10.20 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the town to change or amend by additions or deletions,
any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented thereby.
('72 Code, § 1-7) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating or failing, refusing and neglecting to comply with any provision or requirement of any
section or subsection of this code, or any ordinance of this town now in force or hereinafter enacted, to which no
specific penalty is fixed, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30
days, for each and every offense; but the judgment for any penalty may be reduced or wholly or partly remitted
within the discretion of the court.
(B) Each day that any breach or violation of, or any failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of
any section or division of this code or any ordinance of this town, now in force or hereinafter enacted, continues,
or is allowed to continue, shall constitute, and is hereby declared to be, a separate and distinct offense. ('72 Code,
§ 2-4)
1
Chapter 11. Town Policies
Section
11.01 Smoking regulation in municipal buildings and vehicles
11.01 SMOKING REGULATION IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning, chewing, dipping, or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or
other combustible tobacco products.
(B) Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or
facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled
by the town.
(C) Smoking prohibited inmunicipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle now or
hereafter owned or leased by the town.
(D) Conflict of laws. If any portion of this section or the enforcement thereof is found to be preempted by state or
federal law, such preemption shall not operate to invalidate the rest of the ordinance and the same shall remain in full
force and effect. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 787, passed 9-27-93; Ord. 1374, passed 7-12-04) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
Chapter 30. General Administrative Procedures
Section
30.01 Conflict of interest in zoning matters
§ 30.01 CONFLICT OF INTEREST IN ZONING MATTERS.
For zoning matters or for matters coming before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, it shall be a conflict of interest for
the Mayor, any member of the Board of Commissioners, any member of the Zoning and Planning Board or any
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to participate in the deliberation or to vote on those matters wherein they
may have a direct or indirect interest in the property subject to the proposed zoning and/or matters before the Board of
Adjustment. For purposes of this section, INDIRECT INTEREST shall include an interest through an immediate
family member or own property within 100 feet of the area subject to zoning, or matters before the Board of
Adjustment or professionally represent a client whose property is the subject of the matter.
('72 Code, § 3-2-5) (Am. Ord. 270, passed 3-25-85)
1
Chapter 31. Board of Commissioners
Section
General Provisions
31.01 Election of Town Commissioners
Ordinances
31.15 Proposed ordinances in written form
31.16 Numbering system for ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 ELECTION OF TOWN COMMISSIONERS.
The town shall select the nonpartisan primary and election method as set out in G.S. § 163-294 as the method for
conducting municipal elections for the town.
('72 Code, § 3-2-2)
ORDINANCES
§ 31.15 PROPOSED ORDINANCES IN WRITTEN FORM.
(A) Proposed ordinances must be written, and the form approved by the Town Attorney.
(B) Every ordinance amending or repealing any ordinance and every new ordinance shall be proposed in writing, shall
be approved as to form by the Town Attorney. Passage shall be deferred at least until the next meeting following its
introduction, unless all Commissioners then present vote unanimously to allow consideration of the ordinance for
passage at the meeting of its introduction.
('72 Code, § 3-1-1) (Am. Ord. 12, passed; Am. Ord. 19, passed 9-13-76)
§ 31.16 NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR ORDINANCES.
Numbering system for ordinances; title; filing; certification and indexing by Town Clerk required:
(A) Every ordinance introduced, if it proposes to amend or repeal an existing portion of this code, shall show by
proper reference the chapter and section proposed to be amended; or if it proposes to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section, it shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of that chapter
or section. In addition to that indication thereof as may be contained in the text of that proposed ordinance, the same
shall be shown in concise form above the title of the ordinance.
(B) The chapter and section numbers required to be shown above the title, as provided by division (A) of this section,
shall be shown as substantially one of the following forms:
1) “Amending Chapter ___, Section___, an ordinance changing the place of meeting of the Town Council.”
2) “Repealing Chapter ___, Section ___, an ordinance repealing the ordinance requiring that all elections shall
be by ballot.”
2
3) “Ordinance Chapter ___, an ordinance defining the duties of the Information Bureau.”
(C) The original and signed copy of every new ordinance adopted after the adoption of this code shall be numbered
consecutively beginning with the number 1 and shall be filed in order in a book to be known as the “Original
Ordinances Book.” Each original ordinance shall bear evidence of its proper adoption, the date of adoption and
the signature of the Town Attorney approving the ordinance as to form.
('72 Code, § 3-1-2)
1
Chapter 32. Town Officials and Employees
Section
32.01 Failure to attend meetings
§ 32.01 FAILURE TO ATTEND MEETINGS.
Any member of the Zoning and Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment or any special ad hoc committee
appointed by the Board of Commissioners, who shall fail to attend at least 75% of the regular and special meetings of
that board or committee during any one-year period, may be automatically removed from that board or committee.
The Chairperson of that board or committee shall notify the Town Board of Commissioners of any member who shall
so fail to attend. Vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Town Board of Commissioners.
('75 Code, § 3-2-4) (Am. Ord. 253, passed 12-10-84) (Ord. 1600, passed 11-12-07)
1
Chapter 33. Boards andCommissions
Section
Auxiliary Police Force
33.01 Reserve police
Planning Board
33.15 Continuing state authority to perform functions andduties
33.16 Appointment; terms; organization
33.17 Officers; meetings and rules
33.18 Staff and finances
33.19 General powers and duties
33.20 Purposes in view
33.21 Public hearings; promotion of public interest; attendance at city planning conferences
33.22 Submission of reports
Appearance/Tree Committee
33.40 Establishment of Appearance/Tree Committee
33.41 Membership, qualification and terms of office
33.42 Organization of the Committee
33.43 Powers and duties of the Committee
33.44 Annual report
33.45 Staff and technical services
33.46 Receipt and expenditures of funds
AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE
§ 33.01 RESERVE POLICE.
In accordance with G.S. § 160A-282, the town does hereby establish an auxiliary police force to consist of reserve
officers under the direction of the Police Commissioner of the town, and that while those auxiliary police officers are
undergoing official training and while performing duties on behalf of the town, pursuant to orders or instructions of
the Chief of the Police Department, those law enforcement personnel shall be entitled to benefits under the North
Carolina Worker's Compensation Act, and to any fringe benefits for which those volunteer personnel qualify. ('72
Code, § 15-1) (Ord. 13, passed 5-24-76)
PLANNING BOARD
§ 33.15 CONTINUING STATE AUTHORITY TO PERFORM FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
A Planning Board for the town, and formerly created under the authority of G.S. § 160-22, is hereby continued under
the authority of G.S. § 160A-361 to perform the functions and duties herein prescribed.
2
('72 Code, § 3-2-1A)
§ 33.16 APPOINTMENT; TERMS; ORGANIZATION.
(A) The Planning Board shall consist of seven members who shall be persons of recognized experience and
qualifications. At the time of their appointment, members shall hold no other official municipal government
position except on a zoning board, zoning board of appeals or housing authority board. Further, all seven members
shall be citizens of the town and shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners so that terms overlap. (Note:
It is the intent to create two-year staggered terms for the seven members.) (Ord. No. 1301-B, passed 8-25-03)
(B) All members of the Planning Board shall serve as such without compensation.
(C) Members may, after a public hearing, be removed by the governing body that appointed them for inefficiency,
neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall file a written statement of reasons for the removal.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by
the governing authority that appointed the member to be replaced.
(D) Members shall be eligible for reappointment for a maximum of two consecutive terms at which point they
would not be eligible for reappointment for at least one year. (Ord. No. 1301-B, passed8-25-03)
(E) There shall also be appointed two alternate members who shall serve for two-year terms with a maximum of two
consecutive terms. The alternates shall be eligible to attend meetings of the Planning Board and participate in its
deliberations. Alternates may not vote, however, unless and except one of the above seven designated members or
more shall be absent from that meeting. The alternates then shall sit in the place of the absent member during that
meeting with full power to both deliberate and vote on all matters on the agenda. The Planning Board Chairperson
shall determine which alternates shall sit in the stead of an absent regular Board member. ('72 Code, § 3-2-1B)
(Am. Ord. 326, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 487, passed 3-28-88; Am. Ord. 565, passed 3-28-89; Am. Ord. 686,
passed 8-5-91; Am. Ord. 829, passed 10-10-94; Ord. 1239, passed 3-11-02; Ord. 1301-B, passed 8-25-03)
§ 33.17 OFFICERS; MEETINGS AND RULES.
(A) At the start of each calendar year, the Planning Board shall elect its Chairperson from among the appointed
citizen members and create and fill any other of its offices as it may determine. The term of office for the
Chairperson shall be one years. (Ord. No. 1301-B, passed 8-25-03)
(B) The Planning Board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month which shall be open to the public. It
shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations. which record shall be a public record. ('72 Code, §3-2-1C)
§ 33.18 STAFF AND FINANCES.
(A) The Planning Board may contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for those services
as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the Board of Commissioners and no indebtedness for which the town shall be
liable shall be contracted by the Planning Board unless an appropriation is made by the Board of Commissioners
for those purposes, as authorized by law, and then only to the extent of the appropriation. The Planning Board shall
have the right to accept gifts and donations for the exercise of its functions and for giving publicity to its work and
may expend the money received from those donations and gifts as in its judgment may appear best. ('72 Code, § 3-
2-1D)
(B) All officers and employees of the Town shall render any reasonable assistance and any information to the
3
Planning Board as may be requested by the Planning Board for its work. ('72 Code, §3-2-1G)
§ 33.19 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Board to make and adopt a suggested master plan for the physical
development of the town, including subdivision control ordinances, as the Planning Board and the Board of
Commissioners may deem best. This plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter may show
the Planning Board's recommendations for the development of that territory, within the town limits including among
other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards,
parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces, the general
location of public buildings and other public property and the general location and extent of public utilities and
terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication,
power and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or
extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals, as well as a
zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. The Planning Board
may from time to time recommend amendments, extensions or additions to the plan. ('72 Code, § 3-2-1E)
§ 33.20 PURPOSES IN VIEW.
In the preparation of that plan or modified plan or parts thereof, the Planning Board shall make careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the municipality. The plan shall be made
with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the
municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development, including among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other
dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population,
the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the adequate
provision of public utilities and other public requirements. ('72 Code, § 3-2-1F)
§ 33.21 PUBLIC HEARINGS; PROMOTION OF PUBLIC INTEREST; ATTENDANCE AT CITY
PLANNING CONFERENCES.
(A) Before the adoption by the Planning Board of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition the
Planning Board may hold public hearings thereon.
(B) The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest in and understanding of the plan and to that end
may hold public hearings, publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ any other
means of publicity and education as it may determine.
(C) Members of the Planning Board, when duly authorized by the Planning Board, may attend city planning
conferences or meetings of city planning institutes or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the
Planning Board may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to that
attendance. ('72 Code, § 3-2-1G)
§ 33.22 SUBMISSION OF REPORTS.
The Planning Board shall from time to time, and at least annually, submit reports in writing to the Board of
Commissioners giving information regarding the condition of the municipality and any plans or proposals for the
4
development of the area and estimates of the cost thereof, and these reports shall contain any other recommendations as
the Planning Board feels should have immediate attention. ('72 Code, § 3-2-1G)
APPEARANCE/TREE COMMITTEE
§ 33.40 ESTABLISHMENT OF APPEARANCE/TREE COMMITTEE
(A) There is hereby created and established “The Matthews Appearance/Tree Committee”, hereinafter referred to as the
“Committee”, composed of seven (7) members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of
Matthews. All members shall be residents of the Town of Matthews planning and zoning jurisdiction at the time of
appointment.
(B) Committee members shall resign their position within thirty (30) days of their permanent relocation outside of the
planning and zoning jurisdiction of the Town ofMatthews.
§ 33.41 MEMBERSHIP, QUALIFICATION AND TERMS OF OFFICE
(A) Where possible, appointments shall be made in such a manner as to maintain on the Committee at all times a
majority of members who have had special training or experience in a design field, such as architecture,
landscape architecture, horticulture, city planning or a closely related field. It is also desirable to have
members with special training or experience in forestry.
(B) Members shall be appointed for two-year staggered terms, except that the Board of Commissioners may stagger the
length of the initial appointees so that all terms do not expire simultaneously.
(C) Members of the Committee shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incidental to the
performance of their duties within the limits of funds available to the Committee.
§ 33.42 ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMITTEE
(A) The Committee, within thirty (30) days of its appointment, shall meet and elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and
a secretary; the latter office need not be a member of the Committee. It shall adopt bylaws to govern the conduct of
its business.
(B) The Committee shall maintain a record of its members’ attendance, its actions, findings and recommendations,
which record shall be open to the public.
(C) A quorum of four (4) members shall be necessary to take any official action authorized or required by this
ordinance.
§ 33.43 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To make studies of the visual characteristics and problems of the town, including surveys and inventories of
5
an appropriate nature, and to recommend standards and policies of design for the entire area, any portion of a
neighborhood thereof, or any project to beundertaken;
(2) To initiate, promote and assist in the implementation of programs of general community beautification in the
town.
(3) To seek to coordinate the activities of individuals, agencies, and organizations, public and private, whose
plans, activities, and programs bear on the appearance of thetown;
(4) To provide leadership and guidance in matters of area or community design and appearance to individuals,
and to the public and private organizations andagencies;
(5) To prepare both general and specific plans for the improved appearance of the town. These plans may include
the entire area or any part thereof and may include private as well as public property. The plans shall set forth
desirable standards and goals for the aesthetic enhancement of the town or any part thereof within its area of
planning and zoning jurisdiction, including public ways and areas, open spaces, and public and private
buildings and projects;
(6) To request from the proper officials of any public agency or body, including agencies of the State and its
political subdivisions, its plans for public buildings, facilities, or projects to be located within the town or its
area of planning and zoning jurisdiction;
(7) To review these plans and to make recommendations regarding their aesthetic suitability to the appropriate
agency, or to the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners. All plans shall be reviewed by the Committee
in a prompt and expeditious manner, and all recommendations of the Committee with regard to any public
project shall be made in writing. Copies of the recommendations shall be transmitted promptly to the Planning
Board of Board of Commissioners and to the appropriate agency;
(8) To formulate and recommend to the Board of Commissioners the adoptions of amendments or ordinances
(including the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, and other local ordinances regulating the use of
property) that will, in the opinion of the Committee, serve to enhance the appearance of the town and its
surrounding areas;
(9) To direct the attention of town officials to needed enforcement of any ordinance that may in any way affect the
appearance of the town;
(10) To seek voluntary adherence to the standards and policies of its plans;
(11) To enter, in performance of its official duties and at reasonable times, upon private lands, and make
examinations or surveys;
(12) To promote public interest in and an understanding of its recommendations, studies and plans, and to that end
prepare, publish and distribute to the public such studies and reports as will, in the opinion of the Committee,
advance the cause of improved municipal appearance;
(13) To conduct public meetings and hearings, giving reasonable notice to the public thereof.
(14) To seek funding for tree planting activities.
(15) To coordinate Arbor Day celebrations.
(16) To promote compliance by the Town with TREE CITY U.S.A.requirements.
6
§ 33.44 ANNUAL REPORT
The Committee shall, no later than April 15 of each year, submit to the Board of Commissioners a written reports of its
activities, a statement of its expenditures to date for the current fiscal year, and its requested budget for the next fiscal
year. All accounts and funds of the Committee shall be administered substantially in accordance with the requirements
of the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.
§ 33.45 STAFF AND TECHNICAL SERVICES
The Committee may recommend to the Board of Commissioners suitable arrangements for the procurement or
provision of staff or technical services for the Committee.
§ 33.46 RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURES OF FUNDS
The Committee may receive contributions from private agencies, foundations, organizations, individuals and the state
or federal government, or another source in addition to any sums appropriated for its use by the Board of
Commissioners. It may accept and disburse these funds for any purpose within the scope of its authority and as herein
specified. (Ord. No. 926-A, passed 7-14-97)(Ord. No. 1599, passed 11-12-07)
1
Chapter 34. Criminal History and Motor Vehicle Checks
Section
34.01 Criminal History and Motor Vehicle Record Checks
34.02 Procedures for Check and Requirements of Applicants
34.03 Dissemination or Release of Information
§ 34.01 CRIMINAL HISTORY AND DRIVERS’ HISTORIES CHECKS FOR TOWN EMPLOYEES.
In order to protect the citizens of the Town of Matthews (Town) and their properties, the provisions of this ordinance
are established to provide for fingerprinting and completion of criminal history and drivers’ license checks on all
prospective employees and volunteers of the Town. Subject to the provisions of this ordinance, employment or
acceptance for volunteer service with the Town may be denied with respect to those persons convicted of crimes
against a person, crimes against property where intent is an element, a drug or gambling offense, or certain motor
vehicle offenses.
§34.02 PROCEDURES FOR CHECK AND REQUIREMENTSOF APPLICANTS.
The Chief of Police (Chief), or his/her designee, shall conduct a criminal history and motor vehicle operator’s license
investigation for a part time, full time or volunteer position with the Town. It shall be a precondition of employment
that an applicant, upon request, provide necessary personal identification including social security and driver’s license
number so that the Chief may cause for a thorough search to be made of local and state criminal records to determine
whether the applicant has a history of criminal convictions for the above-named offenses by use of the networks of the
State Bureau of Investigations, Division of Criminal Information (DCI).
An evaluation of any offense of the purposes of employment will take into account the nature and the circumstances of
the offense and the time of the offense as they relate to the essential job functions for the position applied.
No action to deny employment will be taken until the Chief confirms the identity of the applicant through fingerprints
submitted through the State Bureau of Investigation or a certified true copy of the public record is obtained.
§34.03 DISSEMINATION OR RELEASE OF INFORMATION.
The Chief may provide the findings made by the use of the DCI network to the Town Manager, or his/her designee,
provided that all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations have been executed.
(Ord. No. 1449, passed 9-12-05)
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
Section
General Provisions
§ 50A.1 Definitions
§ 50A.2 Public Works Director
§ 50A.3 Disposal of Refuse in Town Limits by Nonresident Prohibited
§ 50A.4 Prohibited Disposal of Wastes
§ 50A.5 Transportation of Refuse
§ 50A.6 Depositing Debris in Catch Basins, Manholes, or Drains
§ 50A.7 Appliances, Refrigerators or Containers left Outside Prohibited: Exception
Refuse Collection Service
§ 50A.10 Permit Required to Engage in Business of Waste Collection
§ 50A.11 Collection Practices
§ 50A.12 Containers for Refuse; Regulations
§ 50A.13 Storage of Refuse
§ 50A.14 Pre-collection Practices
§ 50A.15 Point of Collection
§ 50A.16 Multi-family Sanitation Services
§ 50A.17 Yard Waste Collection Practices
§ 50A.18 Wastes the Town Will Not Collect
§ 50A.19 Recycling Service
§ 50A.20 Private Streets
§ 50A.21 Collection of Disposal Fees
Hazardous and Industrial Wastes
§ 50A.26 Hazardous Materials
§ 50A.27 Industrial Wastes
Penalties
50A.30 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50A.1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
Animal and Agricultural Wastes. Principally, the manure and crop residue from various agricultural pursuits including
dairying and raising of livestock and poultry. Animal waste also includes, in addition to items mentioned above, wastes
from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops, veterinary establishments, and the like.
Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material in homes, stores,
institutions and small industrial establishments for the purposes of heating, cooking, and disposing of combustible
waste materials. Ashes shall contain no live embers or other burning materials.
1
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
Building Rubbish. Any materials or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing
building, construction of new buildings, demolition of existing buildings, or moving of buildings, including but not
limited to bricks, stone, concrete, wood, lumber, siding, shingles of any type, and the like. Also, referred to as
constructionmaterial.
Commercial Parcel (Property). Commercial parcels are those in which the primary use of the parcel in non-residential,
such as a retail establishment, offices, flex-space, warehousing and/or restaurants. Churches may also be classified as
Commercial, as are multi-family parcels containing six (6) or more units. (Ord. 1976, passed 11-25-13)
Contracted Services (Yard Waste). Any tree or shrubbery trimming resulting from work performed by landscaping or
tree service contractors or other commercial workers, including, but not limited to land clearing work. This shall also
apply to any job performed by anyone, including friends, family or neighbors for pay and also including the owner or
resident of the property, that is of such scale that heavy equipment as used by contractors is needed to complete the work.
Dead Animals. Those animals that die naturally or from disease or are killed accidentally. Condemned animals or parts
from slaughterhouses or similar places are not included in this item.
1. Small Dead Animals. Dogs, cats, rabbits, squirrels, chickens, rats, and other similar animals. Small animals
must be placed in plastic bags before disposal in any rollout.
2. Large Dead Animals. Horses, cows, goats, sheep, hogs, and other similar animals. Large animals must be
disposed of by the owner of the same.
Garbage. The byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs, resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
serving of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction, or the generation of noxious or
offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, other
insects, or animals.
HazardousWaste. Any waste accumulation meeting the definitions as spelled out in 40 CFR 261.3.
Household Hazardous Waste. (HHW) Hazardous refuse generated in normal residential activities, and may consist of
items such as paints and thinners, pesticides, herbicides, cleaners, batteries, electronic waste, etc.
Household Trash. Any waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kinds,
other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping
Household or Residential Bulk Items. Items generated from single-family residential units such as home furnishings,
mattresses, etc., also see White Goods.
Industrial Waste. All waste, including solids, semi- solids, sludge and liquids, created by factories, processing plants,
or manufacturing enterprises.
Junk. Any item, including but not limited to, dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, building
materials, automobile parts, tires, or other items which are either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked,
dismantled, or inoperative condition.
Litter. An illegally discarded man-made material including but not limited to, building materials, business trash,
garbage, household trash, industrial waste, refuse, yard trash, and other solid wastes.
Multi-Residential Unit. Any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominiums, or housing units designed for or
occupied by more than one family, not to exceed 5 units or a single site. Complexes containing six (6) or more units
must privately contract for dumpster service.
Normal Use (Roll out Container), Residential. Placement of any variety of both combustible and noncombustible
solid waste materials from households, including such items as plastic, waste paper, rags, sweepings, and similar waste
2
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
materials ordinarily accumulated around a house. The list shall not include any HHW.
Normal Use (Roll out Container), Small Business. Placement of any variety of both combustible and noncombustible
solid waste materials from business, including such items as plastic, waste paper, rags, sweepings, and
similar waste materials ordinarily accumulated in general business operations. This list shall not include oil, oil cans,
paint/paint thinners, and the like, nor any hazardous waste.
Parcel. A separate, distinct section of land with its own Tax ID number in the county tax system.
Private Property. Property owned by any person, not a political entity, including but not limited to yards, grounds,
driveways, entrances of passageways, parking areas, storage areas, vacant land, and bodies of water, including
sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs, or rights- of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street.
Public Works Director. The Public Works Director for the Town ofMatthews or his designee.
Recyclable Material. Newspapers, magazines, glass bottles, steel and aluminum cans and plastic drink bottles or other
such material as designated by the Public Works Director.
Refuse. Solid waste consisting of garbage, household trash, or business trash.
Roll Cart. A plastic, mobile, top-loading, residential refuse container of 90-gallon capacity compatible to the Town’s
collection equipment. Sometimes called a rollout.
Single Residential Unit. Any dwelling place designed for or occupied by one family.
White Goods. Residential appliances such as washers, dryers, stoves, window A/C units, and similar items.
Yard Waste. Accumulation of lawn, grass, or shrubbery cuttings or clippings, bushes, limbs, and dry leaf rakings free
of dirt, rocks, large branches, and bulky or non- combustible material.
§ 50A.2 PUBLICWORKS DIRECTOR
The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the implementation of this section. Any decision of the Public Works
Director, or his designees, may be appealed to the Town Manager, whose decision shall be final.
§ 50A.3 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE IN TOWN LIMITS BY NONRESIDENT PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or a corporation not a resident of the Town to bring trash, refuse,
rubbish, or other forms of waste into the Town and to discard it or to deposit it for collection by the Town.
An example of a violation of this section is a person who owns or is employed by a business within the Town
limits, but who lives outside the Town limits, bringing his household garbage into the Town and depositing it
or otherwise leaving it for collection by the Town.
B. Ownership of trash, refuse, rubbish, or other forms of waste, including designated recyclable material, set out or
placed in receptacles for collection by the Town shall be vested in the Town.
§ 50A.4 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL OF WASTES.
A. Prohibited disposal of wastes generally.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, or otherwise deposit upon any Town street or
sidewalk, or in any public place not designated for such purposes, any scrap paper, bottles, cans, glass,
rags, feathers, building material scraps, tree and shrubbery trimmings, liquid wastes, lubricating or fuel
3
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
oil, flammable or combustible wastes or any other trash, refuse, or debris.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free flow of water in, over,
along, upon, or through any drainage way in any public street or other public way, or in any creek, stream,
or other natural drainage course within the Town limits by depositing any trash, refuse, tree or shrubbery
trimmings, building material scraps, or other matter therein. (See Chapter 52 Matthews Code)
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or cause any gasoline, fuel oil, or other flammable
liquid, or any wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance, or any lubricating oil, grease or
detergent, to drain into any drainage ditch, street gutter, culvert, or other drainage way in any public
street or other public way or in any creek, stream, or other natural drainage course within the Town limits
(Chapter 52 Matthews Code). It shall also be illegal to place any type of lubricating oil, or other above
named materials in any container provided by the Town for garbage pickup. All lubricating oils should
be taken to recycling centers.
4. No person shall throw, drop, or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped, or deposited on any land in
the Town (vacant or occupied), including specifically streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public and semipublic
areas, or in any waters under jurisdiction of the Town, any wastes (including but not limited to
refuse, garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals or fish, paper, drinking cups, broken glass, tacks, brush,
grass, weeds, and anything injurious to health). If any person, while transporting or hauling, or causing to
be transported or hauled such rubbish, material, earth excavation, coal, or other materials, shall throw,
drop, or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped, or deposited, such rubbish or material from the body of a
vehicle, in violation of the provisions of this section, such persons must daily clean up and remove such
rubbish or material in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Public Works, failing which, the
Department may clean up and remove such rubbish and material, and the Town may collect the cost of
such cleaning up and removal from such persons.
B. Waste matter subject to scattering. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to
accumulate any waste matter or refuse of any description which is subject to scattering by animals or the
elements of nature on that part of any property which is adjacent to a street or public place.
§ 50A.5 TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE
No garbage, kitchen waste, or refuse shall be transported through the Town streets except in watertight metal containers
with tight fitting covers. All other loads must be covered.
§ 50A.6 DEPOSITING DEBRIS IN CATCH BASINS,MANHOLES, OR DRAINS
No person shall throw, drop, or deposit grass clippings, leaves, shrubs, or any other debris into any catch basin, manhole,
or drainage ditch or structure in the Town. (See Section 52 Matthews Code)
§50A.7 APPLIANCES, REFRIGERATORSOR CONTAINERS LEFTOUTSIDE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance,
refrigerator or container. This subchapter shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been
placed on or adjacent to the rear of a building and is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a
child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof.
REFUSECOLLECTIONSERVICE
§ 50A.10 PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS OF WASTE COLLECTION
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, hauling, or transporting in the Town, any waste without first
4
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
obtaining a permit from the Public Works Director. A Town Business License shall also be required. Tax-exempt
charitable organizations shall be exempt from this requirement if they are collecting household goods from residents
with their approval.
§ 50A.11 COLLECTION PRACTICES
A. Except as otherwise provided in this sub chapter, and except in the case of emergency arising from an act of
God or other circumstances over which the Public Works Department has no control, the Public Works
Department or its agents will attempt to collect, remove, and dispose of certain refuse in residential sections of
the Town once per week. In the event of inclement weather events, such as ice or snow, schedules may be
adjusted as conditions and safety factors warrant. Schedule updates will be posted on the Town web site.
B. Industrial waste shall be collected, removed, and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant, or
enterprise creating or causing the same in accordance with applicable provisions of this code.
C. Building rubbish, including items from large scale inside work, carpet, padding, and the like, shall be
collected, removed, and disposed of by the contractor or person constructing, repairing, or demolishing any
building, or in their failure to do so, by the owner of the property. Building rubbish shall not be collected by the
Town.
D. No refuse shall be collected where refuse receptacles cannot be serviced by sanitation personnel without
unlocking, opening, or reaching over a door, gate, or similar obstacle, encountering a porch, carport, or garage,
encountering a dog, or otherwise being denied reasonable access by parked vehicles, yard tools, equipment,
or similar object. Generally roll out carts and recycling containers must be placed at curbside for collection.
E. Once an established collection route is established, any changes shall be advertised in the local
newspaper and on the TownWebsite once at least 15 days before such changes become effective; provided, that
such notice may be given by other means and within a lesser period of time in cases of emergency.
§ 50A.12 CONTAINERS FOR REFUSE; REGULATIONS
A. Every person owning or occupying a single and/or multi-family residential unit shall store all garbage and
refuse in containers, as specified herein, so as to eliminate wind driven debris and unsightly litter in and about
their premises.
B. Each single-family unit, not using dumpster service, shall use one 90-gallon rollout container, so long as the
containers are provided by the Town or its contractors. Additional containers, if needed, may be obtained, when
supplies permit, by the payment of the monthly contract fee for residential services times the number of extra
containers. Additional containers shall be limited to two. Each container will be assigned by the Town and will
remain the property of the Town or its contractor. Except by the Town or its contractor, the container shall not
be moved from the residence where assigned. (Ord. 2173, passed 8-22-16)
Residents who on occasion have more material than can be held in a single container may place the excess in a
plastic bag, with the container for set out. If in the opinion of the Public Works Director that this use is
excessive then he may require the residence to obtain an additional container or may refuse to collect the excess.
C. In the case of small business locations, the Town or its contractors, will provide one rollout per business parcel.
Additional containers, up to two, may be obtained, when supplies permit, by the payment of the monthly
contract fee for small business times the number of additional containers. Businesses requiring more than three
rollouts must contract for private dumpster service. In business locations where in the sole opinion of the Public
Works Director, it is neither feasible nor desirable to place a dumpster, the Director may authorize the use of
additional rollouts. The additional per rollout charge shall apply to any additional rollouts so authorized. (Ord.
2173, passed 8-22-16)
D. Containers shall be used for the purpose of holding regular household type refuse. No items such as sticks, yard
5
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
clippings, leaves, and the like may be placed in rollout containers, used for garbage.
E. Stones, bricks, iron items, and the like shall not be placed in the containers.
F. The Town will be responsible for repairing or replacing containers only for normal wear and tear. All other
damage to the containers may be assessed against the property owner and/or tenant of the property. This policy
shall also apply to missing containers. Residents should call the Public Works Department when rollout carts
need repairs.
G. Residents are required to clean rollout containers when needed to keep down odor and insects.
H. The Town may refuse to collect the following types of solid wastes and it shall be unlawful for any person to
place any of the following in any container or receptacle for collection by the Town:
1. Hazardous refuse and industrial waste. All such refuse shall be stored in suitable leak proof containers
that will ensure that no such refuse or wastes leak or spill onto any public or private property. It shall
be the responsibility of the person in possession of the premises to see that it is disposed of properly.
2. Oils, lubricants or any other type matter that may damage the container, cause it to leak, erode wheel
parts, or violate any state or federal disposal laws.
3. Contagious disease refuses. The removal of clothing, bedding, or other refuse from homes or the
places where highly infectious diseases have occurred shall be performed under the supervisor and
direction of the County Health Department.
4. Material defined as biohazards.
5. Materials of any kind or nature, including ashes, that contains any hot or live coals or fire.
6. Raw or uncooked seafood or meats unless tightly wrapped in plastic bags.
7. Dead animals of any sort, except as spelled out in Sec. 50A.1
8. Hypodermic needles and/or any other sharp object.
9. Paints, thinners and other such HHW items. Latex paint may be disposed of but must be dried first
and not be in a liquid state.
10.Computer parts, TVs and other electronic equipment.
11.Building rubbish
12.Tires, automobile wheels and other auto parts
13.Any other items that are banned from disposal in the Landfill, or in the opinion of the Public Works
Director should not be collected. (Ord. 1976, passed 11-25-13)
After warning, violations of this section may result in penalties as spelled out in this chapter.
§ 50A.13 STORAGE OF REFUSE
A. Each owner and every occupant or other person in control of any building or land in the Town, including vacant
property, shall keep the same in a clean and orderly condition and shall deposit refuse for collection in
accordance with the provisions of this sub chapter and the regulations of the Director of Public Works. All
refuse shall be stored in containers complying with this code.
B. Persons occupying business buildings shall store cardboard boxes inside the building unless stored in
automatic containers
6
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
§ 50A.14 PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES
The occupant, whether owners or tenants, of single and multi-family residential units requiring a rollout cart in which to
store their refuse shall adhere to the following collection practices:
A. Garbage and general rubbish shall be stored only in receptacles approved by 50A.12 of this chapter
and such receptacles shall be covered at all times.
B. All dangerous trash items such as broken glass, light bulbs, and the like, shall be securely wrapped to prevent
injury to collection crews. Boxes should be broken down prior to collection.
C. All garbage and refuse shall have liquid drained before it is placed in the container for collection.
§ 50A.15 POINT OF COLLECTION
A. Time of Collection. Garbage and recycling containers when set out for collection shall be placed at a
location as shall be designated by the Public Works Director not more than 24 hours before the time set for
collection thereof nor later than 7:00 a.m. (6:30 a.m. daylight-saving time) the day of collection and the
containers shall be returned to the principal structure or moved at least 50 feet from the curb or street right-ofway
prior to 9:00 p.m. on the date of collection. (Ord. No. 1641, passed 10-14-08)
B. Disabled Provisions. In the event a resident is physically unable to place the cart at the curbside.
Residents may request and will receive backyard pick-up for 30 days without getting a doctor’s certification.
At the end of 30 days, if they want to continue with backyard pick-up, they must submit a doctor’s
certification.
C. Business Building Collection. Business building collection areas shall be from the rear, side, or in certain cases,
front. Where front collection points are used, empty containers shall not be left on the street after sundown
of collection day. The best collection location for businesses shall be determined by the Public Works
Director.
D. Street Litter Containers. Businesses shall not use street litter containers for the disposal of business- generated
trash.
E. Household Bulk Items. Upon request, the Town will collect normal household discarded furniture, including
sofas, chairs, bedding, and the like. Request shall be made to the Department of Public Works or its
contracted agents for scheduling. Items for collection shall be placed at curbside on day of scheduled
collection. This service shall be available to residential premises only. The Town shall not collect more than
two (2) bulk items per residential unit per week. (Ord. 1976, passed 11-25-13)
F. Appliances (White Goods). Appliances will be picked up on an as-needed schedule. Residents shall contact
the Public Works Department or its contracted agents to schedule collection. The Town shall not collect more
than two (2) white good items per residential unit per week. (Ord. 1976, passed 11-25-13)
G. The owner or owner’s agent for multi-family units with five (5) or fewer units shall provide a central location
area for placement of rollout containers for pick-up. This location shall be one that meets the standards set forth
in this chapter and it will be subject to approval of the Department of Public Works. Multi-family complexes
with six (6) or more units must contract for private collection service.
§ 50A.16MULTI-FAMILY SANITATION SERVICES
7
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
A. The Town, either itself or through its agents, will provide residential garbage collection service on the same
basis as single-family residences to any multi- family complex that has five (5) or fewer units.
B. Multi-family facilities with 6 or more units must contract for collection.
C. All multi-family facilities at which the Town provides garbage collection service under this section shall
also participate in the Town’s recycling program.
§50A.17 YARDWASTE COLLECTION PRACTICES
Yard waste service is provided at single-family residences and multi-family locations with five (5) or fewer units. It
is not provided to commercial locations. Townhouse-type developments with master landscape contracts shall be
responsible to dispose of their generated yard waste, generated either by contractors or individual residences. (Ord.
1976, passed 11-25-13)
Tree, hedge, and shrubbery trimmings shall be placed at the curb for collection in accordance with the following
guidelines:
A. Limbs and brush larger than one (1) inch in diameter, but smaller than six (6) inches in diameter, must be cut
not to exceed six (6) feet in length. Tree trunks and limbs larger than six (6) inches in diameter must not
exceed two (2) feet in length and must not weigh more than fifty (50) pounds. Generally, limbs and trunks
larger than ten (10) inches in diameter are too heavy for collection. (Ord. 1976, passed 11-25-13)
B. Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches or limbs trimmed off. Small limbs of a size that
might be blown about and scattered by the elements, shall be effectively tied so as to avoid wind driven debris
and unsightly litter condition. Thorny vegetation shall be placed near the curb in small, neat piles.
C. Collection of tree and shrubbery trimmings shall be limited to amount one man can collect per week per
residence in 20 minutes. Additional service may be approved by the Public Works Director upon request,
for unusual circumstances.
D. Tree limbs should be separated from smaller shrubbery trimmings and all yard waste shall be put in
piles separate fromother general debris.
E. Limbs and cuttings must be placed with butt or cut ends toward the street or public alley and must be of the
size that can be handled by one person.
F. The Town shall not collect, remove, or assist in the removal of tree stumps, small lots, tree trunks, heavy
grass or dirt resulting from the clearing of property of any kind. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
deposit any such item at curb side at any time. (Ord. 1976, passed 11-25-13)
G. Leaves and grass clippings must be placed in clear plastic bags or open receptacles. Bags that are not clear
must be left open for inspection by the driver. No more than 20 bags will be collected per household per week.
H. Yard waste shall not be mixed with any other garbage or trash. Yard waste found to be mixed will not be
collected until it has been separated and after warning, additional violations may result on penalties as spelled
out in this Chapter.
I. In the event of a declared disaster these limitations may be temporary suspended at the direction of the Public
Works Director and approval of the Town Manager.
§ 50A.19 RECYCLING SERVICE
8
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
The Town, at its discretion, may provide residential recycling service. Items subject to recycling shall be placed in bins
as provided by the Town and placed at curbside on designated collection days. Items recycled are newspapers,
magazines, cardboard (boxes must be broken down) cut to pieces not to exceed 36" X 36", "junk" mail, other paper,
plastic milk jugs and other drink bottles, steel and aluminum cans. No other items shall be placed in recycling bins. This
list may be changed from time to time with notice in the Town newsletter and website.
A. Each single-family unit shall use one 90-gallon rollout container provided by the Town or its contractors.
Additional containers, if needed, may be obtained, when supplies permit, by the payment of a one-time fee
calculated as the product of the monthly charge per household per month, times twelve (12), times the number
of extra containers. Additional containers shall be limited to two. Each container will be assigned by the
Town and will remain the property of the Town or its contractor. Except by the Town or its contractor, the
container shall not be moved from the residence where assigned. (Ord. 2173, passed 8-22-16)
B. In the case of small business locations, the Town or its contractors will provide one rollout per business parcel.
Additional containers, up to two, may be obtained, when supplies permit, by the payment of a one-time fee
calculated as the product of the monthly small business charge, times 12, times the number of additional
containers. Businesses requiring more than three rollouts must contract for private service. In business
locations where, in the sole opinion of the Public Works Director, it is neither feasible nor desirable to place a
dumpster, the Director may authorize the use of additional rollouts. The additional per rollout charge shall
apply to any additional rollouts so authorized. (Ord. 2173, passed 8-22-16)
§ 50A.20 PRIVATE STREETS
Collection shall not be made from private streets or private vehicle areas unless the party responsible for the street
provides a written waver of accountability for any damage collection vehicles may cause to the streets or areas. A
private street is a street or private vehicle area, such as a parking lot, that has not been accepted by the Town or State for
maintenance.
§ 50A.21 COLLECTION OF DISPOSAL FEES
The Town Board may establish and fix from time to time such charges and other fees as necessary, to cover the costs of
sanitation and disposal services within the Town, including recycling, bulk items, household hazardous waste, white
goods and yard waste services.
HAZARDOUS AND INDUSTRIALWASTES
§ 50A.26 HAZARDOUSMATERIALS.
It shall be unlawful to place any hazardous refuse, as defined in 50A.01 of this chapter, in any receptacle used for
collection by the Town. It shall be unlawful to place in any container, at curbside, or in any catch basin, manhole, or
drainage ditch, or structure, any materials considered to be hazardous refuse by the U.S. EPA or any other responsible
agency. The Town, at its discretion, may conduct household hazardous waste collections annually.
§ 50A.27 INDUSTRIALWASTES.
The Town shall not collect any type industrial wastes, be they solid, liquid, hazardous, or highly combustible. It shall
be unlawful to place industrial waste in any container or receptacle for collection by the Town. Industrial waste shall
9
Chapter 50A. Solid Waste
be collected, removed, and disposed of by the operator of the factory or industry, or business creating the same.
PENALTIES
§ 50A.30 PENALTY
A. A civil penalty of $25.00 for the first violation is hereby assessed. A second violation of this Chapter shall
result in a $50.00 civil penalty, and a third and all subsequent violations shall result in a civil penalty of $100.00
per violation.
B. The Town, at its discretion, may charge a violator with a misdemeanor and the violator shall be subject to a
fine of up to $500.00 and/or thirty (30) days in jail pursuant to GS 14-4. (Ord. 1523, passed 12-11-06)
C. The Public Works Director, or his designee, shall be authorized to issue to persons violating the terms of this
ordinance a civil citation in the amounts shown in Section (A) above. Any person to whom a civil citation has
been issued may appeal to the Town Manager, whose decision shall be final. Civil penalties shall be paid
within ten (10) business days of the issuance, unless appealed. Failure to appeal in ten (10) business days
shall result in an additional late penalty of $25. Penalties shall be collected in the form of a debt. (Ord. 1976,
passed 11-25-13)
10
1
Chapter 51. Sewerage and Water Systems
Section
51.01 Scope
51.02 Adoption of regulations by reference
51.03 Enforcement
§ 51.01 SCOPE.
(A) The town water system and sewerage system has been conveyed to the City of Charlotte and the City of Charlotte
is hereby conveyed the right to operate the public water system and sewerage system within the town.
(B) The development, design, construction and physical operation of the public water and sewerage systems shall be
under the supervision of the City of Charlotte through the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department. This chapter
shall apply to all users and applicants of and to the said public water and sewerage systems within the town limits.
('72 Code, § 17-1-1) (Ord. 232, passed 7-23-84)
§ 51.02 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.
Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-76(b), the town hereby adopts as the water and sewerage code of the town,
Chapter 16 of the Code of the City of Charlotte regulating sewerage and water and, additionally, all regulations and
policies promulgated thereunder by the City of Charlotte and same is specifically incorporated herein by reference.
('72 Code, § 17-1-2A) (Ord. 232, passed 7-23-84)
§ 51.03 ENFORCEMENT.
In addition to any remedies provided in Chapter 16 of the Code of the City of Charlotte, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, corporation or unincorporated association to violate any of the provisions contained in this chapter.
('72 Code, § 17-1-2B) (Ord. 232, passed 7-23-84) Penalty, see § 10.99
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
1
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
Section
52A.01 Title, and Authority to Adopt and Enforce
52A.02 Purpose
52A.03 Definitions
52A.04 Territorial Jurisdiction
52A.05 Prohibitions
52A.06 Authority of LUESA
52A.07 Powers and Authority for Inspection
52A.08 Enforcement and Penalties
52A.09 Appeals
52A.10 Severability
§52A.01 TITLE, AND AUTHORITY TO ADOPT AND ENFORCE
This Ordinance shall be cited as the “Town of Matthews’ Surface Water Pollution Control Ordinance.” It is
adopted and will be enforced pursuant to authority granted by NCGS 160A- 459, and NCGS 160A-175.
§52A.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to prevent Pollutants from entering the Storm Water System; to maintain
and enhance surface water quality; and to meet the requirements associated with the NPDES Storm Water
permit.
§52A.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Business Day means any day that the Town of Matthews is open to the public to conduct business.
Charity Vehicle Washing means vehicle or equipment washing performed by a nonprofit entity to raise money
to be used for purposes other than making a profit.
Commercial means devoted in whole or part to commerce, that is, to the exchange and buying and selling of
commodities or services.
Day(s) means calendar days, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless otherwise specified.
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
2
Dechlorinated means the removal of chlorine from a substance such as swimming pool water.
Discharge means the addition of any Pollutant either directly or indirectly to the Storm Water System or Waters
of the State.
EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or other duly authorized official of the agency.
Illicit Connection means any physical connection, actual or potential flowing discharge, or other condition that
could allow Non-Storm Water to enter the Storm Water System.
Illicit Discharge and/or Illicit Disposal means any discharge not composed entirely of Storm Water that may
directly or indirectly enter the Storm Water System or Waters of the State, except as allowed by Section 5(f) of
this Ordinance.
Improper Disposal means the releasing of matter or fluids other than atmospheric precipitation at a location
where the matter or fluid can enter the Storm Water System or Waters of the State.
Incidental means occurring by chance or without intention or calculation; also minor, casual or subordinate in
significance or nature.
Industrial means related to a business engaged in industrial production or service, that is, a business
characterized by manufacturing or productive enterprise or a related service business.
Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee means the Committee established by the Town of Matthews for
the purpose of advising the Town Board regarding environmental matters.
LUESA means the Mecklenburg County Land Use & Environmental Services Agency that is responsible for
Storm Water and water quality matters for Mecklenburg County.
NC DEQ means the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality that is responsible for Storm Water
and water quality matters for North Carolina.
NCGS means North Carolina General Statute.
Non-Storm Water means any flow that is not from a form of natural precipitation.
NPDES permit means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued pursuant to the federal
Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, company, trust, estate, corporation, commission,
institution, utility, governmental entity or other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
Pollutant means a substance that alters the chemical, physical, biological, thermal and/or radiological integrity
of Storm Water, groundwater or surface water.
Pollution and Polluted mean containing Pollutants.
Receiving Stream means the body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the discharge waters from the Storm
Water System, or formed by the water discharged from the Storm Water System.
Riparian means relating to or living or located on the bank of a natural watercourse or waterbody.
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
3
State, when referring to regulatory authority, means the NC Department of Environmental Quality or any duly
authorized representative thereof; otherwise, it means the State of North Carolina.
Storm Water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting there
from.
Storm Water System means the network of curbs, gutters, inlets, pipes, ditches, swales, ponds, detention and
retention basins, streams, and other natural or manmade facilities and appurtenances that serve to collect and
convey Storm Water through and from a given drainage area.
Uncontaminated means not containing any Pollutants.
Unmodified Potable Water means tap water that has not had detergents, acids, degreasers, surfactants or other
agents added to or mixed with it, regardless of whether the added agent is labeled as or generally considered to
be, biodegradable.
Wash Water is a subset of Wastewater, and means any water or liquid discharged after and as a result of
conducting washing or cleaning activity.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than Uncontaminated Storm Water or Uncontaminated
Potable Water, discharged from a facility after use. Examples include water used for washing, flushing,
cleaning, or in a manufacturing process.
Waters of the State, as defined in NCGS §143-212(6), means any intermittent or perennial stream, river, brook,
swamp, lake, cove, creek, reservoir, waterway, or other body or accumulation of water, whether surface or
underground, public or private, or natural or artificial, that is contained in, flows through, or borders upon any
portion of this State.
§52A.04 TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
This Ordinance is applicable within the corporate limits of the Town of Matthews.
§52A.05 PROHIBITIONS
A. Illicit Discharge(s) and Improper Disposal(s).
No Person shall cause or allow the discharge or disposal of Non-Storm Water, either directly or
indirectly, to the Storm Water System, Waters of the State, or upon the land in a manner or amount
that is likely to reach the Storm Water System or Waters of the State except as described below in
Section 5(f). Examples of Illicit Discharges and Improper Disposals include, but are not limited to the
following: oil; grease; household and Industrial chemical waste; paint; paint Wash Water; garbage;
yard waste; animal waste; food waste; chlorinated swimming pool water; concrete; concrete
equipment Wash Water; Commercial vehicle Wash Water; heated water; soaps/detergents;
sediment/silt; or any other discarded or abandoned substances or waste materials.
B. Illicit Connection(s).
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
4
No Person shall install, maintain or use any connection to the municipal Storm Water System or
Waters of the State for the discharge of Non-Storm Water or shall cause Non-Storm Water to be
discharged or conveyed through a connection to the Storm Water System or Waters of the State unless
the discharge is a permitted discharge listed in Section 5(f).
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, Illicit Connections made in the past, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection, if classified as an Illicit Connection by this Ordinance.
Examples of Illicit Connections include, but are not limited to:
(1) Wastewater lines such as those from washing machines or sanitary sewers; and
(2) Pipes or drains carrying Wastewater or Wash Water from a building, operation or property.
C. Accidental Discharge(s).
If an accidental discharge to the municipal Storm Water System occurs, the responsible Person shall
immediately begin to collect and remove the discharge and restore all affected areas to their predischarge
condition. The responsible Person shall immediately notify LUESA, and other authorities
as appropriate, of the accidental discharge by telephone or other mode of instantaneous
communication. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of Pollutant, volume,
time of discharge, and corrective action taken. Such notification shall not relieve the responsible
Person of any of the expenses related to restoration, loss, damages or any other liability that may be
incurred as a result; nor shall such notification relieve the responsible party from other liability that
may be imposed by this Ordinance or other applicable law.
D. Obstruction a Violation.
Obstruction, as outlined in Section 7(d) of this Ordinance, shall be a violation. Said violation may be
enforced against the violator as a discrete violation of this Ordinance or as a factor in conjunction with
other enforcement remedies and penalties.
E. Coal Tar Sealant and High PAH Sealant Limitations.
(1) For the purposes of this section, the term “coal tar sealant” means a material that contains coal
tar and is for use on an asphalt or concrete surface, including a driveway, parking lot or roadway.
The term “high PAH sealant” means a material that contains greater than 0.1% PAH, by weight
and is for use on an asphalt or concrete surface, including a driveway, parking lot or roadway.
(2) No Person shall use, permit to be used, or sell for use in the Town of Matthews a coal tar sealant
product or a high PAH sealant product.
(3) Any Person who violates this section shall be liable for the penalties stated in Section 8(c).
F. Allowable Storm Water Discharges.
Storm Water is the only discharge permitted in the Storm Water System with the exception of
Incidental Non-Storm Water flows that do not negatively impact the quality of the Receiving Stream.
Incidental Non-Storm Water flows include the following:
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
5
(1) Water line flushing, except super-chlorinated water line flushing;
(2) Landscape irrigation;
(3) Diverted stream flows;
(4) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR §35.2005(20));
(5) Uncontaminated, pumped groundwater;
(6) Rising groundwaters;
(7) Discharges from Uncontaminated potable water sources;
(8) Uncontaminated, collected and infiltrated Storm Water from foundation drains or footing
drains;
(9) Uncontaminated storm water runoff from roof drains and rain barrels;
(10) Uncontaminated, untreated air conditioning condensate from residential or Commercial units;
(11) Irrigation water (does not include reclaimed water as described in 15A NCAC 2H .0200);
(12) Uncontaminated springs;
(13) Uncontaminated, collected groundwater and infiltrated Storm Water from basement or crawl
space pumps;
(14) Lawn watering;
(15) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharge;
(16) Street Wash Water only when Unmodified Potable Water is used;
(17) Flows from emergency fire and rescue operations other than those resulting from negligence
on the part of the Person who owned or controlled the Pollutant;
(18) Individual non-Commercial vehicle washing operations (*see note below);
(19) Residential and Charity Vehicle Washing (*see note below);
(20) Flows from Riparian habitats and wetlands;
(21) NPDES permitted discharges authorized by the EPA or NC DEQ;
(22) Dye testing, using suitable dyes, for verifying cross-connections, tracing plumbing lines,
determining flow direction or rate and for similar purposes, provided that verbal notification
by non-governmental entities is provided to LUESA prior to testing; and
(23) Removal of Storm Water System blockages with Unmodified Potable Water.
* Designated vehicle wash areas at multi-family residential complexes are not allowed if they
connect, directly or indirectly, to the Storm Water System or surface waters. Charity Vehicle
Washing performed by the same organization or at the same location more than one (1) time in a
thirty (30) Day period is not allowed under this Ordinance.
(Subsection E revised via ordinance 2446, passed 10-14-2019)
§52A.06 AUTHORITY OF LUESA
LUESA is a duly authorized representative of the Town of Matthews in the prevention and enforcement of this
ordinance and is entitled to all the rights granted to the Town.
§52A.07 POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION
A. Authority to Inspect and Monitor.
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
6
LUESA personnel, bearing proper identification, may enter public or private properties at all reasonable
times to inspect, investigate, or monitor activities and conditions subject to this Ordinance. Persons
occupying premises to be inspected shall allow LUESA personnel ready access at all times to all parts
of the premises to perform inspection, monitoring, records examination, copying, photography, video
recording, or other duties. LUESA personnel shall have the right to set up on the Person's property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a Person has security measures in force that would require identification and
clearance before entry into the premises, the Person shall make arrangements with security personnel
so that, upon presentation of identification, LUESA personnel will be permitted to enter and perform
their specific responsibilities without delay. Denial of LUESA personnel access to the Person’s
premises or portions thereof shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Denial of access may also occur if
a Person fails to provide, without unreasonable delay, such facilities, equipment, or devices as are
reasonably necessary to permit LUESA personnel to perform their duties in a safe manner.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. Any delay of more than five (5) minutes may be
considered unreasonable.
B. Search Warrants.
To the extent permitted by applicable law, LUESA may seek the issuance of a search warrant to
determine compliance with this Ordinance.
C. Confidential Information.
(1) To the extent permitted by applicable law and except as otherwise provided in this section,
information and data on a Person obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications,
permits, monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available to the public or other
government agencies without restriction, unless the Person specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of LUESA, that the document containing the information and
data is not public record under North Carolina law.
(2) To the extent permitted by applicable law, when requested by a Person furnishing a report, the
portions of a report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to government
agencies for uses related to this Ordinance provided, however, that such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the Person furnishing the report.
(3) Documents that are not public records and the information set forth therein may be withheld
and released only as provided by applicable law.
D. Obstruction.
No Person shall obstruct, hamper, or interfere with LUESA or its personnel while carrying out official
duties. Upon presentation of credentials by LUESA personnel, necessary arrangements shall be made
to allow immediate access onto premises or into an area protected by security measures. Any
obstruction to the safe and easy access to property, a facility or enclosure on property, or to monitoring
devices shall immediately be removed. Unreasonable delays in providing safe and reasonable access
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
7
or removing obstructions shall also be a violation of this Ordinance.
§52A.08 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. Remedies Not Limited.
The remedies provided herein are not exclusive; may be exercised singly, simultaneously, or
cumulatively; may be combined with any other remedies authorized under the law; and may be
exercised in any order.
B. Notice of Violation and Meeting with LUESA.
(1) Content of Notice.
Except in emergencies, as described in Section 8(k), upon LUESA’s determination that a
violation has occurred, LUESA shall provide to each Person against whom remedial action or
penalties may be pursued, a written notice that describes the following: a) the location of the
property and the nature of the alleged violation; b) a general description of the remedies and
penalties that may be incurred; c) the action(s) needed to correct the alleged violation, which
shall include a requirement to restore areas affected by unlawful discharge(s) to the previolation
condition; d) the time limit, if required, by which corrective actions must occur; e)
how to provide explanatory or additional information to LUESA and a contact Person with
whom the alleged violation can be discussed; and f) how to request a meeting with LUESA
with respect to alleged violations as described in Section 8(b)(3) below. The notice shall also
require the Person to whom the notice has been given to provide written notification explaining
actions taken to correct the alleged violation and to prevent future violations. Only one such
notice shall be required to each Person alleged to be responsible for a violation, regardless of
the number of remedies or penalties that are pursued or the timing of their institution. In
addition, no time period for compliance need be given for obstructing, hampering or interfering
with an authorized LUESA representative while in the process of carrying out duties under this
Ordinance.
Said notice shall further advise the Person responsible for the alleged violation that should the
Person fail to remediate or restore the affected area(s) within the established deadline, under
certain circumstances the restoration work may be done by LUESA or a contractor designated
by LUESA pursuant to Section 8(j), and the expense thereof shall be charged to the Person
responsible for the alleged violation.
(2) Service.
The notice may be served by mail, hand delivery, or by any means authorized under N.C.G.S.
1A-1, Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. Refusal to accept the notice shall
not relieve the violator’s obligation to comply with this Ordinance.
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
8
(3) Meeting with LUESA.
If the Person responsible for the alleged violation makes a timely request for a meeting with
LUESA during the time period set forth in the notice, such meeting shall be scheduled at a time
determined in the discretion of LUESA prior to taking an enforcement action authorized by
this Ordinance. The Person responsible for the alleged violation shall have the opportunity to
present any information relevant to the alleged violation or proposed remedy or penalty at the
meeting, in writing or orally.
C. Civil Penalties
(1) Any Person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs, or assists directly or indirectly
in the creation of a violation of this Ordinance is subject to a civil penalty. A civil penalty
may be assessed from the date the violation first occurs.
(2) The maximum civil penalty for each violation of this Ordinance is $5,000.00. Each Day of
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(3) No penalty shall be assessed until the Person alleged to be in violation has been served notice
of the violation as described in Section 8(b). Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the
violator of the obligation to pay such penalty.
(4) Penalties may be assessed concurrently with a notice of violation for any of the following:
(i) Obstructing, hampering or interfering with an authorized LUESA representative who
is in the process of carrying out official duties under this Ordinance;
(ii) A repeated violation for which a notice of violation was previously given to the Person
responsible for the violation; or
(iii) Willful violation of this Ordinance.
(5) In determining the amount of a civil penalty, LUESA in concert with the Matthews’
Environmental Advisory Committee shall consider any relevant mitigating and aggravating
factors including, but not limited to the following:
(i) Degree and extent of harm caused by the violation;
(ii) Cost of rectifying the damage;
(iii) Amount of money saved through non-compliance;
(iv) Whether the violator took reasonable measures to comply with this Ordinance;
(v) Knowledge of the requirements by the violator and/or reasonable opportunity or
obligation to obtain such knowledge;
(vi) Whether the violator voluntarily took reasonable measures to restore any areas
damaged by the violation;
(vii) Whether the violation was committed willfully;
(viii) Whether the violator reported the violation to an appropriate authority;
(ix) Technical and economic reasonableness of reducing or eliminating the discharge; and
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
9
(x) Prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with this Ordinance or
any other water Pollution control ordinance or regulation.
(6) LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee shall determine
the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed under this section and shall make written demand
for payment upon the Person in violation and shall set forth in detail a description of the
violation for which the penalty was imposed. Notice of said assessment shall be by registered
or certified mail or other means reasonably calculated to give adequate notice. If a violator
does not pay a civil penalty assessed within thirty (30) Days after it is due, or does not request
a hearing as provided in Section 9, the Town ofMatthews shall institute a civil action to recover
the amount of the assessment. The civil action shall be brought in Mecklenburg County General
Court of Justice or in any other court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil actions must be
filed within three (3) years of the date the notice of assessment was served on the violator.
(7) An assessment that is not contested is due when the violator is served with a notice of
assessment. An assessment that is contested is due at the conclusion of the administrative and
judicial review of the assessment.
(8) Civil penalties collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be credited to the Town of
Matthews general fund as a non-tax revenue.
(9) A violation of this Ordinance shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under
G.S. 14-4, but instead shall be subject to the civil penalties fixed by this section.
D. Cost Recovery.
LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee may also recover from the
violator:
(1) Costs to restore damaged property based on restoration costs, which include, but are not
limited to, cleanup costs, devaluation of the property, value of animal and plant life damaged,
and County administrative costs.
(2) Compensation for damage to or destruction of the Storm Water System owned and maintained
by the Town of Matthews.
In no case shall the maximum penalty per Day exceed the amount as specified in Section 8(c)(2).
E. Compliance Agreement.
LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee may enter into compliance
agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with the Person responsible for the non-compliance. Such agreements will include specific actions to be
taken by the Person in violation to correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the
agreement. Compliance agreements shall have the same force and effect as compliance orders issued
pursuant to Section 8(f) below.
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
10
F. Compliance Order.
When LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee finds that any Person
has violated or continues to violate any section of this Ordinance, an order may be issued to the violator
directing that they do one, or a combination, of the following:
(1) Comply with the sections of this Ordinance in accordance with a time schedule set forth in the
order;
(2) Take appropriate remedial or preventive actions for a continuing or threatened violation of any
section of this Ordinance, including installation and proper operation of adequate
structures/devices and/or implementation of procedures and management practices;
(3) Pay a civil penalty for violating any section of this Ordinance.
G. Cease and Desist Order.
Cease and desist orders may be issued as follows:
(1) If LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee finds that any
Person has violated or continues to violate any section of this Ordinance, an order issued
pursuant to this Ordinance, or any other provision of applicable law, an order may be issued
requiring such Person to cease and desist all such violations and direct such Person to perform
any one or more of the following:
(i) Comply immediately with all sections of this Ordinance, an order issued pursuant to this
Ordinance, or other applicable law;
(ii) Take appropriate remedial or preventive actions for a continuing or threatened violation of
any section of this Ordinance, a compliance agreement issued pursuant to this Ordinance,
an order issued pursuant to this Ordinance, or any other provision of applicable law.
(2) LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee may include in
such order the payment of a civil penalty for violating any section of this Ordinance, or for
violating a compliance agreement or order issued pursuant to this Ordinance.
H. Withholding of Inspections, Permits, Certificate of Occupancy or Other Approvals.
Permits for development or other improvements; requests for plan approval for zoning, subdivision, other
development or construction; and certificates of occupancy for the property on which the violation
occurred may be withheld or conditioned upon compliance with this Ordinance until a violator with
ownership or management of the property for which permits or approvals are sought has fully complied
with this Ordinance and all actions taken pursuant to this Ordinance.
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
11
I. Restoration of Areas Affected by Failure to Comply.
LUESA in concert with the Matthews’ Environmental Advisory Committee may require a Person
responsible for a violation to restore all areas affected by the violation to their pre-violation condition in
order to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting impacts. This authority is in addition to any
other enforcement actions authorized under this Ordinance.
J. Abatement by LUESA.
If any violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or
by other allowable remedies, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 9, within ten (10) Days of the
decision of the Matthews’ Environmental Review Committee to uphold the decision of LUESA , then
LUESA or a contractor designated by LUESA may enter upon the subject premises and is authorized to
take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore impacted areas to their previolation
condition in order to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting impacts. It shall be
unlawful for any Person in possession or control of any premises to refuse to allow LUESA or its
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
The Person in violation will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the
specified amount is not paid within thirty (30) Days after it is due, the Town of Matthews shall institute a
civil action to recover the specified amount. The civil action shall be brought in Mecklenburg County
General Court of Justice or in any other court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil actions must be filed
within three (3) years of the date said notice was served on the violator.
K. Emergencies.
If delay in correcting a violation would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this Ordinance or
pose an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment, including but not
limited to Waters of the State, then LUESA in conjunction with the Matthews’ Environmental Review
Committee may order the immediate cessation of the violation. Any Person ordered to cease such violation
or to remedy such violation shall do so immediately. LUESA in conjunction with the Matthews’
Environmental Review Committee may seek immediate enforcement through any remedy or penalty
authorized in this Ordinance or other applicable law.
L. Injunctive Relief.
(1) Whenever LUESA in conjunction with the Matthews’ Environmental Review Committee has
reasonable cause to believe that any Person is violating or threatening to violate this
Ordinance, the Town of Matthews may, either before or after the institution of any other action
or proceeding authorized by this Ordinance, institute a civil action for injunctive relief to
restrain the violation or threatened violation. The action shall be brought pursuant to G.S.
153A-123 in Mecklenburg County General Court of Justice.
(2) Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, the court
shall enter such orders or judgments as are necessary to abate the violation or to prevent the
threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this section shall
not relieve any party to such proceedings from any civil penalty prescribed for violations of
Chapter 52A. Surface Water Pollution Control
12
this Ordinance.
§52A.09 APPEALS
A. Appeal Process.
The issuance of a notice of violation, assessment of a civil penalty, compliance agreement, compliance
order and/or cease and desist order for violations of this ordinance shall entitle the Person alleged to be
responsible for the violation (“Appellant”) to an appeal hearing before the Matthews’ Environmental
Advisory Committee (“Committee”) if such Person submits a written Notice of Appeal to the Committee
within the number of Days specified below following the receipt of the notice from LUESA:
(1) Notice of Violation and/or Assessment of a Civil Penalty issued pursuant to Section 8(b) and/or
Section 8(c) = thirty (30) Days
(2) Compliance Agreement and/or Compliance Order issued pursuant to Section 8(e) and/or
Section 8(f) = twenty (20) Days
(3) Cease and Desist Order issued pursuant to Section 8(g) = ten (10) Days
The Committee shall then grant an appeal hearing within thirty (30) Days after receipt of written Notice
of Appeal. The Committee shall notify the appellant at least ten (10) Days prior to the date of the hearing
as to the time and place.
B. Final Decision.
The decision of the Committee shall constitute a final decision.
C. Compliance with Final Decision.
Thereafter the appellant shall have thirty (30) Days to comply with the final decision of the Committee.
D. Petition for Review in Superior Court.
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Committee with regard to the notice of violation, assessment
of a civil penalty, compliance agreement, compliance order and/or cease and desist order shall have thirty
(30) Days from the receipt of the decision of the Committee to file a petition for review in the nature of
certiorari in Superior Court with the Clerk of Mecklenburg County General Court of Justice.
§52A.10 SEVERABILITY
If any section or sections of this Ordinance is/are held to be invalid or unenforceable, all other sections shall
nevertheless continue in full force and effect.
(Chapter 52 repealed and replaced with Chapter 52A via ordinance 2287, passed 2/12/2018)
Chapter 70. Traffic Code - General Provisions
Chapter 70. Traffic Code - General Provisions
Section
General Provisions
70.01 Definitions
70.02 Authorized Emergency Vehicles
70.03 Obedience to Police Required
Traffic Administration
70.15 Duties of Police Department
70.16 Violation Enforcement Procedure
70.17 Forms for Citations to Appear
70.18 Prosecution for Violation
70.19 Responsibility for Obedience
70.99 Penalty
Cross Reference:
Abandoned and junked vehicles; see Chapter 90
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
CROSSWALK.
1) That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of
sidewalks at intersections.
2) Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
INTERSECTIONS. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then
the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets or highways which join one another at or approximately at
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets or highways joining at any other angle
may come in conflict.
MOTOR VEHICLES. Every vehicle which is self- propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time as may be in current use in the town.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by proper authority for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
1
Chapter 70. Traffic Code - General Provisions
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which
traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading.
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER. Any officer of the municipal police department and any officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails,
except streetcars.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SAFETY ZONES. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and
which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as
safety zones.
SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property
lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
STOP or STOPPING.
1) When required means complete cessation of movement.
2) When prohibited means any stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together
while using any street for purposes of travel.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street
or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
('72 Code, § 21-1-1)
§ 70.02 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles of the
Police Department or fire patrol vehicles when an exemption from these provisions is reasonably necessary in the
actual discharge of official duties; to ambulances; or to vehicles of public service corporations when an exemption
from these provisions is reasonably necessary in the actual installation or repair to public service equipment on or
above streets and sidewalks.
('72 Code, § 21-2-6)
2
Chapter 70. Traffic Code - General Provisions
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE REQUIRED.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer.
('72 Code, § 21-4-7) (Ord. 413, passed 5-26-87) Penalty, see
§ 70.99
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
§ 70.15 DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and other police officers of this town to enforce all street and traffic laws of
this town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this town. These officers are hereby authorized
to direct all traffic in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Departments may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of this title. ('72 Code, § 21-4-1)
§ 70.16 VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
A. When the violation of the state vehicle law or a section of the town's traffic ordinances; any revenue
ordinance relating to the display of any town license tag; or any ordinance creating or regulating parking is
detected, where no recklessness or serious injury to personal property occurs, or where the violator is not
intoxicated, the officer detecting the same is authorized to take the violator's name, address, operator's license
number and the registration number of the motor vehicle involved and issue to him in writing, on a citation
form provided by the town, a notice to answer the charge against him within a period or at a date and time
stated thereon, before the appropriate enforcement authority.
B. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any section of the
state vehicle law or this title, the officer finding that vehicle shall take its registration number and any other
information displayed on the vehicle which may serve to identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to
that vehicle a citation in writing, on a form provided by the town, for the driver to answer the charge against
him within 48hours at the office of the Town Clerk at the Town Hall. (‘72 Code, § 21-4-2)
§ 70.17 FORMS FOR CITATIONS TO APPEAR.
The Town Clerk shall cause all citation forms to be serially numbered in triplicate and shall cause the records, with
respect to those citations and the disposition of the same to be so maintained as that all those forms shall be capable of
being accounted for. The Town Accountant or his or her representative shall periodically investigate the records of
the Town Clerk for the purpose of determining the disposition of those citation forms and shall report the results of the
investigation to the Mayor. For the purpose of making this investigation, that person shall have access to the
necessary records of the Town Clerk. The report shall be a public record. ('72 Code,§ 21-4-3)
§ 70.18 PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATION.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to cause the arrest and obtain prosecution of those persons cited for any
violation of any state law occurring in the town, unless otherwise provided for by law, and for those persons cited for
violations of this title, except that in those cases where provision is made under this title for disposition of a violation
by payment of a fine or penalty, then upon payment of that fine or penalty within the time prescribed under this title,
no further prosecution or action will be taken. ('72 Code, § 21-4-4)
§ 70.19 RESPONSIBILITY FOR OBEDIENCE.
Obedience to sections regulating motor vehicles under this title, other than moving vehicle violations, is chargeable to
the person actually operating or in control of the vehicle at the time that it is discovered in violation of any provision
of this title; provided, proof of ownership of any vehicle found in violation of any section in this title regulating
3
Chapter 70. Traffic Code - General Provisions
parking or abandoning vehicles shall be prima facie evidence that the owner parked or abandoned that vehicle. ('72
Code, § 21-4-6)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
A. 1) The following civil penalties are fixed for traffic and parking violations indicated:
VIOLATION FINE
Blocking Alley $20
Blocking Driveway $20
Double Parking $20
Left Side of Curb $20
Permit Violation (1st violation – warning only) $25
Non-parking Space $20
Obstructing Parking $25
Parking Between Curb and Sidewalk $20
Parking Overtime (1st violation – warning only) $25
Parking or Driving on Sidewalk $25
Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Regulations $20
Quiet Zone $25
Using Street for Storage $50
Unauthorized Parking on City Property $25
Handicapped Only $250
2) Traffic and parking violations included in this Section shall be delinquent after ten (10) days from issuance
of citation. Thereafter, the following civil penalties shall apply to traffic and parking violations, in addition
to the stated penalty:
Delinquent Period Additional Penalty Ten (10) or More Days: An amount equal to fifty per cent (50%) of
fine.
3) Repeat violations of the above violations by the same registered vehicle or the same vehicle operator
within any twelve-(12) month period will be considered separate violations for the purpose of this ordinance
and will be assessed the following graduated penalties:
Repeated Violations Penalty: 3rd and 4th violation: penalty doubles; 5th and above violation: penalty
triples.
4) Any person receiving a citation indicating thereon that the penalty or fine may be paid within a certain
period of time and that person pays the fine or penalty as directed, and before any warrant is issued for that
person's arrest, shall not be subject to any further prosecution under this title with the regard to the violation
for which the citation was issued. ('72 Code, § 21-4-5) (Am. Ord. 41, passed 9-10-79; Am. Ord. 561, passed
2-13-89)
B. Any person or persons unlawfully parking a vehicle in a properly designated and marked “Handicapped
Only” parking space, or parking in such a manner to block access to an officially designated Handicapped
space or access ramp, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $250 to be recovered by the Town.
The offender shall be issued a written citation requiring payment be made to the Town within 72 hours. ('72
Code, § 21-2-7D.) (Ord. 41, passed 9-10-79; Am. Ord. 561, passed 2-13-89; Ord. 1191, passed 11-12-01;
Ord. No. 1655, passed 11-24-08, effective December 8, 2008)
4
1
Chapter 71. Traffic Rules
Section
71.01 Speed limits
71.02 Speed limits for school zones
71.03 Driving on sidewalk
71.04 Attaching toy vehicles to moving vehicles
71.05 Quiet zones
71.06 Helmet Child Protection
§ 71.01 SPEED LIMITS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any street or highway within the town at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing and in any event at a speed greater than the speed limit
pertaining to that street or highway. ('72 Code, § 21-4-8) (Ord. 413, passed 5-26-87) Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference: Speed limit schedule, see Ch. 73, Sched. I
§ 71.02 SPEED LIMITS FOR SCHOOL ZONES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any street or highway in an area designated as a school zone
during school hours as posted in excess of the speed limits posted for those zones. ('72 Code, § 21-4-9) (Ord. 413,
passed 5-26-87) Penalty, see § 70.99
Cross-reference: Speed limit schedule for school zones, see Ch. 73, Sched. I(D)
§ 71.03 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon the sidewalk or sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway
or except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or a
traffic-control device. ('72 Code, § 21-2-8) (Ord. 567, passed 3-28-89) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 ATTACHING TOY VEHICLES TO MOVING VEHICLES.
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, skate boards or any
toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. It shall further be unlawful for the
driver of any moving vehicle upon any roadway to allow or permit any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates, skate boards or toy vehicles to attach that riding vehicle or operator of same to his or her
moving vehicle. ('72 Code, § 21-4-10) (Ord. 413, passed 5-26-87) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.05 QUIET ZONES.
2
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such
zone shall sound the horn, bell or other warning of that vehicle except in an emergency. ('72 Code, § 21-2-9) (Ord. 567,
passed 3-28-89) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.06 HELMET CHILD PROTECTION
(A) No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall use, operate or be a passenger on a bicycle, in-line skates, roller
skates, skateboard or scooter on a public roadway, public bicycle path, or other public right-of-way unless the person
wears a protective helmet of good fit, fastened securely upon the head with straps of the helmet.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to allow his or her child or ward to so operate or ride a bicycle, in-line
skates, roller skates, skateboard or scooter without wearing a protective helmet of good fit, fastened securely upon the
head with straps of the helmet.
(C) Such helmet shall meet or exceed the safety standards set forth by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission,
the American National Standards Institute, or the Snell Memorial Foundation.
(D) Penalties – Violations of Section 71.06(B) shall be punishable by civil fine of $25.00. The fine may be waived as to
any first time violator upon presentation of evidence that the violator has purchased or procured an approved helmet
and demonstrates intention of using the helmet as required by law. (Ord. 1160, passed 4-23-01; effective 120 days from
date of its adoption.)
1
Chapter 72. Stopping, Standing or Parking
Section
72.01 Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specific places
72.02 Parking within lines where provided
72.03 Parking time limitations
72.04 Parking prohibited for certain purposes
72.05 Parking on restricted streets or areas prohibited
72.06 Handicapped parking
§ 72.01 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or a traffic-control device in any of the following places:
(A) On the sidewalk;
(B) Within an intersection;
(C) On a crosswalk;
(D) Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or
roadway;
(E) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when that stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic; and
(F) In any area or between any points where official no parking signs have been erected or adjacent to any curb
line where that street curb line has, pursuant to town authority, been painted yellow. ('72 Code, § 21-2-2)
Penalty, see § 70.99
(G) On any street or Town property during public festivals or events, upon designation by the Town Council
and the erection of official “No Parking” sign upon said streets and Town property. (Ord. No. 1002,
passed 8/24/98)
(H) On any street when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct the movement of other vehicular
traffic. (Ord. No. 1825, passed 11-14-11)
§ 72.02 PARKING WITHIN LINES WHERE PROVIDED.
On any street which is marked with lines indicating the parking space for vehicles, all vehicles shall be
parked between those lines as indicated. ('72 Code, § 21-2-3) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.03 PARKING TIME LIMITATIONS
2
(A) In any parking space or area where a parking time limitation is imposed by an official sign or other
device, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle in any such parking space or area for a
greater time than that indicated by that sign or device.
(B) Re-parking restriction in Time Parking Zones. Any vehicle left parked, standing or stopped for greater than
the time allowed in that parking zone shall be in violation of parking time limitations if it is not moved out of
the parking space. A vehicle shall not re-park in that same parking space for a period equal to one-half of the
posted time limit.
('72 Code, § 21-2-4) Penalty, see § 70.99 (Ord. No. 1654, passed 11-24-08)
§ 72.04 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street or right-of-way for the purpose of:
(A) Displaying it for sale;
(B) Washing, greasing or repairing a vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
(C) Advertising any goods or merchandise for sale;
(D) Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when that storage is not incident to the bona fide
use of an automobile by its owner for more than 12 hours. The provisions of this division shall apply to a
vehicle which is left standing in front of its owner's residence only when the vehicle has no license plates or
expired license plates;
(E) Storage of any detached trailer, or van, when the towing unit has been disconnected for the purpose of
transferring merchandise, or freight, from one vehicle to another;
(F) Parking for any purpose a vehicle greater than one-ton capacity for a period longer than two hours unless
in an officially designated loading zone, then only within the restrictions imposed thereon; or
(G) Parking or storage of any commercial vehicle in residential districts unless it meets one of the exemptions
below.
1. A mid-range commercial vehicle shall be permitted to park on any public street, right-of- way
or public property overnight (9 p.m. to 7 a.m.) adjacent to any property zoned for or occupied by
any single- or multi-family residential use. A mid-range commercial vehicle is defined at § 153.116.
2. A rental or moving van or truck may only park in these zoning districts for the purposes of loading
or unloading personal belongings for the lot at which it is parked. Such vehicles parked in residential
areas shall not exceed three (3) consecutive nights.
3. Emergency response vehicles, road and utility repair and maintenance vehicles, delivery
trucks, and similar vehicles used for emergency situations, repair of public infrastructure, or for the
delivery of goods and services are exempt from this parking limitation while they are needed on the
site.
4. Commercial and construction vehicles and equipment at an active development site or active
construction staging area are exempt from this parking limitation. ('72 Code, § 21-2-1) (Ord. 1902,
passed 11-12-12 ) Penalty, see § 70.99
3
§ 72.05 PARKING ON RESTRICTED STREETS OR AREAS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle along any street or in any area contrary to any
restriction imposed or prohibition thereof established by ordinance which described the street or area so controlled,
whether or not that street or area has been posted or marked so as to indicate the restrictions or prohibition
imposed. Ordinances imposing restrictions or prohibitions on parking or standing vehicles will be set forth in
Chapter 74, Schedules I and II. ('72 Code, § 21-2-5) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.06 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
(A)Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect the health and safety of physically handicapped citizens
and to insure their equal access to public facilities by designating and reserving “Handicapped Only” parking
spaces at or near public facilities, and to provide for the enforcement of G.S. § 20-37.6, which makes it
unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle in a space designated for physically handicapped persons when
that vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate or placard provided by North Carolina law, and
where appropriate, above ground signs or symbols and words giving notice thereof are erected marking the
designated space.
(B) Designation of spaces. “Handicapped Only” parking spaces may be designated on any publicly owned
or controlled street or property, including, but not limited to, streets, off-street parking lots, parks and
recreation facility sites, and may be further designated on any privately owned or controlled shopping center
parking lot. “Handicapped Only” parking spaces shall be clearly marked with above ground signs in
accordance with the requirements of G.S. § 20-27.6.
(C) Duties of law enforcement officers. It shall be the duty of the law enforcement officers of the town to
enforce the provisions of G.S. Chapter 20, Article 2A, specifically G.S. §§ 20-37.1 through 20-37.6, in
accordance with § 70.99(B). ('72 Code, § 21-2-7) (Ord. 41, passed 9-10-79; Am. Ord. 561, passed 2-13-89)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.07 PERMIT PARKING.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish a Downtown Parking Permit Program in specifically
designated off-street, publicly maintained parking lots to create convenient parking for employees and to
therefore provide on-street spaces for customers and clients.
(B) Rules and Regulations. The following rules and regulations shall apply to the Downtown Parking
Permit Program:
1. A Downtown Parking Permit may be issued to eligible employers of Downtown Matthews with a
physical location in the 100 and 200 blocks of North Trade Street, odd-numbered side of Cotton Gin
Alley, even- numbered side of Library Lane, 100 blocks of East and West Charles Street and 100 and
200 blocks of Matthews Station Street.
2. The permit is to be placed in a visible position within the vehicle.
3. Permits will be issued on a calendar year basis at a cost of $120 and will expire on December
31st of each year. After April 1st, partial year permits will be prorated at a cost equal to $10 for each
full month left in the year. Permits must be re-registered every calendar year and will be issued with
4
a new permit. Any vehicle bearing an expired permit after January 31st of each year shall be subject
to the same penalty as a vehicle parking in the permit lot without a permit. (Ord. No. 1653, passed 11-
24-08)
1
Chapter 73. Traffic Schedules
Section
I. Speed limits
II. Through trucks prohibited
III. Vehicular traffic on certain streets prohibited
IV. Stop or yield intersections
V. Traffic movement prohibited
SCHEDULE 1: SPEED LIMITS.
(A) The following streets shall have a maximum speed limit of 10 miles per hour and signs shall be placed
giving notice of same:
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Library Lane
Between Jolm Street and Charles Street
612
11-13-89
(B) The following streets shall have a maximum speed limit of 20 miles per hour and signs shall be placed
giving notice of same:
I Street I Location I Ord. No. I Date Passed I
655
Alexander Street 3-25-91
Andrew Caroline Drive
Matthews Medical Park
1691
6-8-09
Chesney Glen Drive
Chesney Glen Subdivision
655
3-25-91
Clearbrook Road
Pine Forest Subdivision
606
8-14-89
Craterfield Lane
Chesney Glen Subdivision
655
3-25-91
Deer Creek Drive
Pine Forest Subdivision
606
8-14-89
Edgeland Drive
Pine Forest Subdivision
606
8-14-89
Irvin Lane
655
3-25-91
Jefferson Street
655
3-25-91
Jill Lane
Matthews Station
1219
6-24-02
606
Keziah Drive 8-14-89
Main Street
655
3-25-91
Markwell Drive
Pine Forest Subdivision
606
8-14-89
Matthews Station Street
1219
6-24-02
2
I Street I Location I Ord. No. I Date Passed I
McDowell Street
655
3-25-91
Newburg Lane
Pine Forest Subdivision
606
8-14-89
North Freemont Street
Between intersection with West
Matthews Street and its terminus
within the Freemont Cottages
subdivision
1576
7-23-07
Old Depot Lane
Matthews Station
1219
6-24-02
Sadie Drive (entire length) Pine Forest Subdivision 606 8-14-89
Sardis Grove Lane
606
8-14-89
South Freemont Street
655
3-25-91
South Ames Street
655
3-25-91
Swaim Drive
609
828-89
Vinecrest Drive
Pine Forest Subdivision
606
8-14-89
Woody Creek Road
Chesney Glen Subdivision
655
3-25-91
(C) The following streets shall have a maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour and signs shall be placed
giving notice of the same:
Street
Location
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Ablow Drive
Crestdale Crossing, Phase 1
1507
7-24-06
Acadia Lane
702
11-18-91
Adagio Court
Wynchase Subdivision, Phase II
1558
5-23-07
Alaqua Court
1216
6-10-02
Alexander Ridge Drive
Alexander Ridge Subdivision
1309
9-22-03
Alexander Street
702
11-18-91
Ames Street, North
214
6-25-84
Amir Circle
Crestdale Crossing, Phase 1
1507
7-24-06
Annabel Court
A1mabel Subdivision
1612
2-25-08
A1mecy Drive
702
11-18-91
Arborfield Drive
Reverdy Glen Subdivision
1522
12-11-06
Arborlea Court 702 11-18-91
Annadale Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Ashley Creek Drive
Ashley Creek Subdivision
615
12-11-89
3
Ashtead Lane
617
1-22-90
Andulusian Drive
Windrow I Subdivision
237
9-10-84
Axford Lane
Dunnwood Subdivision
Wynchase Subdivision
1509
1527
8-14-06
1-8-07
Ballade Drive
Wynchase Subdivision
1527
1-8-07
Bank Street
702
11-18-91
Bathgate Lane
702
11-18-91
Bayleaf Court
702
11-18-91
Bent Wood Court
702
11-18-91
Bentcreek Lane
702
11-18-91
Benton Woods Drive
702
11-18-91
Bethwyck Court
Sardis Mill Subdivision
980
6-8-98
Bideford Court
Sardis Mill Subdivision
980
6-8-98
Biltmore Forest Drive
1340
3-22-04
Birkenhead Lane
Hampton Green Subdivision
836
2-13-95
Bitter End Court
Greylock Ridge Subdivision
1848
1-9-12
Black Oak Drive
Sardis Forest Subdivision
534
9-12-88
Blacksmith Court
702
11-18-91
Bloom Wood Lane
702
11-18-91
Blossom Wood Court
703
11-18-91
Blueberry Ridge Road
Dum1wood Subdivision
Wynchase Subdivision
1509
1527
8-14-06
1-8-07
Bowen Court
Sardis Plantation
1067
8-9-99
Bradwyck Court
702
11-18-91
Brandywine Drive
Brandywine Subdivision
955
3-9-98
Bramwell Place
Sardis Plantation
1067
8-9-99
Brenham Lane
702
11-18-91
Brenwycke Lane Hampton Green 836 2-12-95
Brightmoor Drive Brightmoor 617 1-22-90
Brightmoor Ridge Drive Brightmoor 617 1-22-90
Brightwood Lane 702 11-18-91
Brigman Lane 702 11-18-91
Brittle Creek Drive Courtney 453 10-12-87
Bubbling Well Road 702 11-18-91
Buckton Lane Oakcroft 702, 1101 11-18-91, 3-27-00
4
Bumble Bee Drive Thornblade Hills Subdivision 1217 6-24-02
Burnwood Court 702 11-18-91
Bydeford Court Hampton Green 836 2-13-95
Calpher Court 702 11-18-91
Candalon Way Candalon 1086 2-8-00
Candlelight Woods Drive Fairfax Woods 1163 5-14-01
Cam10nade Court Windrow I Subdivision 237 9-10-84
Cantata Court Wynchase Subdivision 1527 1-8-07
Capriole Lane Windrow I Subdivision 237 9-10-84
Carriage Crossing Drive Brightmoor 617 1-22-90
Castle Cliff Drive Castle Cliff Subdivision 1542 3-12-07
Cedar Chase Drive Windsor Chase Subdivision 978 5-26-98
Chaney Court Sardis Forest 534 9-12-88
Chanson Place Wynchase Subdivision 1527, 1605 1-8-07, 12-10-07
Chaphyn Lane Courtney 453 10-12-87
Charcoal Ridge Court Brightmoor 617 1-22-90
Charing Cross Drive 702 11-18-91
Charles Street 702 11-18-91
Chateau Court Brandywine 955 3-9-98
Chesson Court 702 11-18-91
Chesswood Lane Brightmoor 617 1-22-90
Chimore Lane 1161 4-9-01
Chipwood Lane 702 11-19-91
Citation Court Windrow I Subdivision 237 9-10-84
Cithara Drive 702
1500
11-18-91
6 26 06
Clairview Lane 1067 8-9-99
Clam Bed Court 617 1-22-90
Clearbrook Road 1132 8-28-00
Clearkirk Court 702 11-18-91
Club View Lane 427 6-22-87
Coach Ridge Trail 702 11-18-91
Cochrane Woods Lane 1516 11-13-06
Colt Court 702 11-18-91
Collllemara Drive 237 9-10-84
Collllie Court 1574 6-25-07
Cotton Gin Alley 702 11-18-91
5
Council Place 1696 8-10-09
Country Place Drive 702
1132
11-18-91
8 28 00
Courtney Lane 702 11-18-91
Covenant Church Lane 1216 6-10-02
Creekside Drive 237 9-10-84
Creekwood Court 702 11-18-91
Crescendo Court 1558 5-23-07
Crescent Knoll Drive 617 1-22-90
Crestdale Crossing Drive 1476 1-23-06
Cricket Lane 702 11-18-91
Crusaders Court 1542 3-12-07
Dalwen Green Court 617 1-22-90
Dam1y Court 1309 9-22-03
Dark Wood Court 702 11-18-91
Darley Dale Court 617 1-22-90
Dartmoor Court 237 9-10-84
Demaree Lane 836 2-13-95
Devereaux Lane 1498 6-12-06
DeVore Lane 1478 1-13-06
Dion Drive 702 11-18-91
Double Girth Court 237 9-10-84
Doug's Drive 427 6-22-87
Draymore Lane 615
702
12-11-89
11 18 91
Du1111wood Hills Drive 1509 8-14-06
Dylan Drive 1349 4-26-04
East Matthews Street 1533 1-22-07
Eastville Court 635 9-11-90
Edenwood Court 1132 8-28-00
Edgebrook Circle 617 1-22-90
East Charles Street 1259 1-13-03
Elizabeth Lane 588 5-22-89
Elizabeth Manor Court 1260 1-27-03
Elmsford Lane 1522 12-11-06
English Knoll Drive 702 11-18-91
Enid Lane 534 9-12-88
Epperstone Drive 610 9-11-89
6
Erwin Lane 702 11-18-91
EvianLane 836 2-13-95
Fair Forest Drive 702 11-18-91
Fairchelsea Way Lane 615 12-11-89
Fairfax Woods Drive
Fairfax Woods
1163
5-14-01
Falkenburg Court
702
11-18-91
Fence Post Lane
702
11-18-91
Fernridge Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Firewood Drive Windsor Chase 978 5-26-98
Fitzpatrick Lane
702
11-18-91
Five Gait Court
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Forest Drive
702
11-18-91
Forest Trail Drive
702
11-18-91
Forest Wood Drive
Windsor Chase
702
978
11-18-91
5-26-98
Forestmont Drive
Eastwood Forest
929
7-28-97
Four Lakes Drive
702
11-18-91
Foxfield Lane
Sardis Plantation
635
9-11-90
Foxlair Court
702
11-18-91
Fraserburgh Drive
702
11-18-91
Fredericksburg Road
Sardis Plantation
635
9-11-90
Freemont Street, North
215
6-25-84
Friendship Drive
Eastwood Forest
929
7-28-97
Gateshead Lane
Hampton Green
836
2-13-95
George Clay Lane
Fullwood Trace
1477
1-13-06
Gilcrest Circle
Matthews Estates
1132
8-28-00
Giles Court
Sardis Plantation
635
9-11-90
Gladewater Drive
Suburban Woods
465
11-23-87
Gladiateur Court
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Glenn Valley Drive
Rivendell Subdivision
702
1406
11-18-91
1-24-05
Glendalough Lane
Ashley Creek
615
12-11-89
Glenshannon Road
702
11-18-91
Gold Cup Court
Windrow!
237
9-10-84
Grand Provincial Avenue
Elizabeth Place Subdivision
1500
6-26-06
7
Grayfox Lane
702
11-18-91
Grayson Court Sardis Plantation 635 9-11-90
Greylock Ridge Road
Greylock Ridge Subdivision
1848
1-9-12
Gumwood Court
702
11-18-91
Hackamore Drive
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Hadco Lane
Alexander Ridge Subdivision
1309
9-22-03
Hadley Court
Atmecy Subdivision
794
12-13-93
Hallmark Drive
Suburban Woods
465
11-23-87
Hampden Lane
Sardis Plantation
1067
8-9-99
Harefield Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Hargett Road
702
11-18-91
Harmony Court
Wynchase Subdivision
1558
5-28-07
Harrogate Road
702
11-18-91
Hartis Lane
702
11-18-91
Hathwyck Court
702
11-18-91
Heathershire Lane 702 11-18-91
Hickory Glem1Drive
Matthews Plantation Subdivision
1440
6-13-05
Hickory Knoll Court
702
11-18-91
Hickory Lake Lane
Matthews Plantation Subdivision
1440
6-13-05
Hidden Trail Court
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Hinson Drive Sardis Forest 534 9-12-88
High Hill Court
Matthews Estates
1132
8-28-00
Holcroft Court
702
11-18-91
Holly Ridge Drive
1340
3-22-04
Holleybark Drive
Glendevon
443
9-14-87
Home Place
Providence Manor
702
1118
11-18-91
6-26-00
Honeysuckle Ridge Road
702
11-18-91
Horseback Circle
702
11-18-91
Hunters Bluff Drive
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Hunting Court
702
11-18-91
Ilsemont Place
702
11-18-91
Ivey ood Lane
702
11-18-91
lvey Wood Lane Millstone Ridge Subdivision 1516 11-13-06
8
Jarrett Drive
Matthews Plantation Subdivision
1440
6-13-05
Jaywick Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Jayw_ood Lane Somersby 610 9-11-89
Jeffers Drive Matthews Estates 1132 8-28-00
Jefferson Street
702
11-18-91
Jerry Lane
702
11-18-91
Joines Drive
702
11-18-91
Kale Wood Drive
702
11-18-91
Katie Court
702
11-18-91
Kent Drive
702
11-18-91
Keziah Road
Wynchase Subdivision
1558
5-23-07
Kilkenney Hill Road
Ashley Creek
615
12-11-89
Kilmarnock Court 702 11-18-91
Kimbrell Court
Alexander Ridge Subdivision
1309
9-22-03
Kimway Drive
702
11-18-91
Kintyre Court
702
11-18-91
Kirkbridge Court
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Legends Lane
Candalon
1086
2-8-00
Lakenheath Drive
702
11-18-91
Lakeview Circle
702
11-18-91
Laurel Fork Drive
Sardis Plantation
635
9-11-90
Laurel Wood Drive
702
11-18-91
Leeswood Lane
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Leighton Court
Somersby
610
9-11-89
Library Lane
702
11-18-91
Light Brigade Drive
702
11-18-91
Lightwood Drive
702
11-18-91
Linden Street 702 11-18-91
Lindsay Lane
702
11-18-91
Linville Drive Sardis Plantation 635 9-11-90
Lion Heart Lane
Castle Cliff Subdivision
1542
3-12-07
Lippizan Court
Windrow!
237
9-10-84
Lochrneade Lane Sardis Mill 980 6-8-98
Lois Street
702
11-18-91
9
Longbridge Drive
Somersby
610
9-11-89
Ludman Way Julian Meadows 1702 9-14-09
Lynderhill Lane
702
11-18-91
Macie Glen Court Matthews Commons 1065 7-26-99
Main Street
216
6-25-84
Mangionne Drive
702
11-18-91
Manicott Drive
702
11-18-91
Manor Ridge Drive
702
11-18-91
Mansard lane
702
11-18-91
Mareshead Lane
702
11-18-91
Marion Drive
702
11-18-91
Mmjorie Lane
702
11-18-91
Markwell Drive
(200 ft extension) Greylock Subdiv.
1848
1-9-12
MargueRoad
702
11-18-91
Matthews Cha]2_el Road
702
11-18-91
Matthews Crossing 702 11-18-91
Matthews Crossing Drive
Matthews Estates
1132 8-28-00
Matthews Estates Road
Matthews Estates
1132
8-28-00
Matthews Mill Road
702
11-18-91
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
from its beginning at East Matthews
Street in easterly direction to its
interaction with McLeod Street
1533
1-22-07
Matthews Plantation Drive
Matthews Plantation Subdivision
1440
6-13-05
Matthews School Road
Crestdale Crossing Phase II
Crestdale Crossing, Phase 1
Extension of 810 feet
702
1476
1507
1828
11-18-91
1-23-06
7-24-06
11-14-11
Matthews Street
East ofHighway 51 and only such
portion as located within Club View
Acres
427
6-22-87
Matthews Street Extension
East ofHighway 51 and only such
portion as located within Club View
Acres
427
6-22-87
Mattridge Road
Glendevon
443
9-14-87
McClendon Court Sardis Forest 534 9-12-88
McDowell Street
702
11-18-91
McLeod Street
Club View Acres
427
6-22-87
10
McLeod Street Circle
Club View Acres
427
6-22-87
Meadow Lake Drive
Matthews Estates
1132
8-28-00
Meadow Lane
702
11-18-91
Merancas Court
Sumise Crossing Subdivision
1828
11-14-11
Merribrook Drive Brightmoor 617 1-22-90
Mikelynn Drive
702
11-18-91
Millhouse Drive Windrow! 237 9-10-84
Minden Lane
Courtney
453
10-12-87
Monaghan Lane
Ashley Creek
615
12-11-89
Mondovi Court
Brandywine
955
3-9-98
Morningwood Drive
Eastwood Forest
929
7-28-97
Morris Road
702
11-18-91
Moss Creek Drive
Matthews Estates
1132
8-28-00
Mullis Lane
702
11-18-91
Neil Ridge Road
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
New Town Drive Sardis Forest 534 9-12-88
Newby Lane
702
11-18-91
Newport Lane
1340
3-22-04
Northfield Court
702
11-18-91
Nutfield Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Oakcroft Drive
Oakcroft
702
11-18-91
Oakglade Court
1350
5-10-04
Oakshade Lane
702
11-18-91
Odell Court
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Old Pine Lane
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
O'Malley
702
11-18-91
Oscar Lane
702
11-18-91
O'Toole Lane
702
11-18-91
Oxborough Drive
702
11-18-91
Patten Hill Drive
Thornblade Hills
1217
6-24-02
Pearwood Drive
Windsor Chase
978
5-26-98
Penderlea Lane
Providence Manor
1118
6-26-00
Percheron Court
Windrow!
237
9-10-84
Phillips Road
Millstone Ridge Subdivision
1516
11-13-06
11
Phillips Woods Lane
Millstone Ridge Subdivision
1516
11-13-06
Pine Chase Lane
Windsor Chase
978
5-26-98
Pineapple Court
Alexander Ridge Subdivision
1309
9-22-03
Pinewood Hill Drive
Windsor Chase
978
5-26-98
Plentywood Drive
Suburban Woods
465
11-23-87
Plum Ridge Court
702
11-18-91
Pommel Drive
702
11-18-91
Port Royal Drive
702
11-18-91
Porters Pond Lane
Rivendell Subdivision
1406
1-24-05
Portpatrick Lane
702
11-18-91
Privette Road
extension
1670
1-26-09
Quill Lane
702
11-18-91
Rainbow Ridge Drive
Rainbow Ridge
1161
4-9-01
Red Porch Lane
Grevlock Ridge Subdivision
1848
1-9-12
Reid Harkey Road
Renfrow Lane
Reverdy Lane
702
11-18-91
6-26-00
11-18-91
11-18-91
6-26-00
9-11-89
6-26-00
9-12-88
5-29-01
6-10-02
1119
702
702
Reverdy Oaks Place Providence Manor 1118
Rhyll Court
Somersby
610
Rice Road Extension
1118
Riddick Place
Sardis Forest
534
River Banks Road
1170
Ritz Lane
1216
Rockwell View Lane
Greylock Ridge Subdivision
1848
1-9-12
Rosearbor Lane
702
11-18-91
Rosedale Lane
Sardis Plantation
1067
8-9-99
Sabot Lane
702
11-18-91
Saddletree Court
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Sagemont Avenue
702
11-18-91
Salvo Drive
Alexander Ridge Subdivision
1309
9-22-03
Sam Boyd Court
Fullwood Trace
1477
1-13-06
Sam Newell Road
Between Matthews Station Street and
Matthews Township Parkway
1640
10-14-08
Sandymead Road
Somersby
610
9-11-89
12
Sardis Glen Drive
Sardis Forest
702
11-18-91
Sardis Mill Drive
Sardis Mill
980
6-8-98
Sardis Plantation Drive
Sardis Plantation
702
11-18-91
Phase 7 1067 8-9-99
Savannah Drive
Sardis Plantation
635
9-11-90
Scarborough Lane
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Schuster Court
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Sea Mist Drive
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Seeton Lane Candalon 1086 2-8-00
Selma Burke Lane
Fullwood Trace
1477
1-13-06
Seton Drive
Matthews Plantation Subdivision
1440
6-13-05
Shady Knoll Court
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Shannon Bridge Lane Ashley Creek 615 12-11-89
Shasta View Way
Yorktown Subdivision
1574
6-25-07
Shelby Street
Sardis Plantation
702
11-18-91
S1n·ewsbury Lane Hampton Green 836 2-12-95
Somersby Lane
Somersby
610
9-11-89
Sonoma Court
Brandywine
955
3-9-98
Southern Cross Lane
Sardis Plantation
1067
8-9-99
Springwater Drive
702
11-18-91
Squirrel Lake Comt Squirrel Lake Village 1670 1-26-09
Stanhope Lane (portion) Somersby 610 9-11-89
Stonehedge Court Oakcroft 702
1101
11-18-91
3-27-00
Stratford Woods Court
702
11-18-91
Stratfordshire Drive
702
11-18-91
Strathaven Drive
702
11-18-91
Summerland Drive
702
11-18-91
Swancroft Lane
Elizabeth Place Subdivision
1500
6-26-06
Sweetgum Lane
Windsor Chase
978
1011
5-26-98
11-23-98
Sycamore Knoll Court
702
11-18-91
Taconic Place
Greylock Ridge Subdivision
1848
1-9-12
Tadlock Place
Sardis Forest.
534
9-12-88
Talbot Court
Hampton Green
836
2-13-95
13
Tall Pines Lane
Millstone Ridge Subdivision
702
1516
11-18-91
11-13-06
Tanfield Drive
Annecy Subdivision
702
794
11-18-91
12-13-93
Thornblade Ridge Drive
Thornblade Hills
1217
6-24-02
Thornsby Lane
Somersby
610
9-11-89
Tilbury Trail Court Thornblade Hills 1217 6-24-02
Tillot Drive
702
11-18-91
Timber Knoll Drive
Matthews Estates
1132
8-28-00
Timberwood Court
702
11-18-91
Tommy Lane
1349
4-26-04
Tom's Farm Road
Village@ Windrow
1703
9-14-09
Torino Road
Suburban Woods
465
11-23-87
Trafalgar Place
Extension of Trafalgar Place
702
1398
11-18-91
12-13-04
Tracelake Drive
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Trail Ridge Road
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Tranquil Cove Court
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Triple Crown Court
702
11-18-91
Tynecastle Lane
702
11-18-91
Umi Court
702
11-18-91
Vaughn Road
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Vine Arden Road
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Wabada Drive
1170
5-29-01
Wagon Hill Road
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
Wainsley Place Sardis Plantation 635 9-11-90
Walnut Knoll Drive 1340 3-22-04
Walnut Point Drive
Sardis Plantation
Phase 7
635
1067
9-11-90
8-9-99
Wardlow Court
Sardis Forest
534
9-12-88
West Charles Street
Between Ames and NC51
1610
2-25-08
Whirlaway Court
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Whisper Ridge Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
14
Whispering Springs Drive
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Whitefriars Lane Hampton Green 836 2-13-95
Wickerby Court 1273 2-24-03
Wilcrest Drive
(and strip offWilcrest Drive)
702
11-18-91
Williams Road
Julian Meadows
1702
9-14-09
Williams Station Road
Yorktown Subdivision
1574
6-25-07
Williamstown Road
Greylock Ridge Subdivision
1848
1-9-12
Willow Brook Drive
Elizabeth Place Subdivision
1500
6-26-06
Willowdale Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Wilrose Place Thornblade Hills 1217 6-24-02
Winding Trail
702
11-18-91
Windrow Wood Court
Village & Windrow
1703
9-14-09
Windy Hill Lane
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Windrow Lane
Windrow I
237
9-10-84
Windsor Chase Drive
Windsor Chase
978
5-26-98
Windsor Crossing Drive
702
11-18-91
Windsor Glade Drive
1350
5-10-04
Windsor Meadow Lane
1350
5-10-04
Windsor Square Drive
702
11-18-91
Wineberry Court
Brightmoor
617
1-22-90
Winter Wood Drive
702
11-18-91
Winterbrooke Drive
702
11-18-91
Wood Star Court
702
11-18-91
Woodbend Drive
Windsor Chase
702
978
11-18-91
5-26-98
Wyndmere Hills Lane
702
11-18-91
Zelda Lane
702
11-18-91
(D) The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated a school zone and those designated
school zone areas shall have a maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour and signs and/or flashers shall be
posted giving notice of the same as well as the hours of enforcement on school days only:
I Street I Location I Ord. No. I Date
Sam Newell
Road
Between a point 0.5 miles south of Margaret Wallace
Road northward to Margaret Wallace Road
846
3-27-95
15
Trade Street
Between its intersection with Jolm Street to the north and
the Fire Department to the south
428
7-13-87
Elizabeth Lane
Between a point 0.22 mile south ofNC 51 to NC 51
908
10-15-96
(E) The following streets shall have a maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour and signs shall be placed
giving notices of the same:
Street
Location
Ord.
No.
Date Passed
Independence Pointe
Pkwy
Within the town limits of the Town of
Matthews
1796
4-25-11
Matthews-Mint Hill Rd.
Between Independence Boulevard and
Matthews Township Parkway
1633
9-8-08
Northeast Parkway
Between Windsor Park and Matthews
Township Parkway
1275
3-24-03
Northeast Parkway
From Sam Newell Road to Matthews
Township Parkway
1855
2-13-12
(F) The following streets shall have a maximum speed limit of 45 miles per hour and signs shall be placed
giving notice of the same:
I Street I Location I Ord. No. I Date Passed I
Fullwood
1289
4-14-03
Idlewild Road
From N.C. 51 eastward to the Union County
line
651
2-11-91
Monroe Road
Between its intersection with Industrial Drive
and proceeding in a northern direction to the
Matthews Town Limits
1039
2-8-99
N.C. 51
From a point approximately 75 feet north of
Kimway Drive, northward to Swaim Drive
337
3-24-86
Stallings Road
From Union County line northward to
intersection of SR 3174 "Idlewild Road"
1245
8-26-02
U.S. 74
From a point 0.53 mile west of Sam Newell
eastward to a point 2.02 miles east of Sam
Newell
1417
1-14-05
SCHEDULE II: THROUGH TRUCKS PROHIBITED.
TRUCKS, for the purposes of this schedule, shall be defined as being a truck with three or more axles.
Through trucks are prohibited from using the following streets:
16
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Ames Street Between West John Street and Charles 329 2-24-86
Annecy Drive
and/or Tanfield
Northeast Parkway and Rice Road 1604 11-26-07
Crestdale Road Between Matthews School Road and
Charles Street
1247 9-23-02
Boyd Drive Except trucks with an origin or
destination on Boyd Drive
1318 11-10-03
Four Lakes
Drive
799 1-24-94
Independence
Pointe Parkway
East of Sam Newell Road to its
terminus
1356 5-24-04
Irwin Street 1416 1-14-05
Main Street 1416 1-14-05
North Trade
Street
Between John and Matthews Street,
except trucks with an origin or
destination for North Trade Street or to
access Charles Street
1120 6-26-00
South Ames
Street
1416 1-14-05
South Freemont 1416 1-14-05
W. McDowell 1416 1-14-05
Windsor Square
Drive
Between Independence Boulevard to
Independence Pointe Parkway
1356 5-24-04
('72 Code, § 21-A-3) Penalty, see§ 70.99
SCHEDULE III: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC ON CERTAIN STREETS PROHIBITED.
Pursuant to authority granted the town in G.S. § 160A-300, the following streets shall be barricaded for the purpose of
prohibiting vehicular Traffic:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Charing Cross
Drive
At a point where the town limits cross
Lynderhill Lane and Charing Cross Drive
64 1-26-81
Lynderhill Lane At a point where the town limits cross
Lynderhill Lane and Charing Cross Drive
64 1-26-81
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE IV: STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Town maintained streets Sign: L - Signal light private; N- None; S – Stop; Y- Yield
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
17
AblowDrive s
Matthews School Road
Acadia Lane s
Laurelwood Drive
N
Adagio Court s
Keziah Road
Alaqua Court s
Ritz Lane
Alexander Ridge Drive s
Marglyn Drive
N
Alexander Street
N
Jefferson Street
N
Alexander unpaved street
Ames Street s
Main Street s
3-way
Ames Street s
John Street
N
John through street
Ames Street
N
West Charles Street s
Ames Street s
Matthews Street s
4-way
Amir Circle s
Matthews School Road
A1mabel Court s
Phillips Road
Andrew Carolina Drive s
Sam Newell Road
Andulusion Drive
N
Com1emara Drive s
Andulusion Drive
N
Percheron Drive
S*
Andulusion Drive
N
Colt Court s
Andulusion Drive s
Windrow Lane s
3-way
Andulusion Drive s
Creekside Drive
N
Street
Sign
Str·eet
Sign
Notes
Annecy Drive s
Northeast Parkway
N
end of Annecy
Annecy Drive
N
Tanfield Drive s
end of Tanfield
A1mecy Drive
N
Newby Court s
Annecy Drive
N
Calpher Court s
Arborfield Drive s
Elmsford Lane
Arborlea Court s
Countr·y Place Drive
N
Armadale Lane s
Brightmoor Ridge Drive
N
Armadale Lane
N
Nutfield Lane s
'
Ashley Creek Drive s
Pleasant Plains Road
N
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Glendalough Lane s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Shannon Bridge Lane s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Fairchelsea Way s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Kilkem1y Hill Drive s
1400 blk. Ashley Creek
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Monaghan Court s
18
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Draymore Lane s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Kilke1my Hill Drive s
1100 blk. Ashley Creek
Ashtead Lane s
Edgebrook Circle
N
Atrium Way
N*
Hounds Run Drive
N
Axford Lane s
Dunnwood Hills Drive
Axford Lane s
Chanson Place
Ballade Drive s
Axford Lane
Ballards Pond Lane s
Hounds Run Drive
N
Ballards Pond Lane
N
Doves Nest Court
S*
Banlc Street s
Matthews Str·eet
N
Barnyard Court s
Hounds Run Drive
N
Barington Place s
Mangione Drive
N
Barington Place
N
Chelsea Place s
Bathgate Lane
N
O'Malley Drive s
Bathgate Lane
N
Swaim Drive s
Bayleaf Court s
Woodbend Drive
N
Street
Sign
Sh·eet
Sign
Notes
Bayleaf Court s
Hickory Knoll Court
N
Bentcreek Lane s
Summerland Drive
N
Benton Woods Drive s
Sardis Road
N
Benton Woods Drive
N
Sardis Glen Drive s
Sardis Glen crosses, 2-way
Benton Woods Drive
N
Hathwyck Court s
Benton Woods Drive s
Tillot Drive
N
Bent Wood Court s
Falkenburg Court
N
Berkley Square Lane
N*
Hounds Run Drive
N
Bethwyck Court s
Loclm1eade Lane
Bideford Court s
Sardis Mill Drive
Bilhnore Forest Drive s
Holly Ridge Drive
N
Birkenhead Lane
N
Gateshead Lane s
Bitter End Court s
Greylock Ridge Road
Black Oak Drive s
Hinson Drive
N
Blacksmith Court s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Bloomwood Lane s
Winterwood Drive
N
19
Bloomwood Lane
N
Lightwood Drive s
Blossom Wood Court s
Winterwood Drive
N
Blueberry Ridge s
Mullis Lane
Boyd Drive s
Hayden Way Drive
N
Boyd Drive y
Claire Drive
N
Bradwyck Court
N
Tillot Drive s
Bradwyck x's end Tillot Dr.
Brandywine Drive s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Brenham Lane s
South Trade Street
N
Brenham Lane
N
English Knoll Drive s
Brenwycke Lane s
Gateshead Lane
N
Bridgemere Terrace s
Old Pond Lane
N
Brightmoor Drive s
Pleasant Plains Road
N
Brightmoor Drive
N
Fernridge Lane s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Brightmoor Ridge Drive s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Brightmoor Drive
N
Hunters BluffDrive s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Wineberry Court s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Whispering Springs Dr s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Hidden Trail Court s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Tranquil Cove Court s
Brightmoor Ridge Drive s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Brightmoor Ridge Drive
N
Armadale Lane s
Brightmoor Ridge Drive
N
Sea Mist Drive s
Brightwood Lane s
Elizabeth Lane
N
Brightwood Lane
N
Umi Court s
Brigman Road s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Brittle Creek Drive
N
Chaphyn Lane s
Brittle Creek Lane
N
Minden Lane s
Bubbling Well Road s
Matthews-Township Pkwy
N
Buckton Lane
N
Stonehedge Court s
2-way Stonehedge
Buckton Lane s
Oakcroft Drive s
2-way Buckton, both sides
Buckton Lane
N
Holcroft Court s
Bumble Bee Drive s
Wilrose Place
20
Bumble Bee Drive s
Thornblade Ridge Drive
Burnwood Court s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Bydeford Court s
White Friars Lane
N
Calpher Court s
Annecy Drive
N
Candalon Way s
Idlewild Road
Cannonade Court s
Millhouse Drive
N
Cantata Court s
Chanson Place
Canterfield Lane s
Woody Creek Road
N
Cape Fear Court s
Reverdy Oaks Drive
Capriole Lane s
Windrow Lane s
4-way stop
Carriage Crossing Drive
N
Dalwen Green Court s
Carriage Crossing Drive
N
Schuster Court s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Carriage Crossing Drive
N
Darley Dale Court s
Carriage Crossing Drive s
Chesswood Drive
N
2-way on Carriage Cross.
Carriage Crossing Drive
N
Kirkbridge Court s
Castle Cliff Drive s
Mt. Harmony Church Road
Cedar Chase Drive s
Windsor Chase Drive s
Chaney Court s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Chanson Place s
Blueberry Ridge Road
Chanson Place s
Sam Newell Road
Chaphyn Lane s
South Trade Street
N
Chaphyn Lane s
Brittle Creek Drive
N
Charcoal Ridge Court s
Whispering Springs
N
Charing Cross Drive s
Pineville-Matthews Rd
N
Charing Cross Drive
N
Stratfordshire Drive s
Charles Street s
North Trade Street
N
2-way for Charles
Charles Street
N
Library Lane s
Charles Street
N
Freemont Street s
Charles Street s
North Ames Street
N
Charles Street
N
Lois Street s
Charles Street s
Matthews-Township Pkwy
N
Chateau Court s
Brandywine Drive
N
21
Chelsea Place s
Barrington Drive
N
Chesney Glen Drive s
South Trade Street
N
Chesney Glen Drive s
Woody Creek Road
N
Chesson Court s
Winterbrooke Drive
N
Chesswood Lane s
Pleasant Plains Road
N
Chesswood Lane
N
Carriage Crossing Drive s
2-way for Carriage Crossing
Chesswood Lane
N
Whisper Ridge Lane s
Chesswood Lane
N
Edgebrook Circle s
Chesswood Lane
N
Jaywick Lane s
Chesswood Lane s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Chesswood Lane
N
Willow Dale Lane s
Chimore Lane s
Tank Town Road
Chimore Lane s
Rainbow Ridge Drive
ld
Chipwood Lane
Cindy Carr Drive s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Citation Court s
Phillips Road
N
Cithara Drive s
Elizabeth Lane
N
Cithara Drive
N
Rose Arbor Lane
N
Cithara Drive s
Willow Brook Drive
Claire Drive s
Independence Blvd.
N
Claire Drive
N
Scenic Drive
N*
Claire Drive
N
Boyd Drive s
Clam Bed Court
N*
Sea Mist Drive
N
Clearbrook Road s
East John Street
N
Clearbrook Road
N
Markwell Drive s
Clearbrook Road s
Deer Creek Drive s
4-way stop
Clearbrook Road s
Jeffers Drive
Clearkirk Court s
Tynecastle Lane
N
Club View Lane s
East Matthews Street
N
Coach Ridge Trail s
Sardis Road N.
Coach Ridge Trail
N
Joines Drive s
Coach Ridge Trail s
Hunting Court
N
s
22
Colt Court Andulusion Drive
Com1emara Drive s
Phillips Road
N
Com1emara Drive
N
Millhouse Lane s
Cmmemara Drive
N
Five Gait Court s
Cmmemara Drive
N
Hackamore Drive s
Connemara Drive s
Andulusion Drive
N
Connie Court s
Williams Station Road
Cotton Gin Alley s
East Jolm Street
N
Street
Sh·eet
Sign
East Charles Street
Cotton Gin Alley s N
Council Place s
East JolmSh·eet
Counh·y Place Drive s
South Trade Street
N
Country Place Drive
N
Matthews Estates Drive
N*
Country Place Drive
N
Wilcrest Drive s
900 blk. Country Place
Counh·y Place Drive
N
Sagemont Drive s
Counh·y Place Drive
N
Arborlea Drive s
Country Place Drive
N
Wilcrest Drive s
1100 blk. Counh·y Place
Counh·y Place Drive
N
Glen Shanuon Drive s
2-way for Glen Shanuon
Courtney Lane s
Pineville-Matthews Rd
N
Courtney Lane
N
Mattridge Lane s
Covenant Church Lane s
Matthews Township Parkway
Covenant Church Lane s
West Jolm Street
Creekside Drive
N
Andulusion Drive s
Creekside Drive
N
Dartrnoor Court
S*
Creekside Drive
N
Springwater Drive s
Creekside Drive
N
Honeysuckle Drive s
Creekside Drive
N
Cricket Lane
N*
Creekside Drive
N
Horseback Circle s
Creekwood Court s
Forestwood Drive
N
Crescendo Court s
Mullis Lane
Crescent Knoll Drive s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Chesswood Drive s
Crescent Knoll Drive s
Merribrook Drive s
3-way, both sh·eets
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Cindy Carr Drive s
2-way for Cindy Carr
23
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Driftway Point Road s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Sum1yview Circle s 3-way I 2700 blk Cresc. Knoll
Crescent Knoll Drive s
Sum1yview Circle s
3000 blk Crescent Knoll
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Ridgeberry Terrace s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Old Pond Road s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Golden Hill Road s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Weeping Willow Lane s
Crestdale Crossing Drive s
Matthews School Road
Crestdale Road
L
Matthews-Mint Hill Rd
L 4-way signal I state roads
Crestdale Road
N
Matthews School Road s
Crestdale Road
N
Matthews Chapel Road s
Cricket Lane
N*
Creekside Drive
N
Cross Point Road s
Winterbrook Drive
N
Cross Point Road s
Honey Creek Lane
N
Cross Point Road
N
Tensing Court s
Cross Tie Lane s
Williams Station Road
N
Cross Tie Lane
N
Gold Spike Court s
Crusaders Court s
Lion Heart Lane
Dalwen Green Court s
Carriage Crossing Dr
N
Dark Wood Court s
Winterwood Drive
N
Darley Dale Court s
Carriage Crossing Dr
N
Dartmoor Court s
Creekside Drive
N
Deer Creek Drive s
Sadie Drive
N
Deer Creek Drive
N
Edgeland Drive s
Deer Creek Drive
N
Clearbrook Road s
4-way stop
Deer Creek Drive
N
Newburg Lane s
Deer Creek Drive s
Vinecrest Drive
N
Demaree Lane
N
Evian Lane s
Devereaux Lane s
Matthews-Pineville Road
DeVore Lane s
Northeast Parkway
Dion Drive s
Margaret Wallace Road
N
Double Girth Court s
Connemara Drive
N
24
Dove Nest Court
N*
Ballards Pond Drive
N
Draymore Lane s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Driftway Point Road s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Dunnwood Hills Drive s
Blueberry Ridge Road
Dmmwood Hills Drive s
Williams Road
Dylan Drive s
Tonuny Lane
N
Dylan Drive s
Rice Road
N
Eastpointe Drive s
Rice Road Extension
Eastville Court s
Walnut Point Drive
N
Edenwood Court s
Matthews Estates Road
Edgebrook Circle s
Chesswood Drive
N
Edgebrook Circle
N
Ashtead Lane s
Edgeland Drive s
East Jolm Street
N
Edgeland Drive
N
Sadie Drive s
Edgeland Drive s
Deer Creek Drive
N
Elizabeth Lane s
Mangione Drive
N
Elizabeth Manor Court s
Elizabeth Lane
Elmsford Lane s
Reverdy Lane
English Knoll Drive s
Brenham Lane
N
English Knoll Drive
N
Marque Place s
Enid Lane s
Trail Ridge Road
N
Epperstone Court s
Jaywood Lane
N
Evian Lane s
Whitefriars Lane
N
2-way stop, Evian Lane
Evian Lane s
Demaree Lane
N
Ezra Court
N*
Sunnyview Lane
N
Fairchelsea Way s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Fairfax Woods Drive s
Candlelight Woods Drive
Fair Forest Drive s
Pleasant Plains Road
N
Fair Forest Drive
N
Gray Fox Lane s
2-way, Gray Fox
Falkenburg Court s
Winter Wood Drive
N
Falkenburg Court
N
Bent Wood Court s
Fence Post Lane s
Kalewood Drive
N
25
Fernridge Lane s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Street
Sign Stt·eet
Sign Notes
Fernridge Lane N Shady Knoll Court s
Firewood Drive s Woodbend Drive
N 2-way, Firewood
Firewood Drive
N
Sweet Gum Lane s 2-way, Sweet Gum
Firewood Drive s
Forest Wood Drive s 3-way
Fitzpatrick Lane s
Tynecastle Lane
N
Five Gait Court s Connemara Lane
N
Forest Drive s
Four Lakes Drive
N
Forest Trail Drive s
Hunting Court
N
Forest Wood Drive
N Winterwood Drive s
Forest Wood Drive
N
Creekwood Court s
Forest Wood Drive s Firewood Lane s 3-way
Four Lakes Drive s Independence Point Pkwy
N
2-way, Four Lakes
Foxfield Lane
N Walnut Point Drive
N
Foxfield Lane N Grayson Court N*
Foxlair Court s
Hunting Court
N
Fraserburgh Road s Port Patrick Lane
N
Fraserburgh Road s
Strathaven Drive
N
Fredricksburg Road N Port Royal Drive s
Fredricksburg Road s Wainsley Place
N
Fredricksburg Road s
Savalll1ah Drive
N
Freemont Street s
West Matthews Street
N
Freemont Street s
West Charles Street
N
Freemont Street s West JolmStreet
N
2-way, Freemont Street
Freemont Street N McDowell Street s
Freemont Street s Main Stt·eet s
4-way stop
Fullwood Lane L South Trade Stt·eet
L
3-way signal light I state
Fullwood Lane
L
Pineville-Matthews Rd
L 3-way signal light I state
Gateshead Lane s Birkenhead Lane
N
Gateshead Lane N Whitefriars Lane s
Gateshead Lane N Brenwycke Lane s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
26
Gateshead Lane
N
Shrewsbury Lane s
George Clay Lane s
East Charles Street
N
George Clay Lane
N
Sam Boyd Court s
George Clay Lane s
Selma Burke Lane
N
Gifford Drive s
Hickory Lake Lane
N
Gilchrest Circle s
Timber Knoll Drive
Giles Court s
Port Royal Drive
N
Gladewater Drive
N
Plentywood Drive s
Gladewater Drive
N
Hallmark Drive s
Gladiateur Court s
Millhouse Lane
N
Glendalough Lane s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Glenshannon Road s
Sagemont Drive
N
Glenshatmon Road s
Country Place Drive
N
2-way, Glenshannon
Glenn Valley Drive s
Reverdy Lane
N
Gold Cup Court s
Hackamore Drive
N
Gold Spike Court s
Cross Tie Lane
N
Golden Hill Road s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Golden Hill Road
N
Mara Court s
Grand Provincial Avenue s
Swancroft Lane
Grand Provincial Avenue s
Willow Brook Drive
Gray Fox Lane s
Fair Forest Drive
N
2-way, Gray Fox
Grayson Court s
Foxfield Lane
N
Greylock Ridge Road s
East John Street
Gum Wood Court s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Gupton Court s
Reverdy Oaks Drive
Hackamore Drive s
Connemara Drive
N
Hackamore Drive
N
Gold Cup Court s
Hackamore Drive
N
Whirlaway Court s
Hackamore Drive
N
Light Brigade Drive s
Hackamore Drive s
Light Brigade Drive
N
dead end ofHackamore
Street
Sign
Str·eet
Sign
Notes
Hadco Lane s
Dam1y Court
N
Hadco Lane s
Salvo Drive
N
27
Hadley Court s
Tanfield Drive
N
Hallmark Drive s
Plentywood Drive
N
Hallmark Drive
N
Torino Drive s
Hallmark Drive s
Gladewater Drive
N
Barefield Lane s
Windy Hill Lane
N
Hargett Road s
Sam Newell Road
N
Hargett Road s
Fairfax Woods Drive
Harrogate Road s
Stratfordshire Lane
N
2-way, Harrogate
Harmony Court s
Mullis Lane
Hartis Lane s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Hartis Lane
N
Oscar Lane s
Hartis Lane
N
Mmjorie Drive s
Hartis Lane
N
Jerry Lane s
Hathwyck Court s
Benton Woods Drive
N
Hayden Way s
Independence Blvd.
N
Hayden Way
N
Boyd Drive s
Heathershire Lane s
Phillips Road
N
Heathershire Lane
N
0'Malley Drive s
Heathershire Lane
N
Tynecastle Lane s
Heathershire Lane
N
Kintyre Court s
Heathershire Lane s
O'Toole Drive
N
Hickory Knoll Court
N
Bayleaf Court s
Hidden Trail Court s
Brightmoor Drive
N
High Hill Court s
Clearbrook Road
Hinson Drive
N
McNab Court s
Hinson Drive
N
Black Oak Drive s
Hinson Drive
N
Old Pine Lane s
Hinson Drive
N
Wagon Hill Road s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Hinson Drive
N
Neil Ridge Road s
Hinson Drive
N
Odell Court s
Holcroft Court s
Buckton Lane
N
Holleybank Drive s
Mattridge Road
N
28
Home Place s
Reverdy Lane
N
2-way, Home Place
Home Place s
Rockfish Drive
Honey Creek Lane s
Weddington Road
N
Honey Creek Lane
N
Cross Point Road s
Honey Creek Lane
N
Sh·eatley Lane s
Honey Creek Lane
N
Sweetbay Lane s
Honeysuckle Ridge s
Creekside Drive
N
Honeysuckle Ridge s
Mareshead Lane
N
Horseback Circle s
Creekside Drive
N
Hounds Run Drive s
Idlewild Road
N
Hounds Run Drive
N
Barnyard Court s
Hounds Run Drive
N
Ballards Pond Lane s
Hounds Run Drive
N
Muses Court
N*
Hounds Run Drive
N
Berkley Square Lane
N*
Hounds Run Drive
N
AtTium Way
N*
Hunters Bluff Drive s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Hunters Bluff Drive
N
Windy Hill Lane s
Hunting Court
N
Coachridge Trail s
Hunting Court N Manor Ridge Drive
Hunting Court
N
Forest Trail Drive s
Independence Conunerce Drive s
Mt. Harmony Church Road
Independence Pointe Parkway s
Sam Newell Road
N
Industrial Drive s
West Jolm Sh·eet
N
Ilsemont Place s
Stanhope Lane
N
Independence Pointe Parkway s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
Irwin Lane s
West Jolm Street
N
Sh·eet
Sign
Sh·eet
Sign
Notes
Irwin Lane
N
Main Street
N
Ivey Wood Lane s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Ivey Wood Lane s
Cochrane Woods Lane
Jaywick Lane s
Chesswood Drive
N
Jaywood Lane s
Long Bridge Drive
N
Jeffers Drive s
Clearbrook Road
29
Jefferson Sh·eet s
Main Sh·eet
N
Jerry Lane c"'
Hartis Lane
N
Jill Lane s
Matthews Station Street
Joines Drive s
Coachridge Trail
N
Kale Wood Drive s
Winterwood Drive s
Kale Wood Drive
N
Fence Post Lane s
Katie Court s
Phillips Road
N
Kent Street s
East John Street
N
Kent Sh·eet s
Sadie Drive
N
Keziah Road s
Mullis Lane
Keziah Road s
Sam Newell Road
N
Kilkem1y Hill Road s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
1400 blk. Ashley Creek
Kilkenny Hill Road s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
1100 blk. Ashley Creek
Kilmarnock Court s
O'Malley Drive
N
Kimway Court s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Kimway Drive y
Kimway Court
N
Kinty1·e Court s
Heathershire Lane
N
Kintyre Court s
O'Toole Drive
N
Kirkholm Drive s
O'Malley Drive s
4-way
Kirkholm Drive
N
Wester Ross Court s
Kirkbridge Lane s
Carriage Crossing Drive
N
Lakenheath Lane s
Pineville-Matthews Rd
N
Lakeview Circle s
Sam Newell Road
N
Lakeview Circle
N
Lakeview Circle s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Lakeview Circle
N
Meadow Lane
N*
Laurelwood Drive s
Woodbend drive
N
Lam·elwood Drive
N
Acadia Lane s
Laurelwood Drive
N
Oakshade Lane s
Leeswood Lane s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Leeswood Lane s
Trail Ridge Road
N
2-way, Leeswood
Legends Lane s
Candalon Way s
Leighton Court s
Somersby Lane
N
30
Lemmond Drive s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Library Lane s
West JolmStreet
N
Library Lane s
West Charles Street
N
Lightwood Drive s
Bloom Wood Lane
N
Lightwood Drive
N
Winterwood Drive s
Lightwood Drive
N
Reid Harkey Road s
Lightwood Drive
N
Timberwood Drive s
Light Brigade Drive s
Hackamore Drive
N
Light Brigade Drive
N
Pommel Lane s
Light Brigade Drive
N
High Echelon Drive
N
Light Brigade Drive
N
Hackamore Drive s
Light Brigade Drive s
Stallings Road
N
Linden Street
N
Matthews School Road
N
not paved
Lindsey Lane s
Idlewild Road
N
Linville Drive s
Sardis Plantation Drive s
Linville Drive s
Walnut Point Drive
N
Lion Heart Lane s
Castle Cliff Drive
Lion Heart Lane s
Phillips Road
Lippizan Court s
Windrow Lane
N
Lois Street s
West John Street
N
Lois Street s
West Charles Street
N
Loughridge Drive s
Thornsby Lane
N
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Longbridge Drive
N
Jaywood Lane s
LudwayWay s
Idlewild Road
Lynderhill Lane s
Stratfordshire Lane
N
2-way, Lynderhill
Main Street s
South Trade Street
N
Main Street s
Freemont Street s
4-way
Main StTeet
N
Jefferson Street s
Main Street s
Ames Street s
4-way
Main Street
N
Irwin Lane
N
no sign needed
Mangione Drive s
Stanhope Lane
N
Mangione Drive
N
Elizabeth Lane s
31
Mangione Drive
N
Barrington Place s
Manicott Drive s
Stanhope Lane
N
Manor Ridge Drive s
Hunting Court
N
Mansard Court s
Rose Arbor Lane
N
Mara Court s
Golden Hill Road
N
Mareshead Lane s
Springwater Drive
N
2-way on Mareshead
Mareshead Lane
N
Honeysuckle Ridge Rd s
Marion Drive s
Fullwood Lane
N
Matjorie Drive s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Matjorie Drive s
Hartis Lane
N
Markwell Drive s
Clearbrook Road
N
Markwell Drive
N
Newburg Lane s
Markwell Drive
N
Vinecrest Drive s
Markwell Lane s
Greylock Ridge Road
Marque Place s
Pleasant Plains Road
N
Marque Place s
English Knolls Drive
N
Matthews Estates Road s
Country Place Drive
Matthews Station Street s
North Trade
Matthews Station Street s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
Matthews Station Street s
Matthews Station Street Ext
3-way stop signs near gazebo
Street
Sign
Sh·eet
Sign
Notes
Matthews Street s
North Ames Street s
4-way
Matthews Street
N
North Freemont Street s
Matthews Street
N
Barile Street s
Matthews Street
L
North Trade Street
L signal light I state
Matthews Street
S*
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
*1 direction only
Matthews Street
N
Club View Lane s
Matthews Street s
McLeod Street
N
Matthews Chapel Road s
Crestdale Road
N
Matthews Crossing Dr s
Sadie Drive
N
Matthews Mill Road s
Reverdy Lane
N
Matthews School Road s
Crestdale Road
N
Mattridge Road s
Courtney Lane
N
32
Mattridge Road
N
Holleybank Drive s
McLendon Street s
Neil Ridge Road
N
McDowell Street s
South Freemont Street
N
McDowell Street s
South Trade Street
N
2-way, McDowell
McLeod Street s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
McLeod Street
N
East Matthews Street s
McLeod Street
N
Matthews Street Ext. s
Meadow Lake Drive s
Matthews Estates Road
Meadow Lane
N*
Lakeview Circle
N
Merancas Court s
Matthews School Road
Merribrook Drive s
Crescent Knoll Drive s
3-way
Mikelynn Drive s
Idlewild Road
N
Millhouse Drive s
Cmmemara Drive
N
Millhouse Drive
N
Gladiateur Court s
Millhouse Drive
N
Cannonade Court s
Minden Lane s
Brittle Creek Drive
N
Monaghan Court s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Mondovi Court s
Brandywine Drive
N
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Moore Road s
Matthews-Mint Hill Road
N
Moore Road
N
Marglyn Drive
N
Morris Road s
East Charles Street
N
s
Matthews Crossing Drive
Moss Creek Drive
Mullis Lane s
Blueberry Ridge Road
Mullis Lane s
Gladewater Drive
Mullis Lane s
Sam Newell Road
N
Muses Court
N*
Hounds Run Drive
N
Neil Ridge Road s
Hinson Drive
N
Neil Ridge Road
N
McLendon Court s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Leeswood Road s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Chaney Court s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Vaughn Road s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Vine Arden Road s
33
Neil Ridge Road
N
Wardlow Court s
Newport Lane s
Matthews Plantation Drive
N
New Towne Drive s
Tadlock Place
N
Newburg Lane s
Markwell Drive
N
Newburg Lane s
Deer Creek Drive
N
Newby Court s
Am1ecy Drive
N
Northeast Parkway
N
Annecy Drive s
Northeast Parkway s
Sam Newell Road
N
Northeast Parkway s
Windsor Square Drive s
4-way
Northeast Parkway s
Matthews-Township Pkwy
N
Northeast Parkway
N
Overcash Drive s
Northfield Court s
Reverdy Lane
N
Nutfield Court s
Armadale Drive
N
Oakcroft Drive s
Phillips Road
N
Oakcroft Drive
N
Buckton Lane s
2-way, Buckton
Oakglade Court s
Rice Road
N
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Oakshade Lane s
Laurelwood Drive
N
Odell Court s
Hinson Drive
N
Old Depot Lane s
Matthews Station
Old Pine Lane s
Hinson Drive
N
Old Pond Lane s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Old Pond Lane
N
Bridgemere Terrace s
Old Pond Lane
N
Mara Court s
O'Malley Drive s
Heathershire Lane
N
O'Malley Drive
N
Kilmarnock Court s
O'Malley Drive s
Kirkholm Drive s
4-way
O'Malley Drive s
Bathgate Lane
N
O'Toole Lane s
Portpatrick Lane
N
O'Toole Lane
N
Heathershire Lane s
O'Toole Lane
N
Kintyre Court s
Oscar Lane s
Hartis Lane
N
Oxborough Drive s
Winterbrooke Drive
N
2500 blk. Winterbrooke
34
Oxborough Drive s
Winterbrooke Drive
N
2300 blk. Winterbrooke
Peggy Ridge Terrace s
Old Pond Lane
N
Penderlea Lane s
Reverdy Oaks Drive
Percheron Drive
N*
Andulusion Drive
N
*sign needed
Phillips Road s
Phillips Woods Lane
Phillips Woods Lane s
Cochrane Woods Lane
Phillips Woods Lane s
Phillips Road
Pine Chase Lane s
Windsor Chase Drive
Pinewood Hill Drive s
Woodbend Drive
Plentywood Drive s
Idlewild Road
N
Plentywood Drive
N
Hallmark Drive s
Plentywood Drive s
Gladewater Drive
N
Plum Ridge Court s
Stratford Woods Drive
N
Pommell Lane s
Light Brigade Drive
N
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Pommell Lane
N
Triple Crown Court s
Pommell Lane s
Hackamore Drive
N
Porters Pond Lane s
Gle1111 Valley Drive
N
Port Royal Drive s
Walnut Point Drive
N
Port Royal Drive
N
Giles Court s
Port Royal Drive s
Fredricksburg Road
N
Portpatrick Lane s
Phillips Road
N
Portpatrick Lane
N
Fraserburg Drive s
Portpatrick Lane
N
O'Toole Drive s
Privette Road s
Pleasant Plains Road
N
Quill Lane s
Cithara Drive
N
Rainbow Ridge Drive s
Tan1c Town Road
Red Porch Lane s
Greylock Ridg Road
Reid Harkey Road s
Matthews-Mint Hill Rd
N
Reid Harkey Road
N
Tall Pines Lane s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Burn Wood Court s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Ivey Wood Lane s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Gum Wood Court s
35
Reid Harkey Road
N
Wood Star Court s
Reid Harkey Road s
Lightwood Drive
N
Renfrow Lane s
New Towne Road
N
Reverdy Lane
N
Wyndmere Hills Lane s
Reverdy Lane
N
Northfield Court s
Reverdy Lane s
Matthews Mill Road s
3-way
Reverdy Lane s
Glen Valley Drive s
3-way
Reverdy Lane
N
Home Place (east) s
Reverdy Oaks Drive s
Home Place
Rhyll Court s
Sandymead Lane
N
Rice Road Extension s u.s. 74
Ritz Lane s
Windsor Chase Drive
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Ridgebury Terrace s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Ridgebury Terrace
N
Terra Glen Court s
Riddick Place s
Trail Ridge Road
N
Rockwell View Road s
Greylock Ridge Road
Rondeau Court s
Sam Newell Road
Rose Arbor Lane s
Cithara Court
N
Sabot Lane
N
Cithara Court s
Saddletree Lane s
Tracelake Drive
N
Sadie Drive s
South Trade Street
N
Sadie Drive
N
Matthews Crossing Dr s
Sadie Drive
N
Kent Street s
Sadie Drive
N
Deer Creek Drive s
Sadie Drive s
Edgeland Drive
N
Sagemont Drive s
Country Place Drive
N
Sagemont Drive
N
Glenshannon Road s
Salvo Drive s
Pineapple Court
N
Salvo Drive s
Kimbrell Court
N
Sam Boyd Court s
George Clay Lane
N
Sandymead Lane s
Somersby Lane
N
Sandymead Lane s
Thornsby Lane
N
36
Sardis Glen Drive s
Benton Woods Drive
N
2-way, Sardis Glen Lane
Sardis Grove Lane s
Sardis Road
N
Sardis Mill Drive s
Lochmeade Lane
Sardis Mill Road s
Sardis Road
Sardis Plantation Drive s
Pineville-Matthews Rd
N
Sardis Plantation Drive s
Linville Drive s
Sardis Plantation Drive s
Clairview Lane
N
Savam1ah Drive s
Fredricksburg Lane
N
Scarborough Lane
N*
Enid Lane
N
Scenic Drive
N*
Claire Drive
N
Street
Sign Street
Sign
Schuster Court s
Carriage Crossing Drive
N
Sea Mist Drive s
Brightmoor Ridge Road
N
Sea Mist Drive
N
Clam Bed Court
N*
Seeton Lane s
Candalon Way
Selma Burke Lane
N
George Clay Lane s
Shady Knoll Court s
Fernridge Lane
N
Shannon Bridge Lane s
Ashley Creek Drive
N
Shasta View Way s
Williams Station Road
Shrewsbury Lane s
Gateshead Lane
N
Somersby Lane s
Elizabeth Lane
N
Somersby Lane
N
Leighton Court s
Somersby Lane
N
Sandymead Lane s
Somersby Lane
N
Stanhope Lane s
Sonoma Court
N
Brandywine Drive
N
Springwater Drive s
Creekside Drive
N
Springwater Drive
N
Mareshead Lane s
Springwater Drive s
Idlewild Road
N
Stanhope Road s
Somersby Lane
N
Stanhope Road
N
Mangione Drive s
Stanhope Road
N
Manicott Drive s
Stanhope Road
N
Ilsemont Place s
Stevens Ridge Road s
Penderlea Lane
37
Stonehedge Court s
Buclcton Lane s
Strathaven Drive s
Heathershire Lane
N
Strathaven Drive
N
Fraserburg Drive s
Stratford Woods Drive
N
Plum Ridge Court s
Stratford Woods Drive
N
Wyndmere Hills Lane s
Stratford Woods Drive
N
Sycamore Knoll Court s
Stratfordshire Lane s
Charing Cross Lane
N
Stratfordshire Lane
N
Lynderhill Lane s
2-way, Lynderhill
Street
Sign
Street
Notes
Stratfordshire Lane
N
Trafalgar Place s
2-way. Trafalgar
Streatley Lane
s
Honey Creek Lane
Summerland Drive
s
Woodbend Drive s
N
Bentcreek Lane s
Sununerland Drive
Sunnyview Circle s
Crescent Knoll Lane s
3-way, 3000 block Cres. Knoll
Sunnyview Circle
N
Ezra Court
N*
Smmyview Circle
N
Treasure Hill Court
N*
Smmyview Circle s
Crescent Knoll Lane
N
1100 block Crescent Knoll
Swaim Drive s
Matthews-Mint Hill Rd
N
Sweet Bay Lane s
Honey Creek Lane
N
Sweet Gum Lane s
Firewood Drive s
2-way on Sweetgum
Sycamore Knoll Court s
Stratford Woods Court
N
Taconic Place s
Rockwell View Road
Tadlock Place
N
NewTown Road s
Talbot Court s
Whitefriars Lane
N
Tall Pine Lane s
Reid Harkey Road
N
Tall Pines Lane s
Phillips Road
Tanfield Drive s
Annecy Drive
N
Tanfield Drive s
Rice Road
N
2-way on Tanfield Drive
Tanfield Drive
N
Hadley Court s
Tensing Court s
Cross Point Road
N
Terra Glen Court s
Ridgebury Terrace
N
Thornblade Ridge Drive s
Patten Hill Drive
Thornsby Lane s
Sandymead Road
N
Thornsby Lane
N
Longbridge Drive s
38
Tilbury Trail Court s
Thornblade Ridge Drive
Tillot Drive
N
Benton Woods Drive s
Tillot Drive s
Bradwyck Court
N
Timber Knoll Drive s
Matthews Estates Road
Tom's Farm Road s
Windrow Wood Court
Street
Sign
Str·eet
Sign
Notes
Torino Drive s
Hallmark Drive
N
Tracelake Drive s
Idlewild Road
N
Tracelake Drive s
Saddletr·ee Court s
Tracelake Drive s
Windrow Lane
N
Trafalgar Place s
Str·atfordshire Lane
N
2-way, Trafalgar
Trail Ridge Road
N*
Enid Lane
N
Trail Ridge Road
N
Leeswood Lane s
2-way, Leeswood
Trail Ridge Road
N
Riddick Place s
Tranquil Cove Court s
Brightrnoor Drive
N
Treasure Hill Court
N*
Sunnyview Circle
N
Triple Crown Court s
Ponnnell Lane
N
Tynecastle Lane s
Heathershire Lane
N
Tynecastle Lane
N
Clearkirk Court s
Tynecastle Lane
N
Fitzpatrick Lane s
Umi Court s
Brightwood Lane
N
Vaughn Road s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Vine Arden Road s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Vinecrest Drive s
Markwell Drive
N
Vinecrest Drive
N
Deer Creek Drive s
Wabada Drive s
River Banks Road
Wagon Hill Road s
Hinson Drive
N
Wainsley Place s
Fredricksburg Road
N
Walnut Knoll Drive s
Holly Ridge Drive
N
Walnut Point Drive
N
Southern Cross Lane
N*
Walnut Point Drive
N
Bramwell Place
N*
Walnut Point Drive
N
Hampden Place s
Walnut Point Drive
N
Linville Drive s
39
Walnut Point Drive
N
Laurel Fork Drive s
Walnut Point Drive
N
Port Royal Drive s
Walnut Point Drive
N
Eastville Court s
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Walnut Point Drive s
Foxfield Lane
N
Wardlow Court s
Neil Ridge Road
N
Weeping Willow Lane s
Crescent Knoll Drive
N
Wester Ross Court s
Kirkholm Drive
N
Whirlaway Court s
Hackamore Drive
N
Whisper Ridge Lane s
Chesswood Lane
N
Whispering Springs Dr s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Whispering Springs Dr
N
Charcoal Ridge Court s
White Friars Lane s
South Trade Street
N
White Friars Lane
N
Bydeford Court s
White Friars Lane
N
Talbot Court s
White Friars Lane
N
Evian Lane s
2-way, Evian
White Friars Lane s
Gateshead Lane
N
Wickerby Court s
Pleasant Plains
Wilcrest Drive s
Country Place Drive
N
900 blk. Country Place
Wilcrest Drive
N
Wabada Drive s
Wilcrest Drive s
Country Place Drive
N
1100 blk. Country Place
Williams Road s
Ludman Way
Williams Road s
Rice Road
Williams Station Road s
Williams Road
N
Williams Station Road s
Cross Tie Lane
N
Williamstown Road s
Greylock Ridge Road
Williamstown Road s
Rockwell View Road
Willowdale Lane s
Chesswood Lane
N
Winding Trail Road s
Phillips Road
N
Windrow Lane s
Idlewild Road
N
Windrow Lane
N
Trace1ake Drive s
Windrow Lane s
Capriole Court s
4-way
Windrow Lane s
Andulusion Drive s
3-way
40
Windsor Chase Drive s
Williams Road
N
Sh·eet
Sign
Notes
Windsor Crossing Drive s
Windsor Square Drive
N
Windsor Glade Drive s
Rice Road
N
Windsor Meadow Lane s
Windsor Glade Drive
N
Windsor Square Drive s
Northeast Parkway s
3-way
Windsor Square Drive
N
Windsor Crossing Drive s
Windsor Square Drive s
Independence Pointe Parkway
N
Windy Hill Lane s
Hunters Bluff Drive
N
Windy Hill Lane
N
Harefield Lane
c<
.:>
Wineberry Court s
Brightmoor Drive
N
Winterbrooke Drive s
Weddington Road
N
Winterbrooke Drive
N
Oxborough Drive s
2300 blk. Winterbrooke Drive
Winterbrooke Drive
N
Cross Point Road s
Winterbrooke Drive
N
Chesson Court s
Winterbrooke Drive
N
Oxborough Drive s
2500 bllc. Winterbrooke Drive
Winter Wood Drive s
Lightwood Drive
N
Winter Wood Drive
N
Blossom Wood Court s
Winter Wood Drive
N
Darkwood Court s
Winter Wood Drive s
Falkenburg Court s
Winter Wood Drive
N
Bloom Wood Lane s
Winter Wood Drive
N
Kalewood Drive s
Winter Wood Drive s
Forest Wood Drive
N
Woodbend Drive s
Rice Road
N
Woodbend Drive
N
Laurelwood Drive s
Woodbend Drive
N
Bayleaf Court s
Woodbend Drive
N
Summerland Drive s
Woodbend Drive
N
Firewood Drive s
2-way on Firewood Drive
Woodbend Drive
N
Pinewood Hill Drive s
Woodbend Drive
N
Pearwood Court s
Woody Creek Road
N
Chesney Glen Drive s
Woody Creek Road
N
Canterfield Lane s
Wyndmere Hills Lane s
Reverdy Lane
N
41
Street
Sign
Street
Sign
Notes
Wyndmere Hills Lane s
Stratford Woods Road
N
Zelda Lane s
Idlewild Road
N
Zelda Lane
N
Chipwood Lane
N*
(Ord. No. 941, passed 12-8-97; Ord. 955, passed 3-9-98; Ord. 979, passed 5-26-98; Ord. 981, passed 6-8-98; Ord. No.
1084, passed 1-10-00; Ord. No. 1118, passed 6-26-00; Ord. No. 1119, passed 6-26-00; Ord. No. 1125, passed 7-10-00;
Ord. No. 1132, passed 8-28-00; Ord. No. 1163, passed 5-14-01; Ord. No. 1170, passed 5-29-01; Ord. No. 1216, passed
6-10-02; Ord. No. 1217, passed 6-24-02; Ord. No. 1273, passed 2-24-03; Ord. No. 1309, passed 0-23-03; Ord. No.
1340, passed 3-22-04; Ord. No. 1349, passed 4-26-04; Ord. No. 1350, passed 5-10-04; Ord. No. 1357, passed 5-24-04;
Ord. No. 1406, passed 1-24-05; Ord. No. 1495, passed 5-22-06; Ord. No. 1507, passed 7-24-06; Ord. No. 1542, passed
3-12-07; Ord. No. 1558, passed 5-23-07; Ord. No. 1574, passed 6-25-07; Ord. No. 1605, passed 12-10-07; Ord. No.
1612, passed 2-25-08; Ord. No. 1617, passed 4-14-08; Ord. No. 1625, passed 8-11-08; Ord. No. 1691, passed 6-8-09;
Ord. No. 1696, passed 8-10-0; Ord. No. 1702, passed 9-14-09; Ord. No. 1703, passed 9-14-09; Ord No. 1719, passed
2-8-10) Ord. No. 1796, passed 4-25-11; Ord. No. 1828, passed 11-14-11; Ord. No. 1848, passed 1-9-12)
SCHEDULE IV: TRAFFIC MOVEMENT PROHIBITED
(A) Left turns from West Charles Str·eet onto Trade Street are hereby prohibited between the hours of 4 p.m. and 6
p.m. Monday through Friday. (Ord. No. 1212, passed 1-28-02)
(B) It shall be unlawful for anyone operating a motor vehicle to turn left from Team Road onto Matthews Township
Parkway. (Ord. No. 1496, passed 5-22-06)
(C) No right turn on red between 6:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. at the intersection on Fullwood Lane and South Trade
Street (SR# 3448). (Ord. No. 1504, passed 7-10-06)
(D) Left turn traffic movement off of Pleasant Plains Road onto Marque Place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00a.m. is hereby prohibited. (Ord. No. 1740, passed 7-12-10)
(E) U-turn traffic movement is hereby prohibited in the northerly direction traffic lane on Matthews-Mint Hill Road at
its intersection with Brandywine Drive. (Ord. No. 1741, passed 7-12-10)
1
Chapter 74. Parking Schedules
Section
I. Parking prohibited
II. Parking restricted
SCHEDULE 1: PARKING PROHIBITED.
(A) Parking or standing of vehicles shall be prohibited as indicated in the schedule below:
Street
Location
Side
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Ames Street
Between intersection of West John and
Ames to the intersection of East Matthews
and Ames
Brightwood Lane
Beginning at intersection of Brightwood
Lane and Elizabeth Lane and moving in a
westerly direction for 150 feet.
Both
1128
8-14-00
Charles Street
On the northerly side of West Charles
between its intersection with North Ames to
a point 600 feet west of North Ames and on
the southerly side of West Charles from its
intersection with North Ames to a point
approximately 50 feet west of North Ames
1611
2-25-08
Council Place
Prohibited between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
except in the cul-de-sac bulb, where parking
is prohibited at all times.
Both
1784
1-24-11
Country Place Drive
Parking prohibited on both sides of Country
Place Drive from S. Trade Street to Wilcrest
Drive
North
636;
amended by
Ord. 1850
9-11-90
1-23-12
Elizabeth Lane
Between 300 feet south of the intersection
with Brightwood Lane and
Pineville-Matthews Road (NC51)
Both
1827
11-14-11
Gin Alley
Both
475
2-8-88
Jill Lane
East
1850
1-23-12
Kimway Drive
Its entire length between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. Monday through Friday
Both
1066
7-26-99
Library Lane
Both
475
2-8-88
Matthews Street
Between Freemont and Ames Street
North
1375
8-9-04
2
Matthews Estates
Road
Parking is prohibited within the greenway
access drives located at Matthews
Estates Road and at South Trade Street
Both
1813,
amended by
Ord. 1850
7-11-11
1-23-12
Matthews Station St.
West side fromMatthews-Mint Hill Road to
the Town Square
West
1494
5-22-06
Sadie Drive
Between South Trade Street and Park
Square Drive
North
1392
11-22-04
(B) Town officials are hereby authorized to post signs to indicate prohibited parking. ('72 Code, § 21A-1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE II: PARKING RESTRICTED.
(A) Parking or standing of vehicles shall be restricted as indicated in the schedule below:
Street
Location
Side
Time Limit
Ord. No.
Date Passed
Ames Street
First 16 parking spaces on east side
south of the intersection with West
Charles Street
East
Two hours
Monday thru
Friday, 8:00
a.m. until
6:00 p.m.
1653
11-20-08
Charles Street (East)
Between Cotton Gin Alley and North
Trade
Both
.Three hours
Monday thru
Friday, 8:00
a.m. until
6:00 p.m.
1653
11-10-08
Charles Street (West)
Between Library Lane and North
Trade Street
Both
Three hours
Monday thru
Friday, 8:00
a.m. until
6:00 p.m.
1653
11-10-08
Independence Point
Parkway
South side from its intersection of
Sam Newell to a point 625 east
South
24 hours
1407
1-24-05
Matthews Station
Street
See below
1751
9-13-10
Public easement area
(aka CSX lot)
North of the railroad tracks and
located immediately to the east of
Trade Street, area designated as a
public parking area
Both
24 hours
906
8-26-96
Public parking lot
(aka CSX lot)
Off westerly boundary of North
Trade adjacent to railroad, excluding
two handicapped parking spaces
Permit only
1653
11-10-08
3
Trade Street
Between John Street and Matthews
Street
Both
Two hours
Monday thru
Friday, 8:00
a.m. until
6:00 p.m.
Parking Schedules
Matthews Station Street:
Parking is restricted to a thirty (30) minute time limit on the four (4) parking spaces on the north side of Matthews
Station Street and west of the handicap space in front of the Main Street building and, additionally, the four (4) parking
spaces on the south side of Matthews Station directly west of the mid-block bump-out and crosswalk.
Parking is restricted to a two (2) hour limit for the five (5) parking spaces to the south of Jill Lane where it dead ends;
the twenty-four (q4) space lot west of the Main Street building and north of Matthews Station Street; the four (4)
western most and the sixteen (16) eastern most spaces on the north side of Matthews Station Street and the nine (9)
western most and ten (10) eastern most spaces on the south side of Matthews Station Street; the eight (8) spaces
directly to the west of the Historic Train Depot along Depot Lane; the four (4) spaces in front of the caboose south of
the Town Green; the twenty two (22) spaces adjacent to and surrounding the Town Green; and the eleven (11)
spaces directly in front of and to the west of the Town Hall/Library. (Ord. No. 1751, passed 9-13-10)
(B) Town officials are hereby authorized to post signs to indicate restrictions. ('72 Code, § 21A-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
1
Chapter 75. Traffic Control Photographic Systems
Section
75.01 Definitions
75.02 General
75.03 Offense
75.04 Penalty
75.05 Appeals
§75.01 DEFINITIONS.
Traffic control photographic system is an electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera
and a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control and to automatically produce
photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control.
In operation means operating in good working condition.
System location is the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is
directed and is in operation.
Vehicle owner is the person identified by the North Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles as the registered owner of a
vehicle.
§75.02 GENERAL
(A) The Town of Matthews Police Department shall administer the Traffic Control Photographic Program and shall
maintain a list of system locations where traffic control photographic systems are installed.
(B) Any citation for a violation of G.S. 20-158 issued by an officer of the Matthews Police Department at a system
location shall be treated in the same manner as prescribed in this Chapter.
(C) The citation shall clearly state the manner in which the violation may be appealed. The citation shall be
processed by officials or agents of the Town of Matthews and shall be forwarded by personal service or first-class
mail to the owner’s address as given on the motor vehicle registration.
§75.03 OFFENSE
(A) It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a system location when the traffic signal for that
vehicle’s direction of travel is emitting a steady red light, or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation
specified in G.S. 20-158.
(B) The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation under this section, except when he can provide
evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of another person at the time of the violation, as
2
described in subsection (C).
(C) Notwithstanding subsection (B), the owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, within
21 days after notification of the violation, he furnishes the officials or the agents of the Town:
1. The name and address of the person or entity who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody and
control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; or
2. An affidavit by himstating that, at the time of the violation, the vehicle involved was stolen or was in the care,
custody or control of some person who did not have his permission to use the vehicle.
§75.04 PENALTY
Any violation of Section 75.03(A) shall be deemed a non- criminal violation for which a civil penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00) shall be assessed, and for which no points authorized by G.S. 20-16(C) shall be assigned to the owner or
driver of the vehicle. Failure to pay the civil penalty or file an appeal within twenty-one (21) days after notification
of the violation shall result in an additional penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). The Town may establish procedures for
the collection of the civil penalties and may enforce the penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt.
§75.05 APPEALS
A notice of appeal shall be filed within twenty-one (21) days after notification of the violation. The failure to give
notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the citation. Appeals shall be
heard through an administrative process established by the Town of Matthews Police Department. An individual
desiring a hearing must post a bond equal to the amount of the civil penalty before an appeal hearing will be
scheduled. The hearing officer’s decision is subject to review in the Superior Court of Mecklenburg County by
proceedings in the “nature of certiorari”. (Ord. No. 1087, passed 2-8-00)
1
Chapter 76. Valet Parking
Section
76.01 Permit required
76.02 Definitions
76.03 Application requirements
76.04 Certificate of Insurance required
76.05 Permit approval and renewal
76.06 Permit approval criteria
76.07 Temporary suspension
76.08 No rights established
76.09 Violations, enforcement, and appeals
§76.01 PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to provide, on a continuing basis, a valet parking service which uses
public right-of-way for public or private parking spaces either for pick-up, delivery or storage of automobiles without
first obtaining a valet parking permit pursuant to these regulations. The occasional provision of a valet parking
service, when it occurs no more than once in 6 months for no longer than 3 sequential days, shall not be required to
obtain a permit.
Valet parking shall only be operated within a designated valet parking zone.
The Town reserves the right to approve appropriate street locations and times for the operation of valet parking
services for each valet permittee as applications are reviewed for approval. The Town reserves the right to add,
modify or eliminate street locations and times at annual permit renewals in order to protect pedestrian traffic and
improve conditions for the flow of motor vehicular traffic and/or to accommodate changes in land uses at or near
parking space locations, both public and private.
§76.02 DEFINITIONS
A. Permit means the Town of Matthews written authorization granted to a person or company to conduct a valet
parking service. Permits shall be issued annually and shall run concurrent with a calendar year.
B. Valet operator means (a) a person whose business is served by valet parking service, (b) a person who provides
valet parking service, and/or participates in the provision of, valet parking service.
C. Valet parking service means accepting possession of a vehicle on the right-of-way for the purpose of parking the
vehicle for the operator or retrieving a parked vehicle and returning it to the operator on the right-of-way, regardless
of whether a fee is charged
§76.03 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail and/or website address, where appropriate, of the business to be
2
served by the valet parking service and, if separate from the business to be served, the same information about the
owner/operator of the valet parking service.
B. A written justification of the need for valet parking service by the business to be served.
C. A scale drawing of the location and limits of the proposed valet parking service activities, including an
identification of any on-street parking space or loading zones that could be affected by the activities. A traffic plan
must be included specifying parking spaces to be used as customer drop-off/pick-up location, and detailing routes to
be followed between pick-up and delivery zones and storage area(s).
D. An operation plan that includes the days and times when valet parking services may be provided.
E. A description of any temporary, portable sign or stand proposed to be used by the valet parking service to indicate
the client drop-off and delivery zones, along with a site map showing proposed placement and how it will not
interfere with driver visibility.
F. Any other information reasonably required by the Town Board of Commissioners.
§76.04 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE REQUIRED. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation, and
no person shall operate a valet parking service unless and until there is in full force and effect a motor vehicle
liability insurance policy insuring such owner and each employee thereof, and unless and until such owner shall file
with the Town Clerk a written certificate of insurance showing that the policy or policies are in effect and that they
cannot be cancelled without 30-day written notice to the Town Clerk. The policy shall have coverage limits of not
less than $1,000,000 for death or injury in any 1 occurrence, and property damage coverage of not less than
$100,000.
§76.05 PERMIT APPROVAL AND RENEWAL
The initial permit approval shall be valid through the end of the current calendar year or through the end of the
following calendar year when initial application is submitted after September 01 of any given year. Valet parking
service permits shall be renewed annually. At the time of renewal, either the permit holder and/or the Town Board
may request and consider changes to: the times/days when valet service is provided; the drop-off, delivery and
storage locations; the route to be used by the valet operator between locations; and any other criteria that may be
pertinent. When renewal application is submitted without change, and Town Board does not request any change,
then a new permit shall be issued for the ensuing year without a hearing. Renewal shall be submitted by October 15
of any year for the following calendar year.
§76.06 PERMIT APPROVAL CRITERIA
The Town Board of Commissioners shall issue or deny a valet parking permit taking into consideration the following
factors:
A. Whether the application is complete;
B. Whether there are additional date the Board of Commissioners determines they need prior to final determination
on issuing a permit;
C. The extent to which the valet parking service might unreasonably disrupt the flow of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic;
3
D. The extent to which the valet parking might unreasonably interfere with on-street parking;
E. The proximity of traditional on-street and off-street parking to the business to be served by the valet parking
service; and
F. The proximity and relationship to any other valet parking service.
§76.07 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION
The Town may temporarily suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter when warranted by traffic conditions or
anticipated traffic conditions.
§76.08 NO RIGHTS ESTABLISHED
Nothing in this article is intended to establish any legal right to provide a valet parking service or any legal property
interest in a valet parking permit or any legal right to restrict the use of any public parking spaces identified in the
permit.
§76.09 VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
A. Violations: It shall be unlawful for a valet operator to provide or engage in a valet parking service without a valid
permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, except for an occasional services as listed in 76.01 above. It shall be unlawful
for a valet operator to stop or direct traffic on a public right-of-way.
B. Enforcement: Any person who violates this Chapter shall be subject to suspension, revocation or modification of
their permit. Any person who operates a valet parking service without a permit shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$500.00 per day each day such violation occurs.
C. Appeals: the denial, modification, renovation or suspension of a valet parking permit, or the issuance of civil
penalties, may be appealed within 10 calendar days after notice of such action. Appeals shall be heard by the Town
Board of Commissioners at their next regularly scheduled meeting (Ord. No. 1760, passed 10-25-10)
1
Chapter 90. Abandoned and Junked Vehicles; Junk Removal
Section
Abandoned, Nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
90.15 Statutory authorization
90.16 Purpose
90.17 Administration and enforcement
90.18 Definitions
90.19 Abandoned vehicle prohibited; removal authorized
90.20 Nuisance vehicle prohibited; removal authorized
90.21 Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized
90.22 Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements
90.23 Exceptions to prior notice requirement
90.24 Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
90.25 Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle
90.26 Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
90.27 Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
90.28 Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
90.29 Protection against criminal or civil liability
90.30 Exceptions
90.31 Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
90.99 Penalty
ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 90.15 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Board of Commissioners of the town is authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-193, 160A-303, and 160A-303.2 to regulate,
restrain or prohibit abandoned, nuisance, and junked motor vehicles on public and private property within the town's
ordinance-making jurisdiction. ('72 Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.16 PURPOSE.
The Town finds it necessary and desirable to promote or enhance:
(A) The quality of urban attractiveness and aesthetic appearance of the town;
(B) The protection of property values throughout the town;
(C) The preservation of the liveability and attractiveness of neighborhoods;
(D) The promotion of tourism, conventions and other opportunities for economic development for the town;
2
(E) The attractiveness of the town's thoroughfares and commercial roads which present the primary, public
visibility to visitors and to passersby of the town; and
(F) The promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of occupants of property in the vicinity of
junked motor vehicles. ('72 Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.17 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
The Police Department and the Town Code Enforcement Officer (other public official) shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this subchapter.
(A) The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles
determined to be“abandoned” on the public streets and highways within the town, and on property owned by
the town. The Town Code Enforcement Officer (other public official) shall be responsible for administering
the removal and disposition of “abandoned”, “nuisance” or “junked motor vehicles” located on private
property.
(B) The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to
remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance
with this subchapter and applicable state laws.
(C) Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the
Town Police Department and Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
('72 Code, § 8-2-2) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.18 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an abandoned motor vehicle is one that:
(1) Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or
(2) Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days; or
(3) Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours; or
(4) Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two
hours.
AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department or the Town Code Enforcement
Officer (other public official), respectively, is designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of
this subchapter.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2 the term, JUNKED MOTOR
VEHICLE shall mean a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:
(1) Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
3
(2) Cannot be self propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or
(3) Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $500. (Ord. No. 17532, passed 9-13-10)
MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while
attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety
hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
(1) A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests; or
(2) A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height; or
(3) A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or
(4) A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials as
evidenced by odor; or
(5) One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods and
the like; or
(6) So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over; or
(7) One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible
matter of any kind; or
(8) One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or
(9) Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the Board of
Commissioners. ('72 Code, § 8-2-3) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.19 ABANDONED VEHICLE PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow
that vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined in § 90.18.
(B) Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned
vehicle and order the vehicle removed. ('72 Code, § 8-2-4) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.20 NUISANCE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the
owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
(B) Upon investigation, the Town Code Enforcement Officer (other public official) may determine and declare
that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined in § 90.18 and order the vehicle
removed. ('72 Code, § 8-2-5) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90) Penalty, see § 90.99
4
§ 90.21 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor
vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located
to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed.
(B) It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of
public or private property. Single, permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and
concealment requirements of this section.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle or for the
owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply
with the location requirements or the concealment requirements of this section.
(D) Subject to the provisions of division (E), upon investigation, the Town Code Enforcement Officer (other
public official) may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this subchapter after finding in
writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private
property owner. This finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against
the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community neighborhood or area appearance.
The following among other relevant factors may be considered:
(1) Protection of property values;
(2) Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
(3) Indirect protection of public health and safety;
(4) Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
(5) Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents.
(E) Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle:
(1)
(a) One junked motor vehicle. One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in
the rear yard as defined by the town's zoning ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is
entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by an
acceptable covering.
(b) The Town Code Enforcement Officer (other public official) has the authority to
determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this
provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate.
The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in the preamble of
this subchapter.
(2) More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a
garage or building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor
vehicle(s) cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A garage or building
structure means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected
pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in
accordance with all zoning and building code regulations. ('72 Code, § 8-2-6) (Ord. 640,
passed 10-24-90) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.22 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING
5
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Except as set forth in §90.23, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed
shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the
case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered
owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property
upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be
given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the name(s)
and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If those names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if
the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield
or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the
town on a specified date (no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the
vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed
or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
(B) With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to
which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove
the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the
case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such
appeal shall be made to the Board of Commissioners in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Board of Commissioners and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal
is heard and decided. ('72 Code, § 8-2-7) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.23 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as
determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt
action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. These
findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances
justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include:
(A) Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the Board of
Commissioners hereby determines that immediate removal of those vehicles may be warranted when they are:
(1) Obstructing traffic;
(2) Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking;
(3) Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
(4) Parked in loading zones;
(5) Parked in bus zones; or
(6) Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under other code sections.
(B) Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on townowned
property other than the streets and highways, and on private property, these vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for
prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of
limitation, these circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and
6
residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing
damage to public or private property. ('72 Code, § 8-2-8) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.24 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by
the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator of towing business contracting to
perform those services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official shall
immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, this notice to include the following:
(1) The description of the removed vehicle;
(2)The location where the vehicle is stored;
(3) The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
(4) The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
(5) The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal.
(B) The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the
owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through
(5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in
writing by the vehicle owner or his agent.
(C) If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not
registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the
vehicle.
(D) Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and that vehicle has no valid
registration or registration plates, the authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to
notify him of the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5) above. ('72 Code, § 8-2-9) (Ord. 640,
passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.25 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person
entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the
vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court
judge to receive those hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request,
and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11. ('72 Code, § 8-2-10) (Ord.
640, passed 10-24-90) (Ord. No. 1753, passed 9-13-10)
§ 90.26 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the
removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount
of those fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon
regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or
7
engage in further violations of this subchapter. ('72 Code, § 8-2-11) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.27 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to
possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition
of that vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in accordance with G.S. Chapter 44A, Article 1.
('72 Code, § 8-2-12) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.28 CONDITIONSON REMOVALOF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of that
property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed
by the town from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases
where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Town Code
Enforcement Officer (other public official). The town may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability
incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof. ('72 Code, § 8-2-13) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.29 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action by any owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of that vehicle as provided in this
subchapter. ('72 Code, § 8-2-14) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.30 EXCEPTIONS.
Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to any vehicle:
(A) Located in a bona fide “automobile graveyard” or “junkyard” as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance
with the “Junkyard Control Act”, G.S. § 136-141 et seq.;
(B) In an enclosed building;
(C) On the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is
necessary to the operation of the enterprise; or
(D) In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.
('72 Code, § 8-2-15) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the town any
vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this code unless and until all towing and impoundment
fees which are due, or bond in lieu of those fees, have been paid. ('72 Code, § 8-2-16) (Ord. 640, passed 10-24-90)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
8
(A) Any person found guilty of violating this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(B) Any person violating, failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any of the provisions of § 90.01 shall
be assessed a penalty of $10. Each and every day during which that violation continues, shall be a separate and
distinct offense. ('72 Code, § 8-1.1) (Ord. 11, passed 3-22-76)
Chapter 91A. Animals
Chapter 91A. Animals
Section
Article I. General Provisions
91A-1 Purpose
91A-2 Jurisdiction
91A-3 Definitions
91A-4 - 10 Reserved
Article II. Administration
91A-11 Administration and Duties
91A-12 Inspection, Interference, Concealment, Production
91A-13 Negligence Per Se
91A-14 - 20 Reserved
Article III. Restrictions & Prohibited Acts
91A-21 Abandoned Animals
91A-22 Abuse of Animals
91A-23 Animal Bite
91A-24 Animal Nuisances
91A-25 Harboring Stray Animals
91A-26 Injuring Animals
91A-27 Reckless Riding and Driving of Animal
91A-28 Restraint of Animals
91A-29 Aggression-Trained Dogs
91A-30 Guard Dogs
91A-31 Animals Prohibited at Town-Sponsored Events
91A-32 Exotic or Wild Animals and Reptiles
91A-33 Pet Shops
91A-33 - 40 Reserved
Article IV. Licensing & Permits
91A-41 License and Rabies Tags Required
91A-42 Permits for Fowl, Equine, Cloven Hoofed Animals, etc.
91A-43 Permit for Four or More Dogs or Cats
91A-44 Appeal of Denial or Revocation of Permit
91A-45 Nonresident Exceptions
91A-46 - 50 Reserved
Article V. Impoundment, Seizure/Forfeiture, Containment and Disposition of Animals
91A-51 Impoundment
91A-52 Seizure, Forfeiture, and Disposition of Animals
91A-53 General Seizure/Forfeiture Procedure
91A-53 Disposition of Impounded and Forfeited Animals
91A-54 Dangerous Animals Seizure / Forfeiture Procedures
91A-56 Preventive Measures for Containment of Animals
91A-57 Rabies Impoundment
91A-58 Reserved
1
Chapter 91A. Animals
Article VI. Services & Programs
91A-59 Rabies Clinics; Spay & Neuter Services
91A-60 Reserved
Article VII. Fees, Enforcement & Fines
91A-61 Fees & Fee Schedule
91A-62 Enforcement, Fines & Fine Schedule
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91A-1. PURPOSE
Pursuant to authority granted by the North Carolina General Assembly, this animal control chapter is enacted to
regulate, restrict or prohibit, if necessary, animals; to protect the public from unvaccinated, diseased, stray, roaming,
dangerous, wild or exotic animals; to make unlawful acts of animals that interfere with the enjoyment of property or the
peace and safety of the community; to protect animals from abuse or conditions harmful to their well-being; to operate
an animal shelter; and to carry out any other lawful duties authorized by state laws and applicable ordinances.
The Matthews Board of Commissioners hereby finds that animals kept or allowed to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter are detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Matthews and
jeopardize the peace and dignity of the Town.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent Matthews Police Officers, or any law enforcement officers having
proper authority, from enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter or from exercising their authority as law
enforcement officers.
§ 91A-2. JURISDICTION
This chapter shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the Town. No employee of the Animal Control Division
shall have the authority to enforce provisions of this chapter within any other corporate limits or jurisdictions, unless an
Interlocal Agreement pursuant to G.S. Section 160A-460 et. seq. is executed by the Town and the incorporated
municipality. Such an Interlocal Agreement may be entered into at any time, providing the appropriate resolution is
adopted by the governing body of any such municipality agreeing that this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal
Control Officers, as defined below, within the corporate limits or jurisdiction of the Town.
§ 91A-3. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set out below,
unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
Adequate Shelter: An enclosed area accessible by an animal, of sufficient size and nature so as to provide the animal
with reasonable protection from adverse weather conditions.
Aggression-trained dog: Any dog that has been trained or conditioned, to any extent, to bite, attack or exhibit
aggressive behavior toward humans or other domestic animals for any purpose, including, but not limited to, the
security of business property or personal security.
Aggression-training facility: Any person, group of persons, firm, organization, association, partnership, syndicate or
corporation that schools, trains or conditions canines to bite, attack or exhibit aggressive behavior toward humans or
other domestic animals for any purpose, including, but not limited to, the security of business property or personal
security.
Animal: Every nonhuman, animate being that is endowed with the power of voluntary motion including, but not
limited to, dogs, cats, livestock and other mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish.
2
Chapter 91A. Animals
Animal Control Officers: Persons properly appointed by the Town to enforce all sections of this chapter and
applicable state laws and who are responsible for discharging other duties and functions as may be prescribed by the
Board of Commissioners and as set forward by this or any other applicable ordinance or state law or pursuant to
Interlocal Agreements cited in section §91A-2.
Cat: A domestic feline of either sex.
Chief of Police: The Chief of Police for the Town of Matthews, or his/her designee.
City: The City of Charlotte, North Carolina.
CMPD: Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department.
CMAC: Charlotte-Mecklenburg Animal Control or the shelter operated by CMAC.
Code: Matthews Town Code
Computation of time: In computing any period of time, all calendar days shall be counted unless other was designated
in any order or other document.
County Rabies Ordinance: The Mecklenburg County Ordinance for the Control of Rabies and Other Zoonoses.
Dangerous: Any animal whose behavior, temperament, size, or any combination thereof, when considered under the
totality of the circumstances, including the nature of the surrounding area, constitutes a reasonable risk of injuring a
human or animal or damaging personal or real property. That behavior includes, but is not limited to, an animal's biting
or attacking or attempting to attack a human or another animal. However, this definition shall not apply to any animal
that has been subject to provocation or if the victim has been trespassing, as defined herein, upon the animal owner's
premises.
Dog: A domestic canine of either sex.
Domesticated: Those species of animals that are indigenous to Matthews and normally and customarily share human
habitat in Matthews and are normally dependent on humans for food and shelter in Matthews, such as, but not limited
to, dogs, cats, cattle, horses, swine, fowl, sheep and goats.
Equine: Any horse, pony, mule, donkey or hinny.
Exotic or wild animal: An animal that would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one that would ordinarily be found in
the wilderness of this or any other country or one that is a species of animal not indigenous to the United States or to
North America, or one that otherwise is likely to cause a reasonable person to be fearful of significant destruction of
property or of bodily harm and the latter includes but is not limited to: monkeys, raccoons, squirrels, ocelots, bobcats,
wolves, hybrid wolves, venomous reptiles, and other such animals. Such animals are further defined as those mammals
or non-venomous reptiles weighing over fifty (50) pounds at maturity, which are known at law as ferae naturae. Exotic
or wild animals specifically do not include animals of a species customarily used in North Carolina as ordinary
household pets, animals of a species customarily used in North Carolina as domestic farm animals, fish confined in an
aquarium other than piranha, birds, or insects.
Exposure: Any contact with a human by an animal, to include biting, scratching, or the transfer of the animal’s bodily
fluids.
Exposure to Rabies: An Exposure to any animal or human by an animal known or suspected to be infected with rabies.
Guard Dogs: Dogs primarily kept for the purpose of protecting premises from intruders or for the purpose of attacking
a person coming in the vicinity of the dog.
Harboring an animal: An animal shall be deemed harbored if it is fed or sheltered for at least seven days, unless the
animal is being boarded for a fee.
Health Director: The director of the Mecklenburg County Health Department.
3
Chapter 91A. Animals
Impounded: Any animal that is received into custody by any employee of the Matthews Animal Control or CMAC.
Inoculation: The vaccination of a dog or cat with anti-rabic vaccine approved by the United States Division of Animal
Industry, the North Carolina Department of Agriculture and the State Board of Health at such time or times as shall be
required by the Board of Health and/or the local Health Director, as defined in Section 106-364(2) of the General
Statutes of North Carolina or as amended thereafter.
Livestock: All animals of a domesticated, agricultural nature including but not limited to: equine animals, bovine
animals, sheep, goats, llamas, and swine.
MAC: Matthews Animal Control, A Division of the Matthews Police Department.
MPD: Matthews Police Department
Neutered male: Any male dog or cat that has been rendered sterile by a surgical procedure (orchiectomy).
Owner: Any person, group of persons, firm, organization, association, society, club, lodge, partnership, syndicate,
trustee or corporation owning, keeping, having charge of sheltering, feeding, harboring or taking care of any animal for
seven or more consecutive days, unless the animal is boarded for a fee. If a commercial kennel is involved for breeding,
then ownership shall be indicated by the kennel operator by showing the registration of the animal in the name of the
actual owner of the animal.
Pasture: An auxiliary fenced area with sufficient grass for grazing.
Premises: A definite portion of real estate, including land with its appurtenances, a building or part of a building.
Provocation: Any act done toward an animal that a reasonable person would expect to irritate or enrage such an
animal to the extent that the animal would be likely to bite or attack. Including, but not limited to, teasing, harassing,
beating, torturing, injuring, or intentionally causing pain to an animal. Provocation shall not include any actions on the
part of an individual that pertain to reasonable efforts of self-defense or defense of others.
Security Dogs: For the purposes of this chapter, security dogs shall be synonymous with guard dogs.
Shelter: Any facility designated by the Town for the purpose of sheltering any animal lawfully impounded by
Matthews Animal Control or CMAC.
Spayed female: A female dog or cat that has been rendered sterile by surgical means (ovariohysterectomy).
Town: Town of Matthews.
Trespass: The wrongful or legally unauthorized entrance onto or invasion of the property of an animal owner or lawful
possessor. The cause of the individual to be on the property and any other relevant circumstances shall be considered in
order to determine whether or not a trespass has occurred. A child under the age of seven (7) shall not be deemed to be
a trespasser.
Zoonoses: Diseases caused by infectious agents that can be transmitted between (or are shared by) animals and
humans.
§ 91A-4 - 91A-10 RESERVED
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
§ 91A-11. DUTIES
The Matthews Animal Control Division, a Division of the Matthews Police Department, is created by the Board of
Commissioners and operates under the direction of the Chief of Police.
(A) Duties. The Animal Control Division shall be charged with the responsibilities of:
4
Chapter 91A. Animals
(1) Enforcing and carrying out the provisions of this chapter, any other Town ordinance assigning animal
control duties, and all relevant state laws.
(2) Protecting animals from neglect and / or abuse.
(3) Making canvasses, including of homes and any businesses utilizing guard or security dogs, for the
purpose of ascertaining that all dogs, cats and equine animals are properly licensed, if required; that all dogs
and cats are currently vaccinated against rabies;
(4) Investigating general complaints regarding animals controlled by this chapter.
(5) Enforcing the laws with regard to the vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies and enforcement of the
county rabies ordinance. As the Mecklenburg County Ordinance for the Control of Rabies and other
Zoonoses declares that the Health Director is responsible for county programs to monitor and control rabies
and other zoonotic diseases, MAC shall investigate all reported animal bites or other human physical contact
of the suspected rabid animal, ensure enforcement of quarantine of any animal involved, and submit bite
reports and reports of human contacts to the Health Director.
(6) Supervising any Town facility for the sheltering of animals and coordinating sheltering with CMAC.
(B) Uniform. Every employee of the Division, while performing their official duties, shall wear a uniform or
display sufficient identification such that he/she is clearly recognized as a member of MAC.
(C) Weapons. While acting with weapons in their official capacity, employees of the Division shall be exempt
from any Town Code provision otherwise requiring permits or Town Board approval
§ 91A-12. INSPECTIONS; INTERFERENCE; CONCEALMENT; PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTATION
(A) Inspections. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this chapter, or other
applicable law, or whenever an employee of the Division has probable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises any violation of this chapter or other applicable law, the employees of the Division
are empowered to enter and inspect such property at any reasonable time and perform any duty imposed upon them
by this chapter or other applicable law, but only if the consent of the occupant or owner of the property is freely
given, or an administrative search warrant or criminal search warrant is obtained, or if legally recognized exigent
circumstances exist. Any attempt to enter private property pursuant to this section shall be conducted as follows.
(1) If such property is occupied, the employee of the Division shall first present credentials to the occupant
and request entry, explaining the reasons therefore; or
(2) If such property is unoccupied, the employee of the Division shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other persons having control of the property, then present proper credentials and request entry,
explaining the reasons therefore; or
(3) If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having control or charge
of the property cannot be found after due diligence, an employee of the Division may obtain an appropriate
warrant to conduct a search, or inspection of the property or seizure on the property, or may act under a
legally recognized exigent circumstance if such exists.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employee of the Division shall have the authority to enter
upon any land to enforce the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law if a violation of such law is being
committed in the presence of the employee and such entrance is otherwise consistent with the Constitution of the
United States; such entry upon private property shall not be deemed to be a trespass.
(B) Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, molest, resist or obstruct employees
of the Division while they are carrying out any duty created under this chapter or other applicable law.
(C) Concealment of animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal, for the purpose of evading the licensing
requirement, permit requirement or rabies inoculation requirement of this chapter or any applicable chapter, any un
licensed, non-inoculated or non-permitted animals from any employee of the Division.
5
Chapter 91A. Animals
(D) Production of license, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show proof of a license, permit or a
rabies inoculation to any employee of the Division upon request.
§ 91A-13. NEGLIGENCE PER SE
(A) Public Duty: This section is included in this chapter in order to impose a public duty upon persons having
possession of animals to prevent those animals from attacking another person due to a possible violation of the
following code sections:
91A-28 Restraint of animals.
91A-29 Aggression-trained dogs.
91A-32 Exotic or wild animals.
91A-56 Protective measures for containment of animals; (failing to comply with instructions to impose
preventive measures).
Such persons having possession of animals subject to these sections have imposed upon them a public duty
designed to promote the safety of other persons; and a violation of any of those provisions is negligence per se and
could give rise to the recovery of damages for personal injuries in a civil action by an injured person against the
person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of the animal causing said injuries.
§91A-14 – 91A-20 RESERVED
ARTICLE III. RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 91A-21. ABANDONED ANIMALS
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring an animal to negligently or
willfully abandon that animal.
(B) Abandoned Defined: For the purposes of this section, animals shall be considered abandoned when the totality
of the circumstances reasonably indicates that the owner, possessor, or harborer of the animal has negligently or
willfully ceased to provide basic necessities for the animal with the intention to no longer care for the animal.
§ 91A-22. ABUSE OF ANIMALS
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful if a person owning, possessing or harboring an animal to negligently or
willfully:
(1) Fails to provide adequate food and/or water for any animal they own, possess, or harbor; or
(2) Overworks or over drives any animal causing physical pain, suffering or death; or
(3) Beats, tortures, injures, torments, poisons or mutilates any animal causing physical pain, suffering or
death; or
(4) Fails to provide adequate medical attention for any sick, diseased or injured animal they own, possess, or
harbor; or
(5) Keeps any animal under unsanitary or inhumane conditions which are detrimental to the animal's health
and general welfare or fails to maintain a condition of good order and cleanliness which reduces the
probability of transmission of disease; or
(6) Teases, molests, or in any way bothers or harasses any animal; or
6
Chapter 91A. Animals
(7) Sets any rabbit, hare, raccoon or other such animal loose for the purpose of chasing, hunting or having a
race thereafter; or
(8) Promotes, stages, holds, manages, conducts, or attends any game, exhibition, contest, fight or combat
between one (1) or more animals or between animals and humans; or
(9) Fails to provide an adequate shelter for an animal they own, possess, harbor, or enclose, wherein the
animal can be protected from extremes of weather (heat, cold, rain, etc.) and allowed to remain dry and
comfortable during inclement weather; or
(10) Fails to provide sufficient shade, when sunlight is likely to cause overheating and discomfort, or fails to
allow all animals kept outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun; or
(11) Keeps animals outdoors without access to shelter to allow them to remain dry and comfortable during
inclement weather; or
(12) Transports any type of animal in a motor vehicle, or in a wagon or trailer pulled by a motor vehicle, or
in a truck or the back of a truck, without having such animal reasonably secured so as to prevent the animal
from leaping or being thrown from the vehicle or in such a way as to cause pain, suffering, unreasonable
discomfort or death to the animal; or
(13) Places or confines an animal or allows an animal to be placed or confined in a motor vehicle under such
conditions or for such a period of time as to endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to
temperature, lack of food or drink, or such other conditions as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering,
disability or death.
After making a reasonable effort to find the driver of a vehicle in which an animal is confined, an employee of the
Division, or a law enforcement officers having proper jurisdiction, may use the least intrusive means to break and
enter the vehicle if necessary to remove the animal where probable cause exists to believe that the animal is in the
vehicle in violation of this subsection. The officer removing the animal shall then impound it, and shall leave in a
prominent place on the motor vehicle a written notice of the animal's impoundment, a brief description of the
animal, and where and when the animal may be reclaimed.
(B) License / Permit Denied Due to Abuse Conviction. If, at the time of application for an animal license or permit
pursuant to this chapter, it is found that the applicant has been criminally convicted of violations of this section, or
of N.C.G.S. 14-360, 14-361, 14-361.1, 14-362 or 14-363, and that any two such convictions have both occurred
within the last previous (5) years preceding application, the animal license or permit request shall be refused. The
person shall be eligible to apply for an animal license permit five years after the date of the last criminal
conviction.
(C) Euthanizing exception. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Division or veterinarians from
euthanizing dangerous, unwanted, injured or diseased animals in a humane manner; nor to prohibit slaughterhouses
or medical facilities from the proper, humane and lawful carrying out of their activities or duties.
§ 91A-23. ANIMAL BITE
(A) Bite Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or harborer of an animal to negligently allow the
animal to bite a human being unless the animal has been subject to provocation, or unless the victim has been
trespassing, as defined in §91A-3 "Definitions."
(B) Non-Control Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for an animal that has bitten, attacked or threatened a human or
animal to remain at large.
(C) Reporting Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or harborer of an animal, or for the victim if
the victim is reasonably physically able, to fail to report to the Division or 911 as soon as possible that an animal
has bitten a person.
(D) Production Required: It shall be unlawful for any person knowing the location of such an animal to fail to
inform the Division of where the animal is located, and if the owner, possessor, or harborer has given the animal
7
Chapter 91A. Animals
away, or caused in any way the animal to be taken from their premises, to identify the location of the animal, if
known.
(E) Seizure Authorized: Animal Control Officers, or any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction, shall have the
authority to enter upon private property, including entry into a dwelling unit or other similar building, when the
Animal Control Officer has observed an animal which has committed the biting, attacking or threatening in
violation of this section; and such entry upon private property shall not be deemed to be a trespass. Such entry is
authorized so long as it is otherwise consistent with the North Carolina and United States Constitutions.
(F) Containment: In accordance with the Mecklenburg County Rabies Control Ordinance, any dog and cat that
bites or scratches a person shall be immediately confined for ten (10) days in a place designated by the Animal
Control Division or the Mecklenburg County Health Director. If the owner or the person, who controls or possesses
the dog or cat that has bitten a person, refuses to confine the animal as required by this section, the Chief of Police,
or the Health Director may order the seizure of the animal and its confinement for ten (10) days at the expense of
the owner. The disposition of an animal other than a dog or cat that bites a person shall be at the discretion of the
Health Director in consultation with the consulting veterinarian. If any animal is unclaimed after the ten-day
confinement, then the MAC may dispose of the animal, unless the MAC or CMAC receives instructions of a
different nature from the Health Department.
(G) Protective Measures: If the Division determines that a dog has bitten a human being, the Division shall have
the authority to require protective measures pursuant to § 91A-56 if deemed necessary. The Division shall have the
authority to require the owner to file with the Division signed, written affidavits, and receipts, where applicable,
affirming that any of the above measures have been and will continue to be complied with. Any breach in
compliance with such measures subjects the animal to seizure and forfeiture as provided in § 91A-53.
Ord. No. 1397; passed 11-22-04; effective 12-1-04; Ord. No. 1399; passed 12-13-04; (Chapter 91: Animals -
repealed in its entirety - Ordinance No. 1400; 12-13-04) Ord. No. 1484, passed 2-27-06)
§ 91A-24. ANIMAL NUISANCES
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain an animal in such a manner
as to constitute a public nuisance or a nuisance to neighbors. Such acts or conditions shall include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Having an animal that disturbs the rights of, threatens the safety of, or injures a member of the general
public or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of their property; or
(2) Permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to,
turning over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers or vegetables; or
(3) Maintaining animals in an environment of unsanitary conditions or lack of cleanliness which results in
offensive odor or is dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety, or a failure to maintain a condition of
good order and cleanliness which reduces the probability of transmission of disease; or
(4) Maintaining property that is offensive, annoying or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare of the
community because of the number, type, variety, density or location of the animals on the property; or
(5) Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl, crow, cackle, or cause noise in an excessive,
continuous or untimely fashion so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring
premises; or
(6) Maintaining an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the public health; or
(7) Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians,
joggers, dogs walked on a leash by owners, bicycles or vehicles; or
(8) Failing to confine a female dog or cat while in season in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner
that she cannot come into contact with another dog or creates a nuisance by attracting other animals; provided
this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed,
concealed area on the premises of the owner of an animal which is being bred; or
8
Chapter 91A. Animals
(9) Failing to remove feces deposited by a dog on any public street, sidewalk, gutter, park or other publicly
owned property or private property unless the owner of the property has given permission allowing such use
of the property. This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have charge, control or use of
guide dogs or persons using dogs in conjunction with activities of the Matthews Police Department.
§ 91A-25. HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, without the actual consent of the owner, to harbor, feed, keep
in possession by confinement or otherwise have any stray animal upon his/her property, unless he/she has, within
seventy two (72) hours of the time the animal came into his possession, notified the Animal Control Division.
Upon receiving such notice, the Division may seize the animal pursuant to section §91A-51.
(B) Failure to Surrender: It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender such an animal to an employee
of the Division upon demand.
(C) Feeding/Baiting Strays: It shall be unlawful for any person, group, club, business entities or their employees to
keep, harbor, maintain, or provide easy food access for stray, feral or otherwise wild dangerous animals on
residential or business property in the Town which may entice known “rabies carriers” into the area.
§ 91A-26. INJURING ANIMALS
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally strike an animal with an automobile or other
vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person injuring or killing a domestic animal by striking it with an automobile or other
vehicle to fail to notify the owner of said animal, if identification of the animal is available, or the Division if no
identification is possible. Notification may be made through the Matthews Police Department.
§ 91A-27. RECKLESS RIDING AND/OR DRIVING OF ANIMAL
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to run, drive or ride any animal in a reckless, disorderly or
careless manner through any street, alley or highway.
(B) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven through any street or highway any
loose or un-haltered horse, mule, cow or other livestock; nor shall the keeper of any such animal knowingly permit
any loose horse, mule or cow to be driven from his property onto streets, alleys or highways.
§ 91A-28. RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS
(A) Physical Restraint of Animal. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody
or control of any animal, excluding cats, to keep such on his own premises or off the premises, unless such animal
is under sufficient physical restraint, such as a leash, cage, bridle or similar effective device which restrains and
controls the animal, or within a vehicle or adequately contained by a fence on the premises or other secure
enclosure. If the physical restraint used is a leash, bridle, or other device requiring a person to control the animal,
then the person using such restraint must be of sufficient age and physical size or ability to reasonably restrain the
animal.
(B) Restraint by ‘Invisible Fence’: If the secure enclosure is an effective, working invisible fence, then there must
be a visible, permanent signs on the premises stating that there is an invisible fence. If an animal escapes from an
invisible fence then the Animal Control Division may order further current methods as specified in § 91A-56.
(C) Adult With Animal on Premises. If a responsible adult is physically outdoors, and immediately adjacent to the
animal, on the land where the owner of the animal resides, and the animal is under the person's direct control and is
obedient to that person's commands, then this section shall not apply during the duration of the time the animal is
in the company and under the control of that adult and the animal is on the premises. An adult is defined as a
person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
9
Chapter 91A. Animals
(D) Public Parks. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of
any dog to take the dog into or allow the dog to enter any public park without being at all times under the restraint
of a leash. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Parks that have been designated as a leash free parks by the governmental agency responsible for the
park;
(2) Guide and hearing-aid dogs that are in the company of blind or deaf persons or being trained for such
purposes;
(3) Dogs employed or hired by law enforcement agencies or by the governmental agency responsible for the
park to perform a governmental purpose within the park.
This conditions of this section do not supersede the prohibitions of section § 91A-31, ANIMALS PROHIBITED
AT TOWN-SPONSORED EVENTS.
§ 91A-29. AGGRESSION-TRAINED DOGS
(A) Identification: The Division shall have the authority to determine whether any individual or business entity is
engaged in the aggression training of dogs. If the Division makes such a determination, then the individual or
business entity must comply with the requirements of sub-paragraph (B) as hereinafter written.
(B) Requirements: Individuals or business entities engaged in the aggression-training of dogs, or the owner,
possessor or harborer of any aggression-trained dog(s) must comply with the following requirements:
(1) The individual, business entity, owner, possessor or harborer has a duty to provide registration
information as required by the Division as it pertains to aggression-training of any kind of dogs.
(2) The individual or business entity has the duty to maintain a current registration of all dogs thus trained,
including the current location or address of the dog; and that information shall be provided to the Division
upon the training of any such dogs.
(3) The Division shall have the authority to inspect the premises engaged in aggression-training and to
observe training methods and the safety of facilities during the operating hours of the aggression-training
facility.
(4) Aggression-trained dogs must be maintained in adequate confinement by anyone possessing them in any
way. The Division shall have the authority to require all aggression-trained dogs to be confined in a strong
fence at least six (6) feet high and, at the discretion of the Division, topped by an anti-climb enclosure.
(5) Zoning – This business shall be allowed only in properties with ‘Business’ zoning classification only.
(D) Imposition of Preventive Measures: If the Division determines that a dog has been aggression-trained, or
trained for fighting or aggressive attack, the Division shall have the authority to impose the same requirements
stated in § 91A-56.
(E) Appeal: If the Division determines that a dog has been aggression-trained, or trained for fighting or aggressive
attack, and the owner wishes to appeal that or the preventive measures imposed, then the appeal shall be the same
as that stated in § 91A-55.
§ 91A-30 GUARD DOGS
(A) Requirements: The owner, possessor, or harborer of a guard dog kept within the Town for longer than is
necessary to merely pass through the Town shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Identification. It shall be unlawful for a guard dog kept in the Town not to have a current license tag.
10
Chapter 91A. Animals
(2) Signs. The owner, possessor, harborer or user of any guard dogs or the owner of the premises employing
the dogs must have posted on the premises a sign that identifies the name, address and telephone number of
the owner of the security dogs.
(B) Escaping Guard Dog: If a guard dog bites someone who is not a trespasser, then the Town shall have the
authority to prohibit that dog from serving as a guard dog within the Town.
(C) Enforcement: In addition to using any and all enforcement remedies stated in this chapter, the Division shall
also have the following additional authority in respect to Guard Dogs:
(1) If any guard dog is seized while running at large, it shall not be returned to the owner until the owner
proves to be in compliance with all the requirements of sub-paragraph (A) above, and the owner had
demonstrated the animal can be contained / controlled upon the owner’s property.
(2) If any guard dog is found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, an Animal Control
Officer shall have the authority to issue a “notice of prohibition” for the use of that guard dog, to the owner of
the animal, until is found to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) If any premise utilizing a guard dog is found to be not in compliance with sub-paragraph (A) above, an
Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to issue a “notice of prohibition”, to the owner or person in
authority for that property, for the use of guard dogs on that premise unless compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter are verified within forty-eight (48) hours of notice.
(4) The Division shall have the authority to seize guard dogs if there has not been compliance with the
provisions of this subsection, or for the safety of the public, all in accordance with Code § 91A-52.
§ 91A-31. ANIMALS PROHIBITED AT TOWN-SPONSORED EVENTS
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any
animal, as defined in § 91A-3, to take that animal, or allow that animal to enter, whether on a leash or not on a
leash, the boundaries of any Town- sponsored public event unless such event is specifically designated as exempt
from this section due to the event’s nature by the Chief of Police. The boundaries and the interior of a Townsponsored
public event shall consist of any area that is part of the event and shall include any public park, street,
sidewalk or other publicly owned area within that area.
It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal within the boundaries of those events to fail to obey the
command of a law enforcement officer or of an Animal Control Officer, to remove such animal from the event.
(B) Exception: This section does not apply to trained guided dogs. This section shall not apply to those animals
that are part of an authorized event exhibit. The Chief of Police, shall have the authority to specify the conditions,
whether for the protection of the public or the well-being of the animals, for allowance of such animals at Townsponsored
events.
§ 91A-32. EXOTIC OR WILD ANIMALS AND REPTILES
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain, possesses or have under
their control within the Town, any venomous reptile or any other wild or exotic animal.
(B) Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to lawfully operated and located pet shops,
zoological gardens, scientific research laboratories, circuses, veterinarians harboring such animals for purposes of
providing professional medical treatment, wildlife rehabilitators with proper permits, or exhibitors licensed by the
United States Department of Agriculture displaying such animals for educational purposes, provided that the
animals are maintained in a manner so as to prevent escape.
(C) Permits: Permits for the keeping or maintenance of wild or exotic animals are not authorized.
(D) Confinement: The confinement of exotic or wild animals exempted from subsection (a) by subjection (b)
above, must meet the regulations promulgated by the North Carolina Wildlife Commission, the minimum standards
under the Animal Welfare Act and all applicable rules promulgated by the United States Department of
11
Chapter 91A. Animals
Agriculture. In addition to meeting the above minimum standards, all such venomous reptiles and all such wild or
exotic animals shall be confined, restrained or controlled in such a manner so that the physical safety, or property,
of any person lawfully entering the premises shall not be endangered.
(E) Transport: Animals described under sub-paragraph (A) above, but exempt under sub-paragraph (B), shall not
be allowed on any public street, sidewalk, or other public way, except in a fully enclosed cage or adequate
structural restraint. The use of a leash, with or without a muzzle, shall not be considered adequate restraint.
Exempt from this provision are animals that are part of a featured performance at a special event with a Town
festival or parade permit where the animal handler is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture.
§ 91A-33. PET SHOPS
(A) Inspections: Animal Control Officers shall have the authority to conduct inspections of pet stores, to the
extent not preempted by state law, in order to determine if there is any abuse of animals. Pet shops shall also be
subject to the Mecklenburg County Ordinance for the Control of Rabies and other Zoonoses as administered and
enforced by the Mecklenburg County Health Department. Abuse of animals shall include any act described in this
section or any other act that is detrimental to the well-being of the animal.
(B) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any pet store employee or pet store owner to prohibit or otherwise
obstruct the town’s access to conduct such inspections pursuant to this section.
§ 91A-34 – 91A-40. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. LICENSING AND PERMITS
§ 91A-41. LICENSES AND RABIES TAGS REQUIRED
(A) License: It shall be unlawful for any dog, cat, or ferret owner, possessor or harborer who resides in the Town
to fail to provide their dog, cat, or ferret over four (4) months of age with a current Town license tag. The owner,
possessor or harborer of any above-described animal must have their animal vaccinated and must have a current
rabies vaccination tag showing that such animals have been vaccinated. No license will be issued unless proof of
inoculation is shown. Any dog, cat, or ferret owner, possessor, or harborer who moves into the Town for the
purpose of establishing residency, or who becomes a resident as a result of annexation, shall have thirty (30) days
in which to obtain a license.
(B) License Fee: See § 91A-61 for current License Fee schedule
(C) Rabies Inoculation: It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, possesses, or harbors a dog, cat, or ferret not
to have the animal inoculated against rabies.
(D) Rabies Tag Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or harborer of any dog or cat in the Town
not to have the dog or cat wear the rabies vaccination tag issued to them by the veterinarian administering the
rabies vaccine. It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, or harborer of any ferret in the Town not to have in
the owner's possession the rabies vaccination tag issued to that person by the veterinarian administering the rabies
vaccination. Dogs and cats not wearing such tags, and for which the owner cannot promptly display a valid rabies
tag, may be impounded pursuant to § 91A-51.
(E) Reclaim: If the Division has lawfully acquired custody or control of an animal, and the Division has probable
cause to believe that the animal does not have the lawfully required inoculation against rabies, the Division shall
have the authority to have the animal inoculated against rabies. The owner, possessor, or harborer of the animal
shall not have the right to reclaim the animal until the owner, possessor, or harborer has paid the Town for the cost
of the rabies inoculation.
§ 91A-42. PERMITS FOR FOWL, EQUINE, CLOVEN-HOOFED ANIMALS, ETC
(A) Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have, or maintain any equine animals,
cloven-hoofed animals or other livestock or any rabbits, except for rabbits kept exclusively inside the owner’s
12
Chapter 91A. Animals
residence, chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pheasants, pigeons or other domestic fowl in the Town without
first receiving from the Division a permit to do so, or to continue to have any of the same stated above after a
permit has been denied.
(1) The permit application shall list all such animals and fowl to be maintained on the premises.
(2) Before a permit is issued, an employee of the Division shall inspect the premises to determine if the
keeping of the animals or fowl on the premises will endanger or is likely to endanger the health, safety, peace,
quiet, comfort, enjoyment of or otherwise become a public nuisance to nearby residents or occupants or
places of business.
(3) When a permit is denied for any reason, the applicant shall be given a written explanation of the reason
for denial.
(B) Permit Fee: Only one permit is required per household, and must be renewed annually. The fee schedule is
found in section 91A-61.
(C) Permit Considerations: An owner or possessor of such animals or fowl shall comply with the following
applicable provisions before a permit is issued. All shelters described within this section must meet all standards as
defined within the applicable Town of Matthews Unified Development Ordinance, as noted. Compliance with the
below provisions will create a presumption that a permit shall be issued. That presumption may only be rebutted
by specific findings supported by competent evidence that despite compliance with the below provisions, the
presence of such animals or fowl are still likely to endanger the health, safety, peace, quiet, comfort, enjoyment of
or otherwise become a public nuisance to nearby residents or occupants or places of business.
(1) Maintaining fowl and other specifically identified animals including, but not limited to, chickens, turkeys,
ducks, guineas, geese, pheasants, pigeons, or other domestic fowl or rabbits:
(a) Such animals must be confined in a coop, fowl house or rabbit hutch not less than eighteen (18)
inches in height. The fowl must be kept within the coop or fowl house and the rabbits in the hutch at
all times.
(b) The coop or fowl house must be used for fowl only and the hutch for rabbits only, and both must be
well ventilated.
(c) The coop, fowl house or hutch shall have a minimum of four (4) square feet of floor area for each
fowl or rabbit.
(d) The run must be well drained so there is no accumulation of moisture.
(e) The coop, fowl house or hutch shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulation of animal
excrement and objectionable odors. It shall be cleaned daily, and all droppings and body excretion
shall be placed in a fly proof container and double-bagged in plastic bags.
(f) The coop, fowl house or hutch shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any adjoining
property line.
(g) No more than twenty (20) such fowl or rabbits shall be kept or maintained per acre. The number of
fowl or rabbits should be proportionate to the acreage.
(2) Maintaining equine (horses, etc.):
(a) Equine must be provided with adequate shelter to protect them from the elements.
(b) Shelters for equine, located upon single-family zoned sites, except where otherwise described in
section (c) below, shall be kept a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property line. The
shelters must be in compliance with all other provisions of the Town of Matthews Unified
Development Ordinance 155.506.12, Private Stables.
13
Chapter 91A. Animals
(c) Shelters for equine within Equestrian-Oriented Subdivisions, when designed and utilized as
‘community shelters’ as defined in the Town of Matthews Unified Development Ordinance
155.506.02, shall be kept at a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining property line
when that adjoining property does not fall within the special district for Equestrian-Oriented
Subdivisions. All other shelters within the Equestrian-Oriented Subdivision shall be kept a minimum
of three feet (3’) from any property line, pursuant to the Town of Matthews Unified Development
Ordinance 155-601.20, Accessory Structures.
(d) The shelter shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulations of animal excrement and
objectionable odors.
(3) Maintaining cloven-hoofed animals and other livestock:
(a) Such animals must be provided with adequate shelter to protect them from the elements.
(b) The shelter shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulations of animal excrement and
objectionable odors.
(c) The shelters for cows and other large livestock, which are covered by the zoning ordinance, shall be
kept at a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from any property line. The shelters for goats and other
small livestock shall be kept at a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line.
(d) Each cow or other large livestock, excluding equines, shall have a minimum pasture area of two (2)
acres. Each goat, sheep or other small livestock shall have a minimum pasture area of one-fourth (1/4)
acre.
(4) The slaughter of any livestock or poultry not regulated by North Carolina state law or otherwise forbidden
or regulated, shall be done only in a humane and sanitary manner and shall not be done open to the view of
any public area or adjacent property owned by another.
(D) Exceptions: A permit shall not be required for animals of any kind if the animals are kept by a governmental
authority or other appropriately certified and recognized academic institution, museum, raptor center, etc. This
section shall not apply to, and no permit shall be required for, any agricultural operation within G.S. Section 106-
700, "Nuisance Liability of Agricultural Operation." The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance and shall be renewed annually. (Ord. No. 1512; passed 10-9-06)
(E) Revocation of Permit: The Division may revoke any permit when the permit has been mistakenly issued
without compliance with this section; or when the applicant has submitted false information; or for a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter; or, when it is deemed that the health, safety or welfare of any person or
property is menaced by the keeping of such animals; or when the animals become a nuisance. If a permit is
revoked, the applicant shall be given a written explanation of the reasons for the revocation. Upon the
determination of a violation of this section, and if the violation pertains to a correctable condition on the property,
the owner shall have thirty (30) days in which to bring the property or condition into compliance with this chapter.
§ 91A-43. PERMIT FOR FOUR OR MORE DOGS AND/OR CATS
(A) Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, to keep custody of, or care for, four (4) or more
dogs or cats, or any combination of four (4) dogs and cats or more, all being four (4) months or older, unless a
permit is issued by the Animal Control Division.
(B) Permit Fee: Only one permit is required per household. A fee schedule for this permit is found in section 91A-
61.
(C) Permit Period: A permit shall remain valid as long as the person is in compliance with the terms and
conditions, if any, of the permit. If any of the circumstances change, such as, but not limited to, more animals,
different breed for a particular dog, new structures or other such similar change that might reasonably violate the
five (5) standards set forth above, then the permit shall automatically terminate and be null and void. The person
must secure a new permit, or the person shall be in violation of this section.
14
Chapter 91A. Animals
(D) Permit Considerations: If a person has four (4) or more dogs or cats on the premises, then the Chief of Police,
must make the following findings before a permit is issued:
(1) That noise from the dogs or cats will not interfere with an abutting occupant's use and peaceful enjoyment
of the property.
(2) That odor or unsanitary conditions caused by the dogs or cats will not interfere with an abutting property
occupant's use and peaceful enjoyment of their property.
(3) That four (4) or more dog runs or other dog-related structures, or any combination thereof, cannot be seen
from an abutting occupant's property if within a residentially zoned district.
(4) That there is no evidence that the dogs or cats pose any health problem or disease exposure for abutting
occupants.
(5) That the dogs or cats do not interfere in some other similar manner with the peaceful use and enjoyment
of abutting property.
(E) Permit Denied: If an application for a permit relative to this section is denied, the applicant will receive the
reasons for the denial in writing. The written statement may include any recommendations or conditions that would
enable the person to be in compliance with the standards. The Town reserves the right to assign specific conditions
to any permit when it is deemed to be in the best interest of the Town.
(F) Permit Revoked: The Division may revoke any permit when the permit has been mistakenly issued without
compliance with this section; or when the applicant has submitted false information; or for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter; or, when it is deemed that the health, safety or welfare of any person or property is
menaced by the keeping of such animals; or when the animals become a nuisance. If a permit is revoked, the
applicant shall be given a written explanation of the reasons for the revocation. Upon the determination of a
violation of this section, and if the violation pertains to a correctable condition on the property, the owner shall
have thirty (30) days in which to bring the property or condition into compliance with this chapter.
§ 91A-44. APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT
(A) Right to Appeal: Any person who is denied a permit or has a permit revoked under §91A-42 and 91A-43 shall
have the right to appeal the denial or revocation to the office of the Town Manager.
(B) Appeal Process: Any appeal shall be in writing, shall state the basis of the appeal, and must be filed with the
Town Clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the notice of denial or revocation of the permit is delivered to the
appellant by the Division. Such notice shall be considered “delivered” when the notice letter, with adequate
postage and having been properly addressed to the last mailing address provided to the Division by the person, is
placed in the United States mail; or when personal notice is given to the person. The appellant, in addition to filing
the appeal with the Town Clerk, shall also file a copy of the appeal letter with the Chief of Police.
(C) Response to Appeal: Upon receipt of a proper appeal, the Town Manager, or his representative, shall conduct a
hearing within ten (10) calendar days to determine if the permit should be denied or revoked. A permit application
denied shall remain so unless and until such time as the Town Manager or his representative overturns the denial.
A permit revocation order shall be suspended, upon a properly filed appeal, until a decision is entered on the appeal
by the Town Manager or his representative.
§91A-45. NONRESIDENT EXCEPTIONS
The provisions of this chapter requiring certain animals to be licensed or permitted shall not apply to those animals
owned by, in the charge of or under the care of nonresidents of this Town who are traveling through or temporarily
sojourning in the Town for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Nor shall the licensing provisions apply to animals
temporarily brought into this Town for the exclusive purpose of entering animals in a show or other exhibition.
§ 91A-46 – 91A-50. RESERVED
15
Chapter 91A. Animals
ARTICLE V. IMPOUNDMENT, SEIZURE/FORFEITURE, CONTAINMENT & DISPOSITION OF
ANIMALS
§ 91A-51. IMPOUNDMENT
(A) Impoundment: Any animal that is found to be abandoned, neglected, stray, or to be in violation of any
provision of this chapter is subject to immediate impoundment if the animal’s owner is nonexistent, unknown, or
found to be unavailable after a reasonable attempt to identify, locate, and/or notify the animal’s owner has been
made.
(B) Impoundment Period: Except as otherwise directed by any provision of this chapter, any animal that is so
impounded may be held by the MAC for up to three (3) working days, excluding the day of impoundment, before
disposition of the animal pursuant to this chapter
(C) Reclaim of Animal: If the owner of the animal appears during the holding period, the owner may redeem the
animal upon successful completion of any required hearing, upon paying all applicable fees and any outstanding
civil fines that may have been issued pursuant to a violation of this chapter, and by bringing the animal into full
compliance with all provisions of this chapter and any applicable state law. Unless otherwise defined in this
section, the owner shall have ten (10) calendar days from when they first appear and reclaim the animal, during
which time the animal shall remain impounded at MAC. The owner shall be responsible for a boarding fee for the
entire time the animal is held by the Division. Failure to do so shall result in the forfeiture of the animal to the
Division. The MAC may grant a time extension to any owner actively attempting to redeem their animal.
(D) Transfer to CMAC: Matthews Animal Control may transport the animal to the CMAC at any time, and any
release from CMAC shall be in accordance to their regulations and requirements, and shall require proof of
satisfaction of any/all fees and fines assessed by MAC for the impoundment and transport of the animal.
§ 91A-52. SEIZURE, FORFEITURE, AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS
(A) Authority to seize and forfeit animals: In addition to any other authority or procedure authorized by this
chapter or by any other law to seize an animal, the MAC shall have the authority to summarily seize and forfeit to
the MAC any animal when the MAC determines that:
(1) There is probable cause to believe that the animal, under the totality of the circumstances, is dangerous or
prejudicial to the public safety or public health and the MAC has issued a probable cause notice on the
animal; or
(2) There is probable cause to believe the animal is the subject of a violation of the following sections of this
chapter:
91A-21 Abandoned Animals.
91A-22 Abuse of Animals.
91A-23 Animal Bite.
91A-24 Animal Nuisances.
91A-25 Stray Animals.
91A-28 Restraint of Animals.
91A-32 Exotic or Wild Animals or Reptiles
91A-41 License and Rabies Tags and Fees.
91A-43 Permit for Four or More Dogs and/or Cats; or
(3) There is probable cause to believe the animal is the subject of a violation of this chapter that is punishable
by escalating civil penalties under § 91A-62 and the escalated penalty appropriate to the specific violation
includes seizure of the animal (Civil); or
(4) The lawful owner of the animal willingly forfeits it to MAC due to an inability or desire to care for or
keep the animal. The owner shall sign a release vesting all rights and title to the animal to the town.
(B) Procedure. The procedures by which such seizures and forfeitures shall be accomplished shall be in accordance
with subsequent sections as follows:
16
Chapter 91A. Animals
(1) Sub-paragraph (A)(1) “Dangerous Animal Seizures” shall be conducted in accordance with the
procedures set out in §91A-55.
(2) Sub-paragraph (A)(2) through (A)(4) seizures shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set
out in § 91A-53.
§ 91A-53. GENERAL SEIZURE/FORFEITURE PROCEDURE
(A) Procedures: When an animal has been or shall be seized pursuant to § 91A-52(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), the
procedures of this section shall be followed. The act of seizing the animal shall be done in any manner consistent
with North Carolina law and the United States Constitution.
(B) Notice and Holding Period: MAC may/shall conduct reasonable efforts to identify, locate, and notify the
animal’s owner. The animal shall be held three (3) working days, excluding the day of seizure, from the date
notice is sent to the owner or from the date of seizure if the owner cannot be identified or located after reasonable
efforts to do so.
The Notice shall include the following:
(1) An order to the animal’s owner to contact the Division immediately.
(2) A brief statement of the date, location, and reason for the seizure of the animal.
(3) A statement that the animal is subject to forfeiture and humane destruction within three (3) working days
from the date the notice was sent.
(4) A statement that a hearing will be held, at the owner’s request, to determine if the animal shall be forfeited.
(5) A statement of the method(s) by which the owner may contact the Division.
(C) Hearing: If the animal owner contacts the Division within the three days and requests a hearing, a hearing shall
be held. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner and with the same remedies and consequences as
those set out in § 91A-55.
(D) Findings: If the violation that is the basis of the seizure is found by the preponderance of the evidence to have
occurred, then the Hearing Officer shall have the authority to order the same remedies available in § 91A-55(K)
and 91A-56. However, if forfeiture is ordered, the animal may be placed for general adoption to the public if it is
healthy, non-aggressive, and has not bitten. If the animal’s owner fails to contact MAC and request a hearing
within the three days after the notice is sent, then the animal shall be forfeited to MAC or CMAC.
(E) Appeal: Appeal from a determination under this section shall be conducted in compliance with § 91A-55(L).
(F) Reclaim Fee: The owner may reclaim the impounded animal subsequent to payment of the Impound Fee and
Boarding Fees as found in section 91A-61, and after having provided proof of current licensing required by the
owner’s current jurisdiction.
§ 91A-54. DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED AND FORFEITED ANIMALS
(A) Disposition of Impounded Animals: Animals impounded by MAC and not reclaimed by their owners may be
may be sold or offered for public adoption, if the animal is found to be healthy, or humanely euthanized. Such
animals may be transported to CMAC and disposed of in accordance with policies as established by the Charlotte
City Council.
(B) Disposition of Forfeited Animals: Animals forfeited to MAC and not reclaimed by their owners may be sold or
offered for public adoption, if found to be healthy, or euthanized. Such animals may be transported to CMAC and
disposed of in accordance with the policies as established by the Charlotte City Council.
17
Chapter 91A. Animals
(C) Disposition of Injured or Suffering Animals: MAC shall have the authority to carry out the humane euthanasia
of any animal lawfully taken into custody by the Division which is affected with any dangerous, painful, incurable
or communicable disease, or which is incurably crippled or suffering incurably after reasonable effort has been
made to notify the owner.
§91A-55. DANGEROUS ANIMAL SEIZURE/ FORFEITURE PROCEDURE
(A) Notice Required: No animal shall be seized on the basis that it is dangerous or prejudicial to the public safety
or public health without the prior issuance of a Probable Cause Notice. The notice shall be issued by the Chief of
Police. This limitation shall not prohibit seizure based on other lawful authority, nor the subsequent issuance of a
probable cause notice for an animal otherwise seized or impounded.
(B) Probable Cause Notices: The probable cause notice shall include:
(1) The specific facts constituting probable cause for declaring the animal dangerous,
(2) That a prompt hearing to determine whether or not the animal is dangerous shall be held as soon as
possible, and
(3) That anyone in possession of the animal shall immediately turn the animal over to the MAC.
(4) That if the animal’s owner is known, the owner is to immediately contact the MAC.
(C) Notice Delivery: If the animal owner, if known, shall be notified as soon as reasonably possible of the
probable cause notice. If the owner is unknown, the MAC shall make reasonable efforts to determine who the
owner is and try to notify the owner.
(D) Response to Notice: The owner shall turn the animal over to MAC immediately upon receiving a probable
cause notice. The MAC shall have the authority to seize immediately any animal for which a probable cause notice
has been issued.
(E) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a premises to fail to give an animal to the
department immediately upon the presentment of a probable cause notice. Such animal may be held at MAC or
CMAC.
(F) Containment Option: The official that issued the probable cause notice shall have the authority to authorize that
an animal may remain on the premises or elsewhere prior to the seizure/forfeiture hearing if the MAC is satisfied
that the animal’s confinement shall be adequate for protecting the public and for the well-being of the animal. The
official that allows the animal to remain without seizure shall order the animal to be kept adequately confined and
shall issue a containment order in compliance with § 91A-56. A failure of the animal to be kept so confined shall
result in the immediate seizure of the animal. The department shall always have the authority to summarily seize
an animal after the probable cause notice has been delivered and before the seizure hearing.
(G) Request for Hearing. The owner of an animal subject to a probable cause notice shall have the right to a
hearing to determine whether or not the animal shall be declared dangerous as defined in this chapter. The owner of
the animal shall request a hearing by submitting a written request during normal working hours to MAC within ten
(10) working days after the delivery of, or all reasonable efforts to deliver the probable cause notice to the owner.
(H) Failure to Request a Hearing. If the owner fails to properly file a timely request for a hearing with the MAC,
the Chief of Police shall determine whether the animal is dangerous. The Chief of Police shall make findings of
fact to support the determination, and the determination shall be conclusive. MAC may dispose of the animal as
provided for in subsection (I) below. In the event that the Chief of Police, due to a conflict of interest or any other
circumstance, is unable to make the above determination, then the Chief of Police shall make the determination.
(I) Hearing. Upon a proper and timely request, a hearing shall be held. The supervisor that issued the probable
cause notice or his designee shall present whatever relevant evidence the supervisor has that the animal should be
declared dangerous. The owner shall be entitled to present whatever relevant evidence the owner wishes and to
have legal representation. All testimony before the Hearing Officer shall be sworn testimony. The entirety of the
18
Chapter 91A. Animals
hearing shall be recorded. If physical evidence is presented by either side, the Hearing Officer shall have such
evidence photographed as part of the record and shall describe the item fully for the record.
(J) Hearing Officer. The Chief of Police shall be the Hearing Officer and shall conduct the hearing to determine
whether the animal shall be declared dangerous or not. The Chief of Police shall not function as the Hearing
Officer if there is any conflict of interest or appearance of such. In such cases the Police Chief shall serve as
Hearing Officer. The Chief of Police shall disclose any facts, knowledge or any information known by the Chief of
Police regarding the particular situation for the record at the very beginning of the hearing. The Chief of Police
shall respond to any questions about any past knowledge about the particular situation. The appellant shall have the
right to state for the record any specific findings of fact about the particular situation that the appellant believes
precludes the Chief of Police from conducting an impartial hearing of the case.
(K) Decision and Written Orders. The Hearing Officer's decision shall be supported by specific findings of fact
and specific conclusions based upon the findings of fact. The Chief of Police, if the Chief of Police acts as Hearing
Officer over the objections of the appellant, shall make specific findings of fact and conclusions regarding such
objections for that particular case. All findings of fact must be supported by competent and material evidence in the
record and must be included in the record.
The Hearing Officer shall issue a written order based on his or her decision. The written order shall declare
whether the animal is found to be dangerous or prejudicial to the public safety or public health or non-dangerous.
If the animal is found to be dangerous or prejudicial to the public safety or public health, then the Hearing Officer
shall have the authority to terminate the owner’s ownership rights in the animal and to dispose of the animal in
accordance with sub-section (I), or the Hearing Officer may suspend the termination of ownership rights
conditioned upon the owners compliance with such terms as the Hearing Officer deems necessary to ensure that the
animal may be kept by the owner in safety. If such terms are part of a written order suspending seizure/forfeiture,
then the terms and the written order shall comply with the requirements of section 91A-56. The Chief of Police
shall have the authority to modify the terms when it is necessary to ensure the safety of the public. The termination
of ownership rights may be invoked upon the failure to comply with any of the terms. Written orders shall include
the following statements:
(1) Whether the animal is dangerous and prejudicial to the public safety or health or non-dangerous. (If nondangerous,
nothing further is required.)
(2) That MAC has the authority to terminate ownership rights of the animal, and to order the humane
destruction of the animal.
(3) Whether the ownership rights are being presently terminated or if such termination is suspended.
(4) If the termination is suspended, the terms and condition on which the termination is suspended in
compliance with section 91A-56.
(5) That failure to comply with the written order could result in termination of ownership rights and humane
destruction of the animal.
(6) That any appeal to the Superior Court of the Hearing Officer’s decision must be filed within 30 days.
(L) Disposition of the Animal. The Chief of Police shall have the discretion to dispose of any animal forfeited to
the Division under § 91A-53 in one of only two specific ways:
(1) By humane destruction of the animal; or
(2) By giving the animal to an individual or an organization subject to the protective and inspection conditions
required by the Animal Control Officer for the well-being of the animal, for the protection of the public and
for the purpose of preserving and taking care of the animal. Such conditions shall reserve MAC’s right to
seize and humanely destroy the animal upon any failure to comply with the conditions. An animal declared to
be dangerous by the Chief of Police shall not be disposed of for research or experimental purposes.
(M) Appeal to Superior Court. The decision of the Chief of Police or of the Town Manager or his designee shall be
subject to review by the Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari
for review by the Superior Court shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within thirty (30) days after
delivery of or reasonable efforts to deliver the decision to the owner or the owner's representative.
19
Chapter 91A. Animals
The Town shall reimburse the petitioner for the cost of the petitioner's transcript and the court's transcript if the
court reverses the decision and determines that the animal is not dangerous.
In the event of the filing of a petition for writ of certiorari in Superior Court, the animal shall be confined at the
animal shelter or at a location solely acceptable to MAC or CMAC.
§91A-56. PREVENTIVE MEASURES FOR CONTAINMENT OF ANIMALS
(A) Authority: MAC shall have the authority to require the owner or custodian of an animal to comply with
specific preventive measures, as described below in sub-paragraph (B), whenever MAC has the authority to seize
the animal for possible forfeiture or when otherwise authorized by this chapter. Preventive measures shall only be
ordered after taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances, including but not limited, to the following:
(1) The behavior, size, temperament, breed, capacity for inflicting serious injury, the number of animals or
other such similar factors that would be relevant to a determination of whether or not preventive measures
need to be imposed for a particular situation; and
(2) The adequacy of the current enclosure or confinement, if any; and
(3) The likelihood that the conditions pertaining to the particular animal and the animal's confinement are
detrimental to the safety or welfare of citizens or the peace and tranquility of citizens in the immediate
surrounding area.
(4) The history of the animal and the animal’s owner in compliance or noncompliance with this chapter’s
provisions as well as the owner’s ability to adequately restrain the animal when viewed in light of all relevant
factors.
(B) Preventive Measures: If MAC determines that the circumstances require special preventive measures, then the
MAC shall have the authority to require appropriate, specific preventive measures which might include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Necessary repairs for any fence or enclosure, measures to ensure that a gate will remain closed, a "fence"
or "secure fence" as described below or any other similar device that would provide greater assurance for the
confinement of the animal, all of which are subject to being specifically approved for their adequacy by the
Division; and/or
(2) A fence of at least a minimum of four (4) feet high and constitute a secure-enough enclosure sufficient to
contain the animal at all times. The minimum size of the enclosure may be at least one hundred fifty (150)
square feet. If the animal is over fifteen (15) inches at the shoulder or is deemed capable of climbing a
standard four-foot fence, then the MAC may require a six-foot fence. A secured lock shall be required and
secured at all times the animals are present; and/or
(3) A ‘secure fence’ that, in addition to the description found above in sub-section B(2), may be enclosed on
all six (6) sides, including the top. The bottom may be concrete, unless the sides of the fence are buried one
foot deep in a hard-packed soil; and/or
(4) Requiring the owner to microchip the animal at the owner's expense if that is necessary for identification,
investigative or enforcement purposes; and/or
(5) Requiring the owner to procure liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) at the owner's expense; and/or
(6) Requiring the owner to post or display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on the premises warning of the
animal on the premises.
(C) Containment Order: If MAC determines that specific preventive measures must be complied with by the owner
of an animal, the MAC shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of the containment order. All containment
orders shall be in writing and shall state the reasons that preventive measures are required, identify the specific
preventive measures that must be implemented, and the designated time period within which to comply with the
20
Chapter 91A. Animals
containment order. MAC shall have the authority to exercise discretion for extensions of time if that is reasonable
in view of the good-faith progress of the owner in implementing the preventive measures.
(D) Failure to Comply with Containment Order: It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to comply with a
containment order within the designated time for compliance stated in the written order or any extension thereof.
The penalty for a willful failure to comply with a containment order shall be a civil penalty in accordance with §
91A-62 or seizure/forfeiture of the animal in accordance with § 91A-53 or § 91A-55.
(E) Appeal to Containment Order: The owner may submit in writing a challenge to the MAC determination that
sub-paragraph (A) is applicable to the owner's premises or submit in writing a challenge to the specific preventive
measures required by the MAC. The challenge must comply with all of the requirements as for a request for
hearing as set out in § 91A-55. A challenge that meets those requirements shall be heard in the same manner and
with the same appeal to superior court as set out in § 91A-55. The Hearing Officer shall review the containment
order under the standards of this section but shall follow the process for hearing as set out in § 91A-55. If the
animal has been seized and the owner wishes to appeal the seizure and potential forfeiture as well as challenge the
containment order, both matters may be addressed in the same hearing.
(F) Change of Conditions or Residency: Any subject of a Containment Order is required to notify MAC
immediately upon the permanent removal of the subject animal or upon any impending relocation of the occupants
of the property.
§ 91A-57. RABIES IMPOUNDMENT
(A) Power to Impound: The Mecklenburg County Ordinance for the Control of Rabies and other Zoonoses shall
apply.
(B) Impoundment Order: Consistent with that ordinance, the Chief of Police, or any MAC Officer having reason to
believe an animal shows symptoms of rabies or which has bitten a person, shall have the authority to order the
confinement of such animal and to take whatever other action is necessary for confinement, observation and
disposition of the animal.
§ 91A-58. RESERVED
ARTICLE VI. SERVICES & PROGRAMS
§91A-59. RABIES CLINIC; SPAY & NEUTER SERVICES
(A) Rabies Clinics or Spay/Neuter Services: MAC is authorized to establish, equip, operate and maintain and
provide Rabies and/or spay neuter services ("services" hereinafter) for dogs, cats, rabbits and ferrets, and to employ
personnel for those services, and to appropriate and expend tax and non-tax funds, including property taxes, for
those purposes. In lieu thereof, the MAC is further authorized to contract with any individual, corporation,
nonprofit corporation, governmental body or any other group for the purpose of operating or providing services for
dogs, cats, rabbits and ferrets within the Town. The Division may appropriate and expend tax and non tax funds,
including property tax, for those purposes.
(B) Consent and Waiver Form. Persons submitting dogs, cats, rabbits and ferrets for the services of the clinic shall
first be required to sign a consent form certifying under penalty of perjury that they are the owners of said animals
or are otherwise authorized to present the animal for the operation. Such persons may be required to furnish proof
of such ownership or authority.
By signing the consent form, the owner shall waive any and all liability for any injury or death to an animal arising
out of the rabies inoculation or spaying or neutering operation or any services provided incidental thereto. The
person presenting the animal for such operation shall indemnify the Town against any person's claim that the Town
did not have the authority or right to destroy the animal.
(C) Reclaim of Animal: MAC shall establish a return date by which persons submitting animals for the above
operation shall pick up the animal or be subject to a reasonable boarding fee, established in accordance with § 91A-
21
Chapter 91A. Animals
61, such fee to commence the date after such return date. If the animal is not picked up by the seventh day after the
return date, then the MAC may dispose of the animal by any disposition method authorized by this chapter.
§ 91A-60. RESERVED
ARTICLE VII. FEES, ENFORCEMENT & FINES
§91A-61. FEES / FEE SCHEDULES
(A) Animal Licenses: Licenses shall be renewed by the last day of the month in which the license expires one (1)
year from the date of issue, except for sterile dogs or cats, which may have a three (3) year renewal term. (Ord. No.
1512, passed 10-9-06). The license fee for all dogs, guard dogs, cats, and ferrets shall be as follows:
Dogs: Fertile $30.00/year
Sterile $10.00/year (3 year $30)
Cats: Fertile $30.00/year
Sterile $10.00/year (3 year $30)
Ferrets: Fertile $30.00/year
Sterile $10.00/year (3 year $30)
(1) Any owner of an animal who can furnish a statement from a licensed veterinarian that the animal, due to
health reasons, could not withstand a spay/neuter procedure shall be charged at the sterile rate.
(2) Any animal owner sixty-two (62) years of age or older who owns a sterilized animal may receive their
license free of charge.
(3) Any disabled owner of a dog that is used for seeing or hearing purposes and is spayed or neutered shall
obtain a license free of charge.
(4) Any governmental agency that owns for a governmental purpose, an animal subject to licensing, shall
obtain their license free of charge.
(B) Services Provided: Matthews Animal Control shall assess such fees as established by the Town Board of
Commissioners for the following services or permits provided:
(1) Boarding. The housing and care of animals in the possession of MAC. Fees may be established pursuant to
the type or size of animals. Fees shall be determined based upon successive 24-hour periods, beginning the day
following impoundment.
(2) Electronic Tagging. The Division is hereby authorized to, and may without the consent of the animal’s
owner or possessor, humanely implant any animal lawfully impounded with an electronic tagging device
similar to a microchip that will allow the animal to be positively identified. The cost shall be the responsibility
of the owner or possessor prior to the animal being reclaimed.
(3) Impounding. Any animal that is taken into custody by MAC pursuant to this Code or state statute and
maintained for a period of two hours or more.
(4) Permits for equine, cloven-hoofed animals or other livestock, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas,
pheasants, pigeons, or other domestic fowl pursuant to 91A42.
(5) Permits for four or more dogs and/or cats. Pursuant to 91A-43
(6) Rabies Inoculation. Inoculations administered by a member of Town staff or a contracted employee for the
Town.
(7) Transportation. For the transportation of animals from Matthews to CMAC.
22
Chapter 91A. Animals
(C) Fee Schedule: The following fees are hereby established under this chapter: An accurate copy of the fee
schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the Animal Control Division, and a copy shall also
be filed with the Town Clerk's office.
Boarding Fee/day
Dogs $10
Cats, ferrets $ 6
Electronic Tagging $ 8
Impound Fee
Dogs $40
Cats, ferrets $25
Permits for equine, cloven-hoofed, livestock, chickens, fowl, etc. $40
Permits for 4 or more animals $25
Rabies Vaccination $15
Transportation Fee $10
Other Permits $25
(D) Other Fees: The above fees do not include applicable charges for any license or inoculation that may be
required by this chapter or other applicable law. If the animal to be redeemed is not licensed, permitted, or
inoculated as required by law, the owner must have the dog or cat inoculated, and obtain a proper license or permit
before release of the animal.
(E) Animals Transported to CMAC: Any animal transported by MAC to CMAC shall be subject to any and all fees
and policies required by CMAC, as established by the City of Charlotte. Additionally, all fees and fines owed to
the Town pursuant to this chapter must be satisfied with the Town before CMAC will release the animal.
(F) Exception: No fees shall be charged or collected on any animal that has been unlawfully impounded. Any such
animal shall immediately be delivered upon demand to the owner or person entitled to the custody of the animal.
This does not relieve the owner, however, from the proper requirements for licensing pursuant to this chapter.
§91A-62. ENFORCEMENT, FINES & FINE SCHEDULE
Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be enforced by one, or more, of the following methods unless otherwise
limited to a specific manner of enforcement by this section or chapter:
(A) Civil Citation
(1) Civil citations may generally be used to enforce any provision of this chapter. Such citations may be used
independently or in conjunction with any other enforcement method. Violations of the following sections may
only be enforced by the issuance of a civil citation:
91A-25 Harboring stray animals.
91A-27 Reckless riding and driving of animal.
91A-31 Animals at Town-sponsored events.
91A-41 Failure to have Town animal license.
91A-42 Failure to obtain Town permits.
91A-43 Failure to obtain Town permits
(2) The penalties assessed by civil citations shall be in accordance with the escalating civil penalty graph that
follows. The civil penalty graph applies to all violations that are enforced civilly, regardless of any other
method of enforcement that may be additionally used. Each prior offense must be evidenced by the issuance
of a civil citation or a criminal conviction arising from a prior offense before the next escalated penalty for
subsequent offenses may be assessed.
(3) Each day that an ongoing violation continues shall be considered a separate violation from any previous or
subsequent violation and each separate violation may be the basis of a citation.
(4) The following civil fine schedule shall be applied to violations of this section:
1st Offense - $50 fine.
23
Chapter 91A. Animals
2nd Offense - $75 fine.
3rd Offense - $150 fine and/or restraint. measures in accordance with Section 91A-55.
4th Offense - $250 fine and/or restraint measures in accordance with Section 91A-55, which shall include a
secure enclosure for violations of Sections 91A-23, 91A-26, or 91A-31.
5th Offense - $500 fine and seizure / forfeiture of the animal.
(B) Criminal misdemeanor. The violator may be charged with a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days in jail; or
(C) Injunction. The Town may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction and order of abatement that would
require that a violator correct any unlawful condition relating to this chapter existing on his or her property.
(D) Seizure/Forfeiture. The following sections of this chapter may be enforced by the seizure and forfeiture to the
Division of the animal that is the basis for a violation of the Section:
91A-21 Abandoned animals.
91A-22 Abuse of animals.
91A-23 Animal bite.
91A-24 Animal Nuisance.
91A-28 Restraint of animals.
91A-41 License and rabies tags and fees.
91A-42 Permit for equine, cloven-hoofed, livestock, chickens, fowl, etc.
91A-43 Permit for four or more dogs or cats kept outside .
91A-52 Seizure, forfeiture, and disposition of animals.
(E) Procedures: The manner of the seizure and the procedure by which the animal may be forfeited to the Division
is that set out in § 91A-54 unless otherwise stated by the particular section authorizing the seizure and forfeiture.
This subsection shall not be read to limit in any way any seizure or forfeitures authorized by the civil escalating
penalties graph as described in 91-62(A).
24
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
Section
92A.01 Loud, Disturbing Noises Prohibited
92A.02 Definitions
92A.03 Certain Sounds Prohibited
92A.04 Permits for Essential Construction Sounds
92A.05 Amplified Sound
92A.06 Permits for Amplified Sound
92A.07 Outdoor Amplification & Music at Commercial Establishments
92A.08 Sound Measurement Procedures
92A.09 Permits for Large Outdoor Music Facilities
92A.10 Chronic Noise Producers
92A.11 Enforcement & Penalties
91A.12 Severability
§92A.01 LOUD, DISTURBING NOISES PROHIBITED, GENERALLY
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, or assist in creating, any unreasonably loud and/or disturbing noise in the Town
of Matthews.
§92A.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and phrases are defines below unless it shall be apparent from the
context that a different meaning is intended.
“A” Weighting Scale The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured with the sound level meter using the “A” weighted
network scale. (Denoted ‘dB(A)’)
Amplified Sound Any sound created by a sound-magnifying device, whose source is outside or whose source is inside and
where the sound propagates to the outside or to other dwellings or interior locations under separate ownership or occupancy.
‘ANSI’ American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.
Certified Confirmation As it pertains to the required delivery of notice to nearby property owners of requested permits, this
shall mean a notarized signature of the applicant upon the Permit Application form.
Construction On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration, demolition or removal of any structure, facility, or addition
thereto, including all related activities, including, but not limited to, the clearing, moving, blasting or landscaping of land
(earth.)
Daytime Hours 7:00 am to 9:00 pm
dB(A) Sound level in decibels, as determined by the “A” weighting scale of a sound meter having characteristics defined by
the American National Standards Institute and conforming to the requirements of ANSI/NCSL Z540-1 IOS.
Decibel (dB) A unit of measure, on a logarithmic scale, of the ration of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to a
standard reference pressure, which for the purposes of §92A.08 shall be 0.0002 microbars.
Emergency Service Vehicles Publicly-owned or operated vehicles used for the purposes of responding to public emergencies,
to include police, fire and medical rescue vehicles, or vehicles of public utility companies or contracted private companies
conducting emergency repairs to the protection of public safety.
1
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
Essential Construction Sound Permit A permit issued by the town upon finding that the requested construction project
aspect is critical and necessary for the safe and industry-proper completion of the construction project.
Exceptional Permit An amplified-sound or essential construction sounds permit authorized by the Town Manager upon a
finding of ‘legal entitlement’ of an applicant’s request for a permit which is denied by the Noise Control Officer.
Motor Vehicle or Vehicle As used herein, shall mean any vehicle propelled on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to,
automobiles,, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, go-carts, motorcycles, mopeds or buses. It shall exclude trains and
Emergency Service Vehicles.
Nighttime Hours 9:00 pm to 7:00 am
Noise As used herein, any unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels taking into consideration the volume, duration,
frequency, and other characteristics of the sound.
Noise Control Officer Any police officer or other person so designated by the town manager who is trained in the operation
and calibration of the noise measurement equipment. The Noise Control Officer may only operate within his/her territorial
jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a civil summons as required in this ordinance
Person Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency,
political subdivision of the state, any other state or political subdivision or agency thereof or any legal successor,
representative, agent or agency of the forgoing.
Plainly Audible Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided faculties.
Sound An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with
internal forces that cause compression and refraction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic
of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
Sound Level In decibels, a weighted sound pressure level determined by the use of a sound meter whose characteristics and
frequency weighting are specified in ANSI standards.
Sound Level Meter Any instrument certified to meet or exceed ANSI standards which include an Omni directional
microphone, an amplifier, and output meter and frequency weighting network(s) for the measurement of sound level.
Violator As described herein, means any person that is in possession of or has control of any noise generating device.
§92A.03 CERTAIN SOUNDS PROHIBITED
The following acts and activities, among others, are hereby declared to be a source of “unreasonably loud and/or disturbing
noise” in violation of §92A.01.
A. Sounds Impacting Residential Areas: It shall be unlawful to carry on the following activities in any residentiallyzoned
area of the Town, or within three hundred (300) feet of any residentially-occupied structure in any zone of the
Town, except in accordance to a permit obtained from the Noise Control Officer:
(1) The sounding of any horn, car alarm, siren, or other signal device upon any automobile, except when used as a
signal of warning or danger, so as to create any unreasonable noise;
(2) The playing of any sound-magnifying device, radio, television, or musical equipment, within or outside of any
structure, in a manner or at a volume so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any
adjoining dwelling, apartment unit, or hotel/motel room;
(3) The operation a front-end loader for refuse collection during nighttime hours;
(4) The operation of construction machinery or performing any construction activities during nighttime hours,
except where an Essential Construction Sounds Permit has been issued;
(5) The operation of automotive repairs equipment or garage machinery out-of-doors during nighttime hours;
2
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
(6) The operation of lawn mowers or other domestic power tools, out-of-doors during nighttime hours;
(7) The creation of any mechanical noise which registers more than 60 dB(A) during nighttime hours at the property
line of the source of the noise.
B. Sounds Impacting All Areas: It shall be unlawful to carry on the following activities in any area of the town:
(1) To operate or allow the operation of any sound amplification equipment so as to create sounds registering fiftyfive
(55) dB(A) during daytime hours or fifty (50) dB(A) during nighttime hours, as measured at the property line of
the from where the sound is being amplified, except in accordance to a permit obtained from the Noise Control
Officer;
(2) To amplify sound produced by a radio, compact disc, or any other electronic device, or sounds produced by any
person or musical instrument from within a motor vehicle, so as to create an unreasonable noise such that the sound
is plainly audible at a distance of more than fifty (50) feet away from the vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to
vehicles used for business or political purposes which, in the normal course of operation, are not within five-hundred
(500) feet of any school, child care center, house of worship, personal care facility, or hospital. This subsection does
not apply to vehicles operating such equipment during public parades when a valid parade permit, with the sound
conditions identified, has been issued;
(3) To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any internal combustion engine when the muffler system is missing
or configured in such condition so as to result in the creation of unreasonable noise;
(4) The operation of any motor vehicle outside of any structure on private or public property in such a manner as to
create unreasonable noises, by actions including, but not limited to racing engines, spinning tires, jackrabbit starts,
and off-road operation.
C. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Emergency operations designed to protect the public health or safety;
(2) Work performed by State, County, Town or Government-Contracted crews in a right-of-way or utility easement
when the department responsible for the work determines that it is necessary to perform the work during nighttime
hours, under the following considerations:
(a) To avoid unreasonably impacting the flow of traffic; or
(b) To avoid unreasonably disrupting the provision of utility service.
§92A.04 PERMITS FOR ESSENTIAL CONSTRUCTION SOUNDS
This section applies only to the continuous-pour of a singular concrete job where industry recommendations or requirements
necessitates uninterrupted pours and where such pours must exceed the duration of the Daytime Hours otherwise allowing
such construction sounds.
A. Application - An application for a permit pursuant to this section must be submitted to the Matthews Police
Department at least fifteen (15) business days before the earliest requested construction sounds. Emergency requests
requiring less than the fifteen-day application period may be considered, however no such permits shall be issued for a
period beginning less than forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of application. The application shall specify the responsible
person(s) for on-site management of the construction project resulting in the essential construction sounds.
B. Site Review – The applicant and/or project manager shall meet at the site with a town representative to review and
discuss the conditions under which the construction sound may occur to minimize the sound impact upon occupied
properties within a 1,000 foot radius of the construction property.
C. Notice of Tentative Approval – Upon initial review of the applicant and requested use, if found within the conditions
of this section, a Notice of Tentative Approval shall be issued. For the permit to be considered ‘valid’ and in effect, the
applicant must cause for a notice to be delivered / disseminated to the occupants of all occupied properties located within
1,000 feet of the proposed location of essential construction sounds. The certified confirmation of that delivery of notice
shall be returned to the town’s Noise Control Officer at least ninety-six (96) hours prior to the proposed project, except
3
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
for emergency requests, whereby permit shall be issued upon confirmation of the timely notification of affected property
owners as described in this section.
D. Not Permitted in Residentially-Zoned Areas– Pursuant to the issuance of a permit, the creation of sounds registering
more than seventy (70) dB(A) anywhere within the boundary line of the nearest residentially-occupied property shall be
prohibited.
E. Permit Revocation – If sound checks taken by a representative of the Town during the construction event determines
the sound levels to be in excess of the permit, or should it be determined that any other conditions of this section have
not been completed as required or other conditions of the permit have not met or followed, the Town may Revoke the
issued permit and require an immediate cessation of the construction sound.
F. Permit Denial – If the applicant has been denied the issuance of a permit by the Noise Control Officer, and the
applicant believes the denial to be illegal under applicable local, state or federal law, the applicant may appeal the denial
to the Town Manager. The appeal shall be delivered in writing, and shall include a copy of the permit and a statement as
to the applicant’s belief as to the legal basis for the appeal. The Town Manager shall have the discretion to grant an
Essential Permit, waiving the exceptions for location, time of day, and/or decibel restrictions, upon his/her determination
that the applicant has made a substantial showing of legal entitlement. Any such Essential Permits shall be promptly
reported to the Board of Commissioners.
§92A.05 AMPLIFIED SOUND
It shall be unlawful to operate or allow the operation of any sound amplification equipment so as to create sounds registering
55 dB(A) or greater during daytime hours, or 50 dB(A) during nighttime hours, unless otherwise authorized in this ordinance.
A. The following Tables shall serve as the sound emission limits of volume and measurement standards for the listed
source of amplified sound except in accordance with a permit obtained from the Noise Control Officer:
Table 1 – Single Family Residential:
Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours Measurement
55 dB(A) 50 dB(A) Property line of nearest occupied
residential structure
Table 2 – Multi-Family/Tenant Structure:
Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours Measurement
55 dB(A) 50 dB(A)
From a point within the nearest
adjoining unit to the source of the
sound, or from the closest ‘common
area’ to the source of the sound
Table 3 – Residential/Institutional and Places of Public Gathering Having a Capacity of 1,000 or Greater (See also
§92A.08):
9:00 am – 10:00 pm 10:00 pm – 9:00 am Measurement
65 dB(A) 50 dB(A) As measured anywhere at property
line of nearest residential property
Table 4 – Business, Commercial or Industrial, Utilizing Sound to Advertise and/or Attract Customers:
Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours Measurement
60 dB(A) Not Permitted As measured at nearest public rightof-
way
Table 5 – Business, Commercial or Industrial, Other Amplified Sounds (see also §92A.06):
Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours Measurement
60 dB(A) Not Permitted As measured at nearest public rightof-
way
4
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
Table 6 – Street, Sidewalk, Public Right-of-Way, Public Parking Structure or Park:
Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours Measurement
60 dB(A) 50 dB(A) As measured fifty (50) feet from
source of amplified sound
70 dB(A) 60 dB(A) As measured ten (10) feet from source
of amplified sound
Table 7 – Street, Sidewalk, Public Right-of-Way, Public Parking Structure of Park – Portable Amplification Device (i.e.
‘PA System’):
Daytime Hours Nighttime Hours Measurement
60 dB(A) Not Permitted As measured fifty (50) feet from
source of amplified sound
70 dB(A) Not Permitted As measured ten (10) feet from source
of amplified sound
§92A.06 PERMITS FOR ADDITIONAL AMPLIFICATION
A. Application - An application for a permit pursuant to this section must be submitted to the Matthews Police
Department at least fifteen (15) business days before the permit time requested. It shall specify the responsible person(s)
for the sound amplification equipment.
B. Notice of Tentative Approval – Upon initial review of the applicant and requested use, if found within the conditions
of this section, a Notice of Tentative Approval shall be issued. For the permit to be considered ‘valid’ and in effect, the
applicant must cause for a notice to be delivered / disseminated to all occupied properties located within 1,000 feet of the
proposed location of sound amplification. This must be completed within seventy-two (72) hours of the proposed event.
The certified confirmation of that delivery of notice shall be returned to the Noise Control Officer prior to the event / use
of amplified sound.
C. Limits on hours - With the exception of permits issued pursuant to section§92A.09, no permit shall be issued which
will have the effect of allowing more than twenty (20) of excess amplification per year at any place of public
entertainment having a capacity of one thousand (1,000) or more persons or twelve (12) hours of excess amplification at
any other location.
D. Limit on Permits - Permits shall be tentatively approved and subsequently granted by the Matthews Police
Department in the order of receipt. Subsequent permits shall not be issued for a location within a one thousand (1,000)
foot radius of the location of an issued permit.
E. Not Permitted in Residentially-Zoned Areas– Pursuant to the issuance of a permit, the creation of sounds registering
more than seventy (70) dB(A) anywhere within the boundary line of the nearest residentially-occupied property shall be
prohibited.
F. Sound Check(s) – The applicant shall notify the Matthews Police Department when the amplification equipment is
ready for a sound check by the Noise Control Officer. Using a sound-level meter, the Noise Control Officer may take
readings to confirm that the levels have been set at the permitted level.
G. Permit Revocation – If sound checks taken by the Noise Control Officer during the event of amplified sound
determines the levels to be in excess of the permit, or should it be determined that any other conditions of this section
have not been completed as required or other conditions of the permit not met, the Noise Control Officer may Revoke
the issued permit and require an immediate cessation of the amplified sound.
H. Permit Denial – If the applicant has been denied the issuance of a permit by the Noise Control Officer, and believes
the denial to be illegal under applicable local, state or federal law, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Town
Manager. The appeal shall be delivered in writing, and shall include a copy of the permit and a statement as to the
applicant’s belief as to the legal basis for the appeal. The Town Manager shall have the discretion to grant an
Exceptional Permit, waiving the exceptions for location, time of day, and/or decibel restrictions, upon his/her
determination that the applicant has made a substantial showing of legal entitlement. Any such Exceptional Permits shall
be promptly reported to the Board of Commissioners.
5
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
§92A.07 OUTDOOR AMPLIFICATION & MUSIC at COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
A. Except in accordance to a permit issued pursuant to Section §92A.06, it shall be unlawful for any commercial
establishment, including, but not limited to restaurants, bars or nightclubs, to operate or allow the operation of sound
amplification equipment out of doors or directed out of doors or to allow live acoustic music out of doors or directed out
of doors other than during the times listed below or so as to create sounds registering in excess of:
Table 1 – Sunday through Thursday Table 2 – Friday through Saturday
B. The decibel limits prescribed in this section shall be measured at the property line of the commercial property from
where the sound is being generated
C. The amplified sound may only be produced during the operational hours of the commercial establishment.
D. An establishment that has been determined to be ‘Non-Cooperative’ pursuant to section §92A.10 (C) shall be subject
to enhanced civil penalties and, after two violations of this section within one year of having been deemed ‘Non-
Cooperative’, shall not operate or allow the operation of sound amplification or live acoustic music out of doors or
directed out of doors for a period of eighteen (18) months after the second violation. The prohibition shall apply to the
establishment and the property on which the establishment is located.
§92A.08 SOUND MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES & TECHNIQUES
A. For the purpose of determining decibels [dB(A)] as referenced in this ordinance, the noise shall be measured on the
“A-weighting scale slow response” on a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics
established by the American National Standards Institute.
B. When the Noise Control Officer determines that insufficient prima facie evidence exists for establishing a noise
violation case, the investigating officer will use a sound-level meter to measure the sound level. Sound measurements
shall be conducted at that time, day or night, when the suspect noise source is emitting sound.
C. The following procedures shall be utilized in the sound measurement process:
(1) The sound measurement equipment shall have been calibrated within one hour before use and one hour after use
to measure sound level;
(2) Prior to obtaining the sound sample, the sound level meter shall be set to the “A” weighted network at ‘slow
response’;
(3) The Omni directional microphone shall be set in an approximate 70 degree position, approximately four feet
from the ground or floor, facing the noise source while recording the meter’s instantaneous response (reading)
observed at consecutive ten-second intervals, taking 10 to 15 sample readings.
(4) No individual other than the operator of the sound meter shall be within ten feet of the sound level meter during
the measurement process.
§92A.09 PERMITS FOR LARGE OUTDOOR MUSIC FACILITIES
The purpose of this section is to establish a process by which permits may be issued to manage the musical and/or amplified
sound emissions at large outdoor facilities which are designed to accommodate such events.
A. For the purposes of this section, a “Large Outdoor Music Facility” means a facility with a capacity of 1,000 or more
persons and that offers musical and/or other amplified sound entertainment events at least five times a year.
8:00am – 11:00pm 11:00pm – 2:00am
85 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
8:00am – 9:00pm 9:00pm – 2:00am
85 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
6
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
B. A Large Outdoor Music Facility may, but is not required to, submit an application for a Large Outdoor Music Facility
permit. When issued, the permit authorizes the sound emissions, under the conditions described within the permit, for the
calendar year. All permits issued pursuant to this section expire December 31.
C. After consulting with the applicant and investigating the design and layout of the property, its proximity to
residentially-zoned property, and the nature of any intervening property, a permit may be issued that contains the
restrictions and/or requirements designed to strike an appropriate balance between legitimate use and operation of the
facility and the noise impacts on residential life.
D. The restrictions and/or requirements may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on days of week or hours of
operation, total number of events, operational requirements, design and/or structural requirements, and self-monitoring
and reporting requirements.
E. A facility issued a permit pursuant to this section shall not be subject to the provisions of Section §92A.06.
F. It shall be unlawful for a Large Outdoor Music Facility to violate the terms of a permit issued pursuant to this section
§92A.10 CHRONIC NOISE PRODUCER
The purpose of this section is to establish a collaborative process through which the Town and the owner / manager /
occupant of a property that has been identified as a chronic source of objectionable noise will develop and implement a noise
mitigation plan intended to bring the noise to acceptable levels. A ‘Chronic Noise Producer’ is a location that, because of the
sound generated by or at the location, is an annoyance to adjacent or nearby residences, lodgings, schools, businesses, or
other places where people may congregate with a reasonable expectation of undisturbed activity. An establishment may be a
Chronic Noise Producer without having violated other provisions of this Ordinance.
A. The Chief of Police (or designee) may designate the owner / manager / occupant of the location as a ‘Chronic Noise
Producer.’ In making such a determination, among other factors, the following shall be taken into consideration:
(1) The number and frequency of valid noise complaints;
(2) The proximity and physical relationship between the location and the complaining location(s);
(3) The severity of the sound events, both observed or measured;
(4) The times and days of the week of sound events;
(5) The location’s history of cooperation and efforts to alleviate the problem; and
(6) The history and context of the location, including whether the sound producing activity predates the occupation
of the complaining locations and/or whether the sound producing location is located in what is generally recognized
as an entertainment area.
B. Upon designation as a Chronic Noise Producer, the Chief of Police shall inform the location owner / manager /
occupant of the location and that it has been referred to the Chronic Noise Mitigation Committee.
(1) The Town’s Environmental Advisory Committee shall serve as the Chronic Noise Mitigation Committee
(‘Committee’) for the purposes of this section. The Committee may request and consider the input of town staff
and/or external experts with expertise in the type of location and/or noise under review.
(2) The Committee shall schedule a meeting with representatives of the location to review the information that
formed the basis for the designation and any additional information concerning the noise produced at the location.
(3) Following the meeting, the Committee shall determine whether a Mitigation Plan is warranted. If determined
warranted, the Committee and the representatives of the location shall together develop and endorse a noise
Mitigation Plan. The plan may include, among other things:
(a) Restrictions on days of week or hours of noise producing activities;
(b) Placement, orientation, and/or operation of sound-producing activity and/or equipment;
(c) Structural changes including, but not limited to, sound attenuation and baffling;
7
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
(d) Self-monitoring and reporting requirements;
(e) A schedule of plan implementation; and
(f) A schedule for review for possible revisions and or termination of the plan.
C. In the event that a location designated a ‘Chronic Noise Producer’: (i) fails or refuses to participate in good faith in the
development of a noise mitigation plan, (ii) refuses to agree to the developed noise mitigation plan, or (iii) fails to
implement or comply with an endorsed noise mitigation plan, the business or entity shall be deemed as ‘Non-
Cooperative’ and shall not be entitled to the benefits of this section until that designation has been removed. The
designation shall only be removed when the reason for such designation has been resolved to the acceptance of the
Committee and the Town.
D. In the event that noise enforcement action is taken against a location previously designated as a Chronic Noise
producer, evidence of the location owner / manager / occupant’s participation in the development and implementation of
and compliance with the noise mitigation plan shall be relevant to any prosecution or administrative or judicial review or
appeal of the enforcement action. A location owner/manager/occupant who fails to comply with this subsection shall not
be entitled to the benefits of this subsection unless the failure is remedied to the town’s satisfaction.
E. Appeals. The owner / manager / occupant of a location that has been designated as a Chronic Noise Producer or Non-
Cooperative may appeal such designation within ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of such designation.
Appeals shall be heard by the town manager or the manager’s designee, who shall not be a member of the police
department or a member of the Chronic Noise Mitigation Committee utilized in that investigation. The appellant shall
have the right to present evidence at said hearing. A ruling on appeal is subject to review in superior court of
Mecklenburg County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari for review shall be
filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision has been sent to the appellant.
§92A.11 ENFORCEMENT & PENALTIES
A. Enforcement - When there is a violation of any section of this Chapter, the Town, at its discretion, may take one or
more of the following enforcement remedies:
(1) Civil Penalty – The Noise Control Officer or any police officer may issue a notice of violation as provided
subjecting the violator to a civil penalty of $100, which penalty may provide for a delinquency charge of $10 per
day upon non-payment, in which penalty and delinquency charge may be recovered by the Town in a civil action.
The civil penalty must be paid within 72 hours of the date and hour of issuance, with the delinquency penalty
beginning at the 72nd hour.
(2) Repeated Offenses - In the event of more than one violation within any 30-day period, the civil penalty shall be
increased for each additional violation as follows:
(a) $250 Second Offense
(b) $500 Third Offense
(c) $750 Fourth Offense
(d) $1,000 Fifth & Subsequent Offense
(3) The Town may seek an injunction and order of abatement directed toward any person or entity creating or
allowing the creation of any unlawful noise, including the owner or person otherwise having legal or actual control
of the premises from which it emanates.
B. Enforcement - When there are repeated violations of section §92A.07 or §92A.09, the Town, at its discretion, may
take following enforcement:
(1) An establishment which has been found in violation of this section more than two times within any twelvemonth
period may be classified a ‘Chronic Noise Producer’ and have its privileges under this section suspended for
a period of up to twelve months. This may be relieved only if a Mitigation Plan is developed, enacted and confirmed
that it brings the establishment within compliance of this section.
8
Chapter 92A. Noise Control
(2) An establishment having had its privileges under either section §92A.07 or §92A.09 suspended pursuant to such
designation shall only legally produce or allow to be produced amplified or live sound pursuant to the restrictions
described in section §92A.05, Table 5.
(3) The Town may seek an injunction and order of abatement directed toward any person or entity creating or
allowing the creation of any unlawful noise, including the owner or person otherwise having legal or actual control
of the premises from which it emanates.
(4) An establishment which has had its privileges under sections §92A.07 or §92A.09 suspended continues to
produce or allow to be produced amplified or acoustic sounds in excess of those allowed under §92A.05, Table 5,
shall be subject to a civil fine of $1,000 per violation.
C. Criminal Penalty - Violators may be charged with a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or
ordered to thirty (30) days in jail, pursuant to NC GS 14-4.
§92A.11 SEVERABILITY
If any provisions of this subchapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is for any reason held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the subchapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions and subchapter are declared to be severable.
9
1
Chapter 93. Parks and Recreation
Section
93.01 Hours of operation
93.02 Prohibited use of buildings and other property
93.03 Trees, shrubbery and lawns
93.04 Picnic or shelter areas
93.05 Deposit of garbage or refuse; responsibility for disposal
93.06 Prohibited conduct within park
93.99 Penalty
§ 93.01 HOURS OF OPERATION.
(A) Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies as determined by the Town Board of Commissioners, parks
shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each
individual park shall be determined by the Town Board and shall be posted therein for public information. ('72 Code,
§ 14A-5-1)
(B) Any section of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Town Board at any time and for any interval
of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Town
Board shall find reasonably necessary. ('72 Code, § 14A-5-2) (Ord. 34, passed 12-11-78)
§ 93.02 PROHIBITED USE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY.
No person shall:
(A) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, adulterate, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any buildings, bridges,
tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, swimming pools or wading pools, paving or paving material, water lines or other
public utilities or parts of appurtenances thereof, fences, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent,
receptacles, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures, improvements or equipment,
facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(B) Dig, or remove, any soil, rock or stones, or any trees, shrubs, plants, plantings, grass or make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(C) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
run or string any public service into, upon or across those lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
('72 Code, § 14A-1-1) (Ord. 34, passed 12-11-78) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.03 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LAWNS.
No person shall:
2
(A) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any
tree or plant; attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant, or tie or hitch an animal to any tree or
plant.
(B) Climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences, gun-carriages, trees or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for those purposes. ('72 Code, § 14A-1-2) (Ord. 34, passed 12-11-78)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.04 PICNIC OR SHELTER AREAS.
(A) No person in a park shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the
nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse, is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided.
('72 Code, § 14A-3-1)
(B) No person in a park shall interfere with the use of any picnic shelter, including the connected porches and patios,
by the persons occupying the same, or obstruct in any manner the access to and from those shelters. ('72 Code, §
14A-3-2) (Ord. 34, passed 12-11-78) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.05 DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE OR REFUSE; RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPOSAL.
No person in a park shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash anywhere on the park grounds; except that matter may be placed in proper
receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from
the park by the person responsible for its presence, and property disposed of elsewhere. ('72 Code, § 14A-2-1) (Ord.
34, passed 12-11-78) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.06 PROHIBITED CONDUCT WITHIN PARK.
No person in a park shall:
(A) Bring alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs, beer or wine into a park; or be under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, beer, wine or illegal drugs in a park; nor shall anyone consume the same in a public park except where
appropriate ABC permits have been issued to an organization in connection with any outdoor festival or event of a
national, state or local significance; and additionally, where appropriate park use permit containing a provision
concerning the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages has been approved by the Town Board of
Commissioners. ('72 Code, § 14A-4-1)
(B) Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, in any park, except by express
permission given by the Town Board of Commissioners. ('72 Code, § 14A-4-2)
(C) Build or attempt to build a fire in any park except in those areas and under those regulations as may be
designated; drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other
inflammable material within any park area. ('72 Code, §14A-4-3)
(D) Enter an area in a park posted as “CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC,” nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any
area in violation of posted notices. ('72 Code, § 14A-4-4) (Ord. 34, passed 12-11-78; Am. Ord. 757, passed 9-28-92)
Penalty, see § 93.99
3
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a
misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both
such fine and imprisonment, and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. ('72 Code,
§ 14A-6-1) (Ord. 34, passed 12-11-78)
Chapter 94. Public Nuisances
Chapter 94. Public Nuisances
Section
94.01 Certain conditions constitute public nuisance
94.02 Investigation
94.03 Notice to abate
94.04 Request for appeal hearing
94.05 Abatement procedure
94.06 Chronic Violators
94.07 Household items left outside
94.08 Cost of removal to be charged to owner or other person in possession
94.09 Unpaid charges to be lien on property
94.10 Other remedies
§ 94.01 CERTAIN CONDITIONS CONSTITUTE PUBLIC NUISANCE
The existence of any of the following situations within the corporate limits is hereby declared to be dangerous and
prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute a public nuisance. It shall be the shared responsibility of the
owner of record and/or the occupant to maintain grass and ground cover vegetation and to cut/remove grass, weeds or
any accumulation of any noxious matter listed below as often as necessary to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter. Any of the following situations shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
(A) The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to an average height in excess of 12 inches, when such
uncontrolled growth situation is located:
(1) on a lot within a platted residential subdivision, adjacent to improved property, and which has been
graded or cleared of natural vegetation whether or not any further construction has occurred;
(2) on a vacant lot greater than one acre in area when such uncontrolled growth is adjacent to improved
property or a street (public or private), then limited to that portion of the site within 100 feet from any such
adjacent improved property or public or private street;
(3) on an improved property of any size, where at least one-third of the overall property includes such
uncontrolled growth, such as only the rear yard of a house parcel;
(4) on right-of-way or planting strip between sidewalk and curb or edge of pavement in front of any lot and
adjacent to any public or private street. For purposes of this subchapter, “improved property” shall include
any buildings, accessory structures, and/or any ground that has been surfaced with concrete, asphalt, gravel,
or similar material, whether or not currently being used for any activity on-site. This subchapter shall not
apply to any portions of any property which has been designated by any authorized governmental agency as
undisturbed open space, water quality buffer area or BMP which utilizes a naturalized vegetative setting, or
public road right-of-way designated and maintained as a naturalized planting area.
(B) Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk causing or threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or
threatening to cause the accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the inhabitation therein
of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
(C) Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the
inhabitance therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the
public health.
(D) Any accumulation of fallen trees, dead trees, or tree limbs of a sufficient quantity to cause or threaten to cause
the habitation of mosquitoes, rats, mice, or vermin, except where located only within portions of parcels that are
heavily wooded.
1
Chapter 94. Public Nuisances
(E) Any vacant unsecured building including but not limited to houses, apartments, nonresidential buildings and
accessory buildings, which contribute to or are likely to contribute to blighted neighborhood conditions such as
vagrancy, trash accumulation, alcohol or illegal drug use, trespassing, prostitution, or other criminal activities. For
purposes of this subchapter, an “unsecured building” shall include a roofed structure with any opening on the
exterior skin of the building such as broken windows, unlocked or missing doors, and which is large enough and
within ground level reach for a human or animal to enter. Such opening may be completely unimpeded or may
have a covering which is hinged or sliding but is not locked or stabilized to prevent entry.
(F) Any structure, the remains of a structure, or portion that is in a damaged condition as the result of fire, wind,
flood, or other disaster and that remains in an unrepaired state for a period of 120 days from the date of the
disaster, or from the date of conclusion of any criminal, legal, or insurance investigation following the disaster,
when one or more of the following conditions is present on-site:
(1) glass, metal or other sharp objects are in an accessible location;
(2) any structure or any tree is unstable and may fall or collapse;
(3) any substance is present that is hazardous or harmful to humans or animals;
(4) any utility connections or lines, including but not limited to electric, natural gas, water, sewer, are in an
accessible location and present a condition that may be hazardous or harmful to humans or animals.
(G) Any accumulation of demolition debris from structures or vegetation which remains on-site for longer than 30
days when no continuing construction or clean-up activity is progressing.
(H) Any dilapidated furniture, refrigerator, stove or other appliance, hot tub, Jacuzzi, machinery, equipment,
building material, or other item which is either wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled, or in an
inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building, when such item(s) could cause or
threaten to cause: a fire hazard, or the accumulation of stagnant water, or cause or the inhabitation of mosquitoes,
other insects, rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health.
(I) Any unmaintained swimming pool or its appurtenances which may be dangerous or prejudicial to public health
and safety, including but not limited to pools with stagnant water, debris, dead animals or structural deficiencies,
or which lacks proper swimming pool barriers as defined in the NC State Building Code.
(J) Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the rules and regulations of the Mecklenburg
County public health agencies.
§ 94.02 INVESTIGATION
The Town Code Enforcement Officer or other responsible Town official or designee, upon notice from any person of
the existence of any of the conditions in § 94.01, shall investigate the location to determine whether, in fact, those
conditions exist as to constitute a public nuisance as declared in § 94.01.
§ 94.03 NOTICE TO ABATE
Upon a determination that those conditions constituting a public nuisance exist, the Town Code Enforcement Officer or
other responsible Town official or designee shall notify the owner of record, and/or the occupant or person in
possession of the premises of the conditions constituting a public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement within
15 days from the date of notice. Notice of violation of this subchapter shall be provided in writing in one or more of the
following:
(A) Written notice shall be either hand-delivered or mailed by first class mail to the owner of record and /or to any
known occupant;
(B) Additionally, written notice may be sent electronically (fax, e-mail, or similar) to the property owner and/or
occupant where such connection can be determined;
2
Chapter 94. Public Nuisances
(C) Written notice may be posted in a conspicuous location on the property, where it can be expected to be
sheltered from wind or rain and remain legible for a period of at least 48 hours;
(D) Written notice may be published in a newspaper which covers news in the local Matthews area, in print and/or
electronic form;
(E) Written notice may be sent by first class mail or electronically to any interested parties, including but not
limited to a financial institution, mortgage company, attorney, or property management organization. The form or
forms of notice delivery shall be documented, along with time and date of posting, mailing, or other method of
delivery. Receipt of first-class mailing to the owner as listed in Mecklenburg County real estate tax records shall
be assumed completed in absence of information provided to the Code Enforcement Officer to the contrary. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain this documentation, along with any verbal or written response to such
notice(s). Effort shall be made to verify receipt of notice before the close of the 7-day appeal period.
§ 94.04 REQUEST FOR APPEAL HEARING
Within seven days from receipt of the notice provided for in § 94.03, the owner, occupant or person in possession of the
premises may request a hearing before the Town Board of Commissioners and the Town Code Enforcement Officer
whose investigation and findings resulted in the initial abatement order. The Town Board shall fix a time for the
hearing, and the initial abatement order shall be temporarily suspended pending a hearing. At the hearing, the individual
affected by the order shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the findings which supported the
abatement order. Upon completion of the hearing, the Town Board shall consider the evidence before them and shall
either revoke the initial order, issue a final order which differs from the initial order, or reinstate the initial order as a
final abatement order.
§ 94.05 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
(A) Upon the occurrence of either of the following conditions, the Town Code Enforcement Officer or other
responsible Town official or designee shall cause that condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having
Town employees or independent contractors to go upon those premises and remove or otherwise abate the
identified nuisance under his/her supervision:
(1) A hearing is requested and held under § 94.04 resulting in either a final order with modifications or the
reinstatement of the initial order as a final order, and such order is not complied with; or
(2) No hearing is requested or held, and the person having been ordered to abate that public nuisance fails,
neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days from receipt of
the order.
(B) Any person who has been finally ordered to abate a public nuisance may within the time allowed by this
chapter request the town in writing to remove that condition, the cost of which shall be paid by the person making
the request. The person making the request shall sign a statement indicating the estimated cost for abatement is
understood, and full payment shall be made to the Town within 10 days after site work is completed.
§ 94.06 CHRONIC VIOLATORS
The Town Code Enforcement Officer or other responsible Town official or designee may provide notification as a
chronic violator to any property owner of record when the violator’s property is found to meet the public nuisance
criteria listed at § 94.01. For purposes of this Chapter, a chronic violator is a person who was issued a notice of
violation, declaring the owner’s property a public nuisance under § 94.01 at least three (3) times in the previous
calendar year. The Town Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the initial annual notice as a chronic violator by
registered or certified mail, and may also use additional methods of posting or delivery of such initial annual notice.
The Town Code Enforcement Officer shall without further notice in the calendar year in which notice is given as a
chronic violator, take action to remedy or abate the violation, and the expense of the abatement action shall become a
lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
3
Chapter 94. Public Nuisances
§ 94.07 HOUSEHOLD ITEMS LEFT OUTSIDE
(A) In order to assure public safety, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any secured building or
structure, in any place accessible to humans, any appliance, refrigerator, or other container for any period of time
or for any purpose unless such appliance, refrigerator, or other container is altered such that all hinged or
moveable compartments or openings are firmly secured and incapable of operating, This provision shall not apply
to any appliance, refrigerator, or container which has been placed in, or adjacent to, a structure when allowed by
zoning standards as accessory to a permitted use and is accessible only to persons involved with such permitted
use, or when such appliance, refrigerator, or container is crated, strapped, secured or locked so that it is not
plausible for a person to obtain access to any airtight compartment.
(B) Upon determination by the Town Code Enforcement Officer or other responsible Town official or designee
that any item as listed in 94.07(A) above is in violation of this subchapter, a notice of violation shall be posted on
the item or on the premises in a conspicuous location, calling for correction of the violation within 24 hours. The
Town Code Enforcement Officer or Town Police officer shall also make reasonable attempt to contact the
property owner and/or occupant of the premises to notify them of the violation. If such violation remains unabated
beyond the 24 hours notice, the Town shall presume the item has been abandoned and is subject to being
immediately secured in locked position or dismantled so as to be inoperable without further notice in order to
assure public safety.
§ 94.08 COST OF REMOVAL TO BE CHARGED TO OWNER OR OTHER PERSON IN POSSESSION
The cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner or
other person in possession of that lot or parcel of land. Within a 5-year period of the first abatement procedure, the
second abatement procedure the property owner shall incur the cost incurred by the town to abate the nuisance plus
$100; a third abatement procedure within the first 5 years, the property owner shall pay the cost of the town’s
abatement procedure plus $150; and any fourth or subsequent abatement procedure within the said 5 years, the property
owner shall pay the cost of the town’s abatement procedure process plus $200 for each violation. At the end of the
initial 5-year period, the process of abatement charges shall start all over. (Ord. 1925, passed 1-28-13)
§ 94.09 UNPAID CHARGES TO BE LIEN ON PROPERTY
In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a
statement of charges as provided for in § 94.08, those charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises where
the public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
§ 94.10 OTHER REMEDIES
The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under
law for the abatement of public nuisances and this chapter shall not prevent the Town from proceeding in a criminal
action against any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. No. 1752, passed 9-13-10)
4
Chapter 94A. Graffiti Abatement
1
Chapter 94A. Graffiti Abatement
Section
94A.01 Purpose
94A.02 Definitions
94A.03 Defacement by Graffiti Prohibited
94A.04 Removing Graffiti Required
94A.05 Enforcement/Remedies
94A.06 Severability
§ 94A.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal
of graffiti from public and private property. The Matthews Board of Commissioners finds that graffiti is a Public
Nuisance and is destructive of the rights and value of property owners as well as of the entire community. It is believed
that when graffiti is not removed, other properties become the target of graffiti, and entire areas are affected and
become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the Town.
§ 94A.02 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to this section:
Graffiti - any inscription, word, writing, drawing, figure, mark of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance,
etching, engraving or other defacement (collectively “defacement”) by a graffiti implement or chalk or by the
application of any material, gum label, paper, fabric or other matter (collectively “matter”) with adhesive or other
substance which is intended to make the application of the matter permanent or difficult to remove, on public or private
property. Graffiti does not include temporary, easily removable chalks or other water soluble markings which are used
in connection with traditional children’s activities such as drawings of bases for ball games, hopscotch and similar
activities, nor does it include temporary, easily removable markings used in connection with any lawful business or
public purpose or activity and markings used to denote the location of underground utility infrastructure and those used
in conjunction with establishing survey control data and location points by survey crews.
Graffiti Implement - any aerosol paint container or paint applicator or brush, indelible marker containing ink or other
pigmented liquid that is not water soluble, stick or label, paint stick, etching equipment or any other device capable of
defacing or leaving a visible mark on public or private property.
Notice to Remove - a written notice provided by Town, either in person or by way of first class mail, to the person(s)
responsible either for the graffiti or the property on which the graffiti is displayed.
Property Owner(s) - any person, group of people, governmental entity, or corporation having lawful control or
possession of property to include such owner’s agent or manager, or any other person if known to the Town. The owner
of the property shall be deemed to be those persons whose names appear on the tax records as having an interest in the
property.
§ 94A.03 DEFACEMENT BY GRAFFITI PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, inscribe, scratch, scrawl, spray, place or draw graffiti of any type on
any public or private building structure or any other real or personal property.
§ 94A.04 REMOVING GRAFFITI REQUIRED
Chapter 94A. Graffiti Abatement
2
(A) Notice to Remove. Upon determination that graffiti is present, the Town shall deliver to the perpetrator of the
graffiti, if known, and/or to the property owner or person in possession, a Notice to Remove.
The Notice to Remove shall include:
(1) The street address or other description of the property sufficient for property identification;
(2) A description and general location of the graffiti;
(3) A statement that the property is a public nuisance due to the existence of the graffiti;
(4) A statement that the graffiti must be removed or effectively obscured within the time period specified within
this ordinance and that if the nuisance is not so abated within that time the Town will abate the public nuisance
at the cost of the property owner as set forth; and
(5) Information concerning procedures for appeal of the notice.
(B) Removal by perpetrator. It shall be unlawful for any person placing graffiti on public or private property to fail
to remove such graffiti or cause such graffiti to be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after a Notice to Remove
is delivered by the Town. If graffiti is applied by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age, the parents
or legal guardians of such minor shall be responsible for the removal of the graffiti within forty-eight (48) hours
after notice from the Town. The removal by the person placing the graffiti shall only be completed with the
permission of the property owner or person in possession.
(C) Removal by property owner. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to remove of effectively
obscure any graffiti upon property they own, manage, or are in lawful control or possession of within five (5)
business days after receiving written notice (Notice to Remove) from the Town.
(D) Appeal. Any property owner who receives a Notice to Remove may appeal the notice within five (5) business
days of receipt of notice to the Town Board of Commissioners in writing and shall state with specificity the reason
(s) for the appeal. Thereafter, the Town Board will set a hearing on the appeal.
(E) Removal by Town. If the Town has delivered a Notice to Remove to the property owner or person in possession
and that person fails or refuses to remove or effectively obscure graffiti upon their property as directed in the
Notice, then, in addition to other enforcement actions hereunder, the Town is authorized to remove the graffiti and
the cost to remove same shall be charged to the property owner or other person in possession. If the expenses of
removing or obscuring the graffiti is not paid by the property owner or person in possession within thirty (30) days
of receipt of a statement for the cost of such removal, the expense of the abatement actions by the Town shall
become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
(F) Emergency removal. If the Town determines that any graffiti is a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the
public and is unable to provide notice by personal service after at least two attempts to do so, then forty-eight (48)
hours after either mailing of the notice by first class mail or the posting of the notice in a conspicuous place on the
property, the Town may remove or cause the graffiti to be removed or obscured at its expense.
§ 94A.05 ENFORCEMENT/REMEDIES
(A) Civil Penalties. The Town reserves the right to seek penalties and/or remedies through civil and/or criminal
means as described below. The Town Manager shall designate staff person(s) who shall enforce this ordinance.
Citations issued must be paid within seven (7) days from the issue date and time to the town. The Town is
authorized to file civil suit to collect any unpaid citations.
(1) Violations of subsection §94A.03 (Graffiti): Violations of subsection §94A.03 shall subject the offender(s)
to civil penalties in the amount as described in this section pursuant to the total number of adjudicated
violations within the Town of Matthews by the offender.
(a) First offense: $ 100
(b) Second offense $ 250
Chapter 94A. Graffiti Abatement
3
(c) Third offense $ 500
(d) Fourth offense $ 750
(e) Fifth and any subsequent offenses $1,000
(2) Violations of subsection §94A.04 (Removal): Violations of subsection §94A.04 shall subject the offender(s)
to civil penalties as described below.
(a) Property Owner: Violations of subsection §94A.04 by the property owner or person in possession shall
be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $100 per offense.
(b) Offender(s): Violations of subsection §94A.04 by the offenders creating the graffiti shall subject the
offender or, if offender is a juvenile, the parent or guardian of the juvenile, to a civil penalty not to exceed
$250 per offense.
(B) Criminal penalty. In addition to, or in lieu of civil penalties or other remedies, violation of subsection §94A.03
of this section shall constitute a criminal infraction. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not more than $500 nor imprisoned more than thirty (30) days.
§ 94A.06 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this section shall be deemed severable. If any portion of this section is deemed unconstitutional, it
shall not affect the constitutionality of any other portion of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1800, passed 5-9-11)
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
Section
Foreign Materials on Public Streets
95.01 Definition
95.02 Deposit of foreign materials prohibited
95.03 Responsibility to ensure compliance
95.04 Failure to remove materials prohibited
95.05 Overhanging or protruding shrubs, fences, etc.
95.06 Obstructions to vision at street intersections
Sidewalk Improvements
95.15 Petition for and approval of improvement required
95.16 Improvement specifications
95.17 Financing sidewalk improvements within corporate limits
95.18 Sidewalks to become property of town
95.30 Regulating Street Encroachments
95.40 Driveways; General
95.99 Penalty
Cross-reference: Sidewalk and drainage facility construction in conjunction with construction of structures or
buildings, see §§150.50 through 150.57
FOREIGN MATERIALS ON PUBLIC STREETS
§ 95.01 DEFINITION. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FOREIGN MATERIAL. Any mud, dirt, gravel, construction materials, debris or other material foreign in nature to the
surface on which it is deposited. This shall not include materials lawfully applied to streets or sidewalks for the control
of ice and snow or dust and shall not include materials applied by public agencies for traffic control purposes.
('72 Code, § 14B-1) (Ord. 312, passed 12-9-85)
§ 95.02 DEPOSIT OF FOREIGN MATERIALS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or firm to deposit or cause to be deposited foreign materials on the
public streets.
('72 Code, § 14B-1) (Ord. 312, passed 12-9-85) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.03 RESPONSIBILITY TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or firm in charge of a worksite or an unpaved public parking lot to
fail to take reasonable and appropriate steps to assure that vehicles leaving their sites do not deposit foreign materials
on public streets or sidewalks.
('72 Code, § 14B-2) (Ord. 312, passed 12-9-85) Penalty, see § 95.99
1
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
§ 95.04 FAILURE TO REMOVE MATERIALS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or firm depositing foreign materials on the public streets or
sidewalks, or failing to maintain a work site or an unpaved public parking lot as to assure that vehicles leaving their
sites do not deposit foreign materials on public streets or sidewalks, from failing to remove immediately from the public
streets or sidewalks all foreign materials which they deposited or caused to be deposited on the public streets or
sidewalks or which came from their worksite or unpaved public parking lot.
('72 Code, § 14B-3) (Ord. 312, passed 12-9-85) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.05 OVERHANGING OR PROTRUDING SHRUBS, FENCES, ETC.
No person may cause or allow from his or her property or property under his or her control any bush, shrub or other
growth or any trellis, fence, awning or other obstruction to overhang a public street at a distance of less than 20 feet
above the traveled portion of such street or a public sidewalk at a distance of less than 7 feet above such sidewalk.
No person may cause or allow grass, vines, weeds or other vegetation to grow from property under his or her ownership
or control over, onto or across any public street or sidewalk.
(Ord. 1961A, passed 8-12-13)
§ 95.06 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION AT STREET INTERSECTIONS
(A) No person may cause or allow any fence, shrub, bush or other planting on property under his or her ownership
or control to substantially obstruct vision between a height of 2 feet and a height of 10 feet measured above the
average elevation of the existing surfaces of the intersecting streets at their centerlines within the area formed by
joining points on the property lines measured as follows:
(1) On property lines abutting streets 50 feet or less in right-of-way width, the points on the property lines shall
be 25 feet from the lot corner.
(2) On property lines abutting streets more than 50 feet in right-of-way width, the points on the property lines
shall be 40 feet from the lot corner.
(B) The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit obstructions caused by natural grade or by
retaining wall.
(Ord. 1961A, passed 8-12-13)
SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS
§ 95.15 PETITION FOR AND APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED
(A) Any petition for sidewalk improvement must be signed by at least a majority in number of the owners of
property to be assessed, who must represent at least a majority of all the lineal feet of frontage of the lands
abutting on the street or portion thereof to be improved.
(B) The town may require the petitioner to submit as part of the written application that information, plans or
other data as may be required to adequately determine if the requirements of this subchapter are met.
(C) When petition is made for sidewalk improvement to serve an area or development that is planned as part of a
larger development project or subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time petition is made, the
owner or owners shall submit plans in sufficient detail in order to determine the size and type improvement which
will be necessary to serve the entire development or subdivision when completed.
2
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
(D) No sidewalk improvement in the town shall be made and no petition shall be approved except in accordance
with the requirements of this subchapter; however, nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent the Town
Board of Commissioners from making sidewalk improvements on their own initiative without a petition being
filed.
('72 Code, § 18-1)
§ 95.16 IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
(A) All improvements to sidewalks within the town shall be governed by the following:
(1) The minimum distance for any sidewalk improvement shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners.
The minimum distance for sidewalk improvements shall be one platted block.
(2) The size and type of sidewalk to be constructed and other accompanying facilities shall be determined by
the Town Board in accordance with the recognized standards and accepted engineering practices and design
and in accordance with applicable system plans adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
(3) The Board of Commissioners shall confer with the consulting engineer and any other person it deems
necessary to see that those standards and engineering practices and designs are implemented.
('72 Code, § 18-2)
(B) Any sidewalks constructed under the provisions of this subchapter shall be installed in accordance with the
approved plans, specifications and other requirements of the town.
('72 Code, § 18-4) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.17 FINANCING SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS
(A) Improvements to approved subdivisions or developed property.
(1) When petition is received requesting the construction of sidewalks or sidewalk improvements to serve
property within the corporate limits which is developed or has been previously approved as a subdivision, or
where streets have previously been dedicated and accepted by the town, and where that area is not part of a
new subdivision which has not been approved by the town, the consulting engineer or other person designated
by the Board of Commissioners shall estimate the cost of the project and present the petition for that
improvement or construction along with the estimated cost and other required information to the Board of
Commissioners for approval. If the petition is approved by the Board of Commissioners and subject to the
availability of funds, the town will install or have installed by contract under its supervision the construction or
improvements which have been approved, and the construction or improvements shall be financed in
accordance with this division.
(2) When an approved sidewalk improvement or construction project has been completed and the total cost
thereof determined, unless the petition specifies another percentage, not more than 50% of the total cost of the
sidewalk improvement or construction shall be assessed against the property owners whose property abuts
upon that improvement at any equal rate per foot in accordance with and under the authority granted to the
town by G.S. § 160A 216 through 160A-236 as amended. The remaining 50% or other percent of the total cost
of those improvements or construction shall be borne by the town from funds appropriated for this purpose.
(3) Any property owner or owners shall have the opportunity in accordance with G.S. § 160A-232, to pay his
or their proportionate share of the cost of those improvements or construction after the assessment roll is
confirmed rather than paying his or their share in equal annual installments with interest as required by the
statute.
(4) Except when the petition involves a single owner, in no instance shall a property owner be assessed on
more than 600 feet of frontage abutting the sidewalk. If the property abutting the sidewalk has a frontage of
more than 600 feet, the town shall pay for the remaining feet of frontage.
3
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
(5) In the event one of the property owners petitioning for sidewalk improvement owns a corner lot, the plans
calling for sidewalk on both sides of the corner, he shall be assessed only for the side having the greater
amount of frontage. The town shall pay for the remaining feet of frontage.
(B) Improvements to proposed developments or subdivisions. Sidewalk improvements or construction is a
required improvement that must be accomplished prior to approval of the final plat by the Board of
Commissioners.
(See Chapter 152, Subdivision Regulations.) ('72 Code, § 18-3)
§ 95.18 SIDEWALKS TO BECOME PROPERTY OF TOWN
All sidewalks constructed under the provisions of this subchapter shall become the sole property of the town
and under its jurisdiction and control for any and all purposes whatsoever at the time those sidewalks are constructed.
('72 Code, § 18-4)
§ 95.30 STREET ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED, EXCEPTIONS
(A) After the effective date of this ordinance, no person or firm shall construct any sign (except “sandwich signs”
as allowed for in the Zoning Ordinance), structure, building, wall, landscaping structure, or private utility such as
lighting or sprinkler systems within the right-of-way of any town maintained street, or any street expected to be
accepted and maintained by the Town in the future, except in accordance with this section.
(B) On a case by case basis, the Town Manager may grant an encroachment to an adjacent property owner upon
the execution of a “Right-Of-Way Encroachment Agreement” to be prepared by the Town and the payment of a
fee to be established from time to time by the Town Board of Commissioners. Encroachment agreements shall be
in a form suitable for recording at the Deeds Office of the County of Mecklenburg and shall contain provisions to
hold harmless the Town and any public utility franchised by the Town to use the public streets, and in addition,
shall indemnify the
Town for any and all damages and/or injury caused by the existence of the encroachment.
(C) Prior to the final acceptance of any street, existing or future, into the Town system for maintenance, an
inspection shall be made for encroachments and such encroachments must be removed or a “Right-Of-Way
Encroachment Agreement” must be obtained.
(D) Any and all encroachments, covered by an agreement or not, shall be removed by the party responsible upon
reasonable notice by the Town, and failure to remove said encroachment shall result in the imposition of a civil
penalty of $100.00, and each day’s failure to remove said encroachment shall be treated as a separate offense. In
cases of a threat to the safety of the public, the Town may remove the encroachment without notice, and assess the
full cost of such removal to the responsible party.
(Ord. 953, passed 2-9-98)
§ 95.40 DRIVEWAY, GENERAL
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person may open, construct, reconstruct, alter, or relocate any
driveway across any public sidewalk or into any Town-maintained street, or cut any curb for such purpose without
having obtained a written permit from the Town Engineer or his designee.
(B) Any person who receives a permit under this section shall be responsible for constructing said driveway in
accordance with the specifications established by the Public Works Department and for repairing any damage to
the planting strip, sidewalk or street (including curb and gutter or drainage swale) caused by the driveway
construction.
(C) The Engineer shall review the driveway construction and design plans and shall issue a permit unless he finds
the driveway, if constructed, a danger to persons using the street or sidewalk intersected by the driveway, or
4
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
public facilities (including utility poles, traffic signal standards, etc.), or will fail to comply with the specifications
of the Town or any of the provisions of this section.
(D) No driveway may be constructed closer than three feet to a fire hydrant or catch basin or closer than 10 feet to
the right–of-way line of a street that intersects with the street the driveway opens onto, unless specifically
approved by the Engineer. Additional distances may be required by other standards, such as the Zoning
Ordinance.
(E) Any person paving a private driveway that intersects with or opens onto a public street shall make the
pavement of such driveway connect with and conform to the street and sidewalk cross sections in accordance with
the specifications of the Town. Any variations must be approved by the Town Engineer.
(F) All driveways that abut streets that are maintained by the NC Department of Transportation, shall obtain
permits in accordance with the policies and requirements of the NC Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 1578, passed 8-13-07)
§ 95.41 DRIVEWAYS FOR BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
(A) Commercial driveways shall comply with the applicable specifications of the Town of Matthews, or the
NCDOT as applicable.
(B) Commercial driveways shall fully comply with all provisions of the Matthews Zoning Ordinance with respect
to number and location.
(C) The Town shall retain the right to deny any driveway permit when solely in the opinion of the Town that
traffic flow and safety will be compromised or if other driveway access points adequately serve the business.
(Ord. 1578, passed 8-13-07)
§ 95.42 BLANKET PERMITS – RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
(A) In lieu of individual driveway permits for all lots in a residential subdivision, the Engineer may issue a
blanket permit for all lots within the subdivision, to be effective for a period of five (5) years from the date of
acceptance of the final plat by the Board of Commissioners.
(B) To obtain a blanket permit, the developer shall submit a written request for the exemption as part of his
preliminary construction submissions. The Town Engineer in writing, prior to initial construction, shall note the
exemption in the file and establish the five-year period. This exemption shall apply to the initial construction on
the lot and changes afterwards will require an individual permit. Driveways must still comply with the
specifications of the Town.
(C) Upon the expiration of the five (5) year period, any additional driveways constructed on any lot shall require
an individual driveway permit.
(D) Any residential subdivision final plat approved by the Board of Commissioners after July 1, 2004, but prior to
the adoption of this ordinance shall be treated as if a blanket permit had been issued, in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. 1578, passed 8-13-07)
§ 95.43 TOWN INDEMNIFIED
Any person obtaining a permit authorized by this subchapter agrees as a condition of the permit to indemnify the Town
for and hold the Town harmless from any and all expense (including but not limited to attorney’s fees, litigation costs
5
Chapter 95. Streets and Sidewalks
and judgments) incurred as a result of claims made for damages arising out of operations conducted by the permit
recipient pursuant to the permit.
(Ord. 1578, passed 8-13-07)
§ 95.44 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
When the Town Engineer finds that a property owner or agent has violated Sections 95.40 through 95.43, the Engineer
or his agent shall give notice to the owner of the property requiring correction within a schedule required by the
Engineer. Failure to correct any violation may result in the Town removing the violation and invoicing the cost of the
removal to the owner.
(Ord. 1578, passed 8-13-07; Ord. 1978, passed 11-25-13)
§ 95.99 PENALTY
(A) Violation a misdemeanor. Any individual, corporation or firm who violates any provision of these sections
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding $500 and imprisoned not
exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day that the violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense;
OR
(B) Citation and Civil Penalty. Failure to correct a violation within eight (8) hours after having been issued a
warning requesting correction of a violation shall subject defendant to an issue of a citation for violation of those
sections and to a civil penalty of $50. An additional citation may be issued for each additional day that the
violation continues to exist. This civil penalty may be recovered by the Town in a civil action in the nature of a
debt if the defendant does not pay the penalty within seven (7) days after he has been cited for violations under
Chapter 95. The Public Works Director, or his designee, is hereby authorized to issue citations pursuant to this
Chapter. Any person(s) to whom a citation has been issued under this Section may appeal to the Town Manager,
whose decisions shall be final; (Ord. 1978, passed 11-25-13)
OR
(C) Injunction and Order of Abatement. The provisions of this Chapter may be enforced by injunction and order
of abatement.
(Ord. 1578, passed 8-13-07)
6
1
Chapter 96. Cable Television
Section
Rate Regulations
96.01 FCC rate regulations
96.02 Views of interested parties to be considered
96.03 Authorization to file with FCC
RATE REGULATIONS
§ 96.01 FCC RATE REGULATIONS.
The town will follow the FCC Rate Regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the
Company and any other cable television system operating in the town, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent
provisions in the franchise. (Ord. 793, passed 11-22-93)
§ 96.02 VIEWS OF INTERESTED PARTIES TO BE CONSIDERED.
In connection with such regulation, the town will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of
interested parties. (Ord. 793, passed 11-22-93)
§ 96.03 AUTHORIZATION TO FILE WITH FCC.
The Mayor, or his/her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the town and file with the FCC such
certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in
order to enable the town to regulate basic service rates and charges. (Ord. 793, passed 11-22-93)
Chapter 97. Towing of Vehicles
Chapter 97. Towing of Vehicles
Section
97.01 Towing of Vehicles from Private Property
97.02 Towing Charges
97.03 Penalty
§ 97.01 TOWING OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize, direct or contract for the non-consensual towing of a vehicle
from private property for designated parking violations, unless the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) Signs no smaller than 24" x 24"prominently displayed at the entrance to the parking lot clearly stating that
a vehicle not authorized to park on the property will be towed away at the owner’s expense and the sign shall
display the name and telephone number of the towing and storage company; (Ord. No. 1754, passed 9-13-10)
(2) The signs provide a telephone number whereby the vehicle owner may call and, whether by live response
or recorded message, learn where and when they may retrieve their vehicle;
(3) The company towing the vehicle must telephone the Matthews Police Department prior to making
connection to the vehicle, and advise the vehicle description and the location where the vehicle will been
stored.
(4) If any vehicle is removed pursuant to this Chapter and there is a place of storage within fifteen (15) miles,
the vehicle shall not be transported for storage more than fifteen (15) miles from the place of removal; for all
other vehicles the vehicle shall not be transported for storage more than twenty-five
(25) miles from the place of removal. (Ord. No. 2057, passed 10-10-14)
(5) Whenever a tow company is attempting to tow a vehicle and has already connected the vehicle to the tow
truck, and the vehicle owner/driver appears and does not desire the vehicle to be towed, then the vehicle shall
be released to the owner/driver upon the payment of the connect fee. If the vehicle has not been connected to
the tow truck, then the vehicle shall be released to the owner/driver immediately at no charge or fee. (Ord.
No. 2057, passed 10-10-14)
(6) Any person who tows or stores a vehicle subject to this Chapter, shall inform the owner of the vehicle
towed in writing at the time of retrieval of the vehicle that the owner has a right to pay the amount of the lien
asserted, request immediate possession, and contest the lien for towing charges pursuant to the provisions of
N.C.G.S. § 44A-4; further, any person who tows or stores a vehicle subject to this Chapter shall not require
any person retrieving the vehicle to sign any waiver of rights or other similar documents as a condition of the
release of the person’s vehicle, other than a form acknowledging the release and receipt of the vehicle. (Ord.
No. 2057, passed 10-10-14)
(B) This section shall not apply to non-consensual towing of vehicles from residential premises (improved or
unimproved); nor shall it apply to statutory parking violations, such as handicapped parking or fire lane parking
violations; nor does it apply to nonconsensual towing directed by a law enforcement officer.
§ 97.02 TOWING CHARGES
(Repealed by Ord. No. 2057, passed 10-10-14)
1
Chapter 97. Towing of Vehicles
§ 97.03 PENALTY
(A) Violations of this ordinance by the same towing company within any twelve-month period shall result in the
issuance of civil citations upon the following schedule:
1st violation $100
2nd and 3rd violations $250
4th and 5th violations $500
(B) Civil fines assessed for violations of this section must be paid within ten (10) calendar days.
(C) A civil delinquency penalty equal to the amount of the civil fine shall be assessed of the violator if the fine is
not paid within ten (10) days of issuance of the original citation.
(Ord. No. 954, passed 3-9-98; Ord. No. 1223, passed 6-24-02; Ord. No. 1225, passed 7-8-02; Ord No. 1666,
passed 1-26-09; Ord. No. 1688, passed 05-26-09)
2
Chapter 98. False Alarm Ordinance
1
Chapter 98. False Alarm Ordinance
Section
98.01 Definitions
98.02 Alarm User Permits Required
98.03 Alarm System Requirements
98.04 Response to Alarm: Determination of Validity
98.05 Review of False Alarm Determinations
98.06 Service Charge Assessment for False Alarms and Reinstatement of Alarm User Permits
98.07 Automatic Dialing Protection Devices Prohibited
98.08 Prohibited Acts
98.09 Enforcement of Provisions
98.10 Severability
§98.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
Alarm permit: A permit issued by the Town allowing the operation of an alarm system within the Town.
Alarm signal: A detectable signal, either audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which the police or fire
department is expected to respond.
Alarm system: Any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or
other activity requiring immediate attention to which the Police Department is expected to respond, or to signal the
presence of smoke or fire to which the Fire Department is expected to respond, but does not include alarms installed in
motor vehicles.
Alarm systems coordinator: An employee of the Town designated by the Chief of Police to administer this article.
Alarm user: Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any
other entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection
of such premises.
Automatic dial protection device: An automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system,
including any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Communications Center, or the Matthews Police Department, a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for
police or fire department response.
Chief of Police: The Chief of Police of the Matthews Police Department or his designee.
False alarm: The activation of an alarm system whether:
(1) through mechanical or electronic failure,
(2) malfunction,
(3) improper installation,
(4) or the negligence of the alarm user, his employees or agents, and alarm signals activated to summon police or
fire personnel unless police or fire department response was canceled by the alarm user and his alarm company
before police or fire personnel arrive at the alarm location.
A false alarm shall not include:
Chapter 98. False Alarm Ordinance
2
(1) an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent
conditions of nature,
(2) during circumstances where the alarm user reasonably believed a situation was present for which purpose the
alarm system was installed,
(3) any other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user,
(4) an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure if the alarm user first notifies and receives
permission from the user’s alarm company, or designee, to test the system. An alarm is false within the meaning
of this ordinance when, upon inspection by the Chief of Police, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry,
robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a
properly functioning alarm system, when no extraordinary circumstances as described above were present, or
when upon the inspection of the Fire Chief, evidence indicates that no fire or smoke was present which would
have activated a properly functioning alarm system.
Fire Chief: The Fire Chief of the Matthews Fire Department. (Ord. No. 1822; passed 10-10-11.)
Permit Period: Successive twelve-month periods, beginning at the initial issuance of the alarm permit to the alarm user.
§98.02 ALARM USER PERMITS REQUIRED
(A) Permit required: No person shall use an alarm system, as described in Section 98.01, which is designed to elicit,
either directly or indirectly, police or fire department response, without first obtaining a permit for such alarm
system from the Town or its designee.
(B) Application: The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the Town of Matthews. An alarm
user has the duty to obtain an application from the Town.
(C) Transfer of possession: When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is
transferred, the person obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm user permit within
thirty (30) days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable.
(D) Reporting updated information: Whenever the information provided on the alarm user permit application
changes, the correct information must be provided by the alarm user to the alarm systems coordinator within thirty
(30) days of the change. In addition, prior to the beginning of each permit period, permit holders will receive from
the alarm systems coordinator a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return
this form to the alarm systems coordinator when any of the requested information has changed.
§98.03 ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
(A) Multiple alarm systems: If an alarm has one (1) or more alarm systems protecting two (2) or more separate
structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be required for each structure.
(B) Alarm reset: An alarm user may not install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system that can sound continually
for more than fifteen (15) minutes.
§ 98.04 RESPONSE TO ALARM: DETERMINATION OF VALIDITY
(A) Police or Fire response: Whenever an alarm is activated in the Town and the Police Department or the Fire
Department does respond, a police officer or firefighter on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the
area and determine whether the response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm system or whether the
alarm was a false alarm.
(B) Notification: If the police officer or firefighter at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to
be false, the officer or firefighter shall make a report of the false alarm. An alarm user shall be notified of such false
alarm determination.
Chapter 98. False Alarm Ordinance
3
(C) Inspection: The Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the premises to
which a response has been made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine whether it is being used in
conformity with the terms of this article.
§98.05 REVIEW OF FALSE ALARM DETERMINATIONS
(A) Request for review: The alarm systems coordinator shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the
determination that an alarm was false. The alarm systems coordinator shall conduct such review only if the alarm
user requests in writing such a review within ten (10) days of the date that the false alarm occurred. The written
request for review of a false alarm determination by the alarm systems coordinator shall include the following
information:
(1) Alarm user name
(2) Address at which alarm is installed
(3) Alarm user permit number
(4) Date and time of false alarm that is being contested
(5) Facts upon which the request for review of the false alarm determination is made
(B) Response to request for review: The alarm system coordinator will review the request and will affirm or reverse
the determination of false alarm.
§98.06 SERVICE CHARGE ASSESSMENT FOR FALSE ALARMS AND REINSTATEMENT OF ALARM
USER PERMITS
(A) Civil penalties for false alarms: Each service charge incurred for false alarms at the premises described in the
alarm user’s permit shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the invoice. A charge will be
billed, pursuant to the schedule below, per each occurrence and will be owed by the alarm user to the Town and will
be collected from the alarm user as a civil penalty.
(B) Excessive false alarms requiring police response: It is hereby found and determined that three (3) or more false
alarms initiating police response within any twelve month permit period is excessive and constitutes a public
nuisance.
(C) Fine schedule for excessive false alarms requiring police response:
3rd - 5th false alarm $ 50
6th false alarm $100
7th false alarm $100
8th false alarm $250
9th false alarm $250
10th false alarm $500
(D) Discontinuance of police response: The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any service charge imposed
under sub-section (c) of this Section within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt shall result in a discontinuance
of police response to alarms that may occur at the premises described in the alarm user’s permit until payment is
received.
(E) Reinstatement: Reinstatement of eligibility for police response to alarm calls will be made only upon receipt of
any prior unpaid civil penalties assessed pursuant to this section.
(F) Excessive false alarms requiring fire response: It is hereby found and determined that three (3) or more false
alarms initiating fire response within any twelve-month permit period is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance.
Chapter 98. False Alarm Ordinance
4
(G) Civil penalties for false alarms requiring fire response: A service charge of $ 200 shall be assessed for each
occurrence of an excessive fire alarm requiring fire department response.
§ 98.07 AUTOMATIC DIALING PROTECTION DEVICES PROHIBITED
No automatic dial protection device shall be used to report, or cause to be reported, any recorded message to the
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Communications Center or the Matthews Police Department.
§ 98.09 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS
Methods of enforcement: The Town may enforce the provisions of this article by one (1) or a combination of the
following methods:
(A) Civil penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this article may be fined by a civil penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100) which may be recovered by the Town in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the violator
does not pay the penalty within thirty (30) days from the date the violator is notified of the penalty. Any other
service charges imposed by this article may be collected by the Town as a civil penalty in a civil action.
(B) Equitable remedy: The Town may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction, abatement order
or any other appropriate equitable remedy.
(C) Any violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a non-criminal violation and the provisions of N.C.G.S. shall not
be applicable to this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1822; passed 10-10-11)
§ 98.10 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is for any reason held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the article which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 1062, passed 9-27-99)
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
Section
General Provisions
99.01 Purpose and Intent
99.02 Applicability
99.03 Benefits of Trees
99.04 Definitions
99.05 Administration Responsibilities
99.06 Permits
Tree Protection and Management Requirements
99.07 Tree Preservation
99.08 Trees on Public Property
99.09 Trees on Private Property
Standards for Preservation, Planting, and Maintenance
99.10 Tree Harvesting and Forestry Operations
99.11 Preservation Standards
99.12 Planting Standards
99.13 Maintenance Standards
99.14 Approved Tree List
Administrative Procedures
99.15 Modifications
99.16 Inspections, Enforcement, Penalties, and Appeals
99.17 Emergencies
99.18 Education and Guidelines
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
(A) The Town of Matthews holds that trees are an integral part of the community’s infrastructure. As such, they are
a reflection of the quality of life in the community, contributing to the health, safety, and well-being of its citizens.
(B) This Chapter regulates trees on public and private property while balancing the need for the reasonable use and
enjoyment of real property by its citizens. Specific purposes of the chapter include: to provide parameters for the
planting, maintenance, and removal of trees; to encourage and require the protection of existing trees on the streets,
on public spaces, and on private grounds; to establish a standard for sound arboricultural practices within the
Town; to assign responsibility for conduct of its requirements; and to establish the education, informational, and
regulatory procedures for fulfilling these purposes.
§ 99.02 APPLICABILITY
(A) The terms and provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all Town property and to private property as specified
herein. Specifically, this code regulates:
1
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(1) Streetscape trees along public or private streets within or near those streets.
(2) Trees on other public properties.
(3) Trees on private property which constitute a safety hazard or nuisance to the public or to public property.
(4) Trees designated as having special significance to the public in the manner of a Regulated or Protected tree.
§ 99.03 BENEFITS OF TREES
(A) The benefits that trees provide our Town include:
(1) Improved control of soil erosion.
(2) Moderation of storm water runoff and improved water quality.
(3) Interception of airborne particulate matter, and the reduction of air pollutants.
(4) Enhanced habitat for wildlife.
(5) Reduction of noise and glare.
(6) Climate moderation.
(7) Definition of exterior spaces.
(8) Increased property value.
(9) Promotion of energy conservation through shading and cooling effects.
(10) Reduction in the need for watering of vegetation.
(11) Maintenance of the visual character of the community.
(12) Psychological health benefits derived from natural vegetation and open spaces.
§ 99.04 DEFINITIONS
(A) When used in this Chapter, the following terminology shall have the definitions ascribed to them in this
section. Those words and phrases used in this document that are not defined shall be interpreted so as to give them
meaning they have in common usage.
Applicant. Any person, party, partnership, corporation or other business entity seeking the Town’s approval of a
proposed plan, or permit, or variance to this Chapter.
Approved Forestry Plan. A plan for the harvesting of timber from a specific parcel of land prepared by a N.C.
Registered Forester under generally accepted practices.
Buffer. Trees or other woody shrubs that serve to screen incompatible land uses, unwanted light, or noise.
Caliper. Diameter measurement of tree-trunk taken at six inches above ground level for trees up to and including
four inches in caliper. For larger trees, measurement of caliper shall be taken at twelve (12) inches above ground
level.
Casualty Loss of Nature. A loss of value or property resulting from an act of nature – fire, winds, ice storms, etc. –
that is sudden, unexpected, and beyond normal human control.
Clear-Cutting. A management technique in which all of the trees in an area are cut at the same time.
2
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
Committee. The Appearance and Tree Committee of the Town of Matthews.
Construction Site. A site where any land disturbing activity is to occur.
Construction Period. The time period on a development site from the granting of a construction permit until the
issuance of a final certificate of compliance.
DBH. (Diameter Breast Height). The diameter of a tree four and one-half (4 ½) feet above the average ground
level.
Deciduous. Plant materials that drop all of their foliage preceding their dormant season (usually the winter).
Drip line. An imaginary vertical line extending from the outermost portion of the tree canopy to the ground.
Existing Tree Canopy. The tree canopy that has existed for at least 3 years on a site as verified by aerial
photographs.
Evergreen. Plant materials that retain foliage throughout the year.
Impervious cover. Buildings, structures and other paved, compacted gravel, or compacted areas, which by their
dense nature do not allow the passage of sufficient oxygen and moisture to support and sustain healthy root growth.
Landscaping. The preservation and/or modification of an existing landscape for an aesthetic or functional purpose.
Live vegetation materials required for development.
Landscape Establishment Guarantee. A bond ,irrevocable letter of credit, or other surety held by the Town until
the satisfactory conclusion of the three-year landscape establishment period.
Landscape Establishment Period. A period of three years commencing with the approval by the Town of an
executed landscape plan.
Landscape Manager. The Town of Matthews employee responsible for the management of landscape issues.
Large Maturing Tree. A tree whose height is greater than 35 feet at maturity.
Matthews Urban Forestry Master Plan. A plan adopted by the Town Board that directs the short and long-term
actions of the Town’s Urban Tree Management Program.
North Carolina Champion Tree. A North Carolina Heritage Tree is any tree that is listed in the North Carolina Big
Tree List.
Planting Area. Landscape area reserved for the purpose of providing growth area for required plant material.
Planting Season. The recommended time of the year for planting, normally September thru May, tha tis timed to
avoid the summer heat.
Planting Strip. A strip of land, adjacent to a public right-of-way, that is reserved for landscaping purposes.
Protected Tree(s). An individual tree having special regulatory procedures for removal on public and private
property. Protected tree includes all trees on public property, North Carolina Champion Trees, and Matthews
Specimen Trees as designated by the Matthews Board of Commissioners. Protected trees can include individuals or
all individuals in a stand on a construction site designated to be preserved on a required landscape plan.
Regulated Tree. A tree located on private or public property that has been classified according to national, state,
county, or Town standards as being a tree that has special maintenance and removal restrictions.
Root Protection Zone. An area measuring approximately eighteen (18) to twenty four (24)inches deep and at a
horizontal distance from the trunk in all directions equal to one foot for each inch of DBH.
Screen. A structure providing enclosure and a visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property.
3
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
Selecting Cutting. The periodic removal of individual trees or groups of trees to improve or regenerate a stand.
Selective Grading. Clearing and/or grading a development site such that selected, existing vegetation is preserved.
Shrub. A woody plant normally containing multiple stems and a mature height of less than twelve (12) feet.
Small Maturing Tree. A tree whose mature height is generally more than fifteen (15) feet but usually less than
thirty five (35) feet.
Specimen Tree. A Specimen Tree is any tree designated by the Town as having unique value, historical interest, or
other noteworthy characteristics. A tree may be considered a specimen based on its size, age, rarity, history, or
ecological significance as determined by the Town’s Landscape Manager.
Streetscape Plan. A plan that specifies planting strips, tree species, sidewalk locations, and other design aspects
along public and/or private streets within Matthews. Such plans are effective following approval by the Board of
Commissioners.
Streetscape Tree. Any tree planted within or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
Timber Harvesting. The removal of trees, through approved techniques, from a parcel of land for commercial
forestry purposes, or possible future development. Future development may be restricted by other sections of the
General Statutes or this code.
Topping. Any pruning practice that generally employed on the top of a tree that in discriminately makes cuts
without regard to the proximity of a side branch. The practice is very detrimental to tree health.
Tree Canopy. The combined crown areas of all trees on a tract of land.
Tree Evaluation Formula. A formula for determining the value of trees and shrubs as published by the
International Society of Arboriculture.
Tree Hazard. The degree to which a tree poses an imminent threat to persons or property. A tree with a high hazard
rating is unsafe.
Tree Protection Area. Those areas designated for the protection of both preserved and planted trees depicted on the
Tree Protection and Landscape Plans.
Tree Stand. A group of trees in close spatial proximity that can be treated as a unit for the implementation of a tree
protection area.
Woodland. Land covered with wood or trees; forest land on which trees are allowed to grow, either for fuel or
timber.
§99.05 ADMINISTRATION RESPONSIBILITIES
(A) Town Manager. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall direct, regulate, and control the planting,
maintenance, and removal of all trees growing in public property and on all private property as they relate to
regulated trees. No person shall hinder, delay, or interfere with the Town Manager in the execution of duties under
this Chapter.
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for implementing the following specific provisions of
this Chapter:
(1) The Matthews Urban Forestry Management Plan directs day-to-day urban forestry activities within the
Town.
(2) The conduct of the streetscape plan for trees on the public-right-of-ways
(3) The planting, maintenance, and removal of trees on all public properties
(4) Conduct of the regulated trees on private property not subject to development provisions.
4
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(5) Reviewing all development plans for compliance with provisions of this ordinance.
(B) The Matthews Appearance and Tree Committee (MATC). The MATC is responsible for:
(1) An annual review of this ordinance.
(2) An annual review of the Matthews Urban Forestry Plan.
§ 99.06 PERMITS
(A) Permits for work affecting regulated trees on private property as outlined herein shall be obtained from the
Town.
(B) A permit shall be issued if the work complies with the guidelines in Matthews Urban Forest Management Plan
or this Chapter. The Town may attach reasonable conditions to the permit. The Town can rescind the permit for
noncompliance.
(C) A Landscape Plan that has been approved by the Town shall constitute a permit.
(D) Individual permits will not be required for state transportation projects; however, the Town should review the
project plans for tree preservation and replacement requirements.
TREE PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT
REQUIREMENTS
§ 99.07 TREE PRESERVATION
(A) Intent. Preservation of all existing trees is a value expressed by the Town. Preservation of specific trees that
have been identified as being historically important or physically unique or important is outlined in this section.
(B) Regulated Trees. For the purposes of this Chapter, regulated trees comprise all trees identified and classified by
special government programs. Regulated trees can be located on public or private property.
(1) Regulated tree programs include:
(a) National: National Registry of Big Trees as compiled by American Forests.
(b) State: Champion Trees of North Carolina as identified by the North Carolina Department of Forest
Resources.
(c) Town: Specimen Tree Designation. All trees of significant historical, physical, or unique interest to be
classified as Matthews Specimen Trees. The criteria for awarding this designation are outlined in the
Guide. Town Board, on a case-by-case, basis shall award the designation.
(2) The Town Board shall designate all qualifying trees as meeting a regulated tree status. All regulated trees
within the Town limits shall be identified on the Town’s Urban Forestry Master Plan.
(C) Protection. No person shall willfully destroyer cause to destroy a regulated tree.
(D) Removal. A permit is required from the Town to remove any regulated tree on private or public property.
(E) Mitigation of Loss. If a regulated tree is removed for any reason other than structural problems resulting from
decay or normal old age processes, or from a casualty loss of nature, it shall normally be replaced by planting new
trees somewhere on the property. A mitigation schedule is provided in figure 1. If the trees cannot be planted on
the property, then the replacement trees will be planted on public property as prescribed by the Town Landscape
Manager.
5
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(1) Planted trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper in size and the quantity determined by the value of
the loss.
(2) Planted trees shall be of the same species or a species of equal mitigated value as determined by the Tree
Evaluation Formula in the Guide.
(3) All replacement trees must receive the same measures for protection as cited in § 99.10 for a minimum of
one year.
Designation
Requirement
Replacement Criteria
National and
State Champions
Replace with trees of equal value to the
loss
Town Specimen Trees Replace with trees equal to 50% value of
the loss
Figure 1 Mitigation for the Removal of Regulated Trees
(F) Town Assistance for Regulated Trees on Private Property. In order to promote the preservation of Regulated
Trees and to participate in their survival, the Town may assist the property owner in the care and maintenance as
prescribed by the Town Landscape Manager of all Regulated Trees so identified and classified within the Town.
The Town will perform semi-annual inspection of the trees in cooperation with the property owners.
(G) Protected Trees Designated. A tree having the classification of a protected tree has special maintenance and
removal requirements. Designated Protected Trees include all regulated trees, all trees on public property, and any
trees designated on an approved landscape plan to be preserved during any land disturbing activity. § 99.10 of this
Chapter provides details on protection requirements during development activities.
§ 99.08 TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
(A) Staff Requirements. The Matthews Urban Forestry Master Plan sets the performance standards and guidelines
on how trees shall be planted, maintained, and removed by Town staff on all public properties. The MUFMP shall
guide Town staff in their day-to-day activities, and shall provide both short-term and long-term planning for overall
tree management in the Town. Tree management activities by staff on public properties should closely follow those
required on private properties.
(B) Tree Planting by Private Parties. The Town of Matthews encourages tree planting on public property. The
Town shall assist any individual or group in evaluating this potential; however, the following parameters shall
apply;
(1) Any person or organization wishing to planta tree on public property or on a public right-of-way in
accordance with the approved Urban Forestry Management Plan shall obtain a permit. There is no fee for this
permit.
(2) Any person or organization wishing to plant more than one (1) tree on public property or on a public rightof-
way shall also submit a planting plan to the Town Landscape Manager. One copy of the approved plan will
be returned to the applicant. The plan must include show the following:
(a) A scaled drawing of the location or street to be planted and the distance from adjacent curbs, sidewalks,
buildings, or any other hard surface structure.
(b) The location of underground and overhead utilities.
(c) The location of each tree to be planted.
(d) The species, variety, and size of each tree to be planted.
(e) Any surface or subsurface drainage that will be installed.
6
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(3) For developed properties, an approved landscape plan on file with the Town Planning Department shall
serve in lieu of a permit.
(C) Construction Work by Private Contractors. Construction or any land disturbance work performed by private
parties on public property, or within the dripline of a tree whose trunk is located on public property, is subject to
conditions. Within the right-of way of any public street or within any public area of the Town no person shall take
any of the following actions without first obtaining a written permit from the Town:
(1) Remove, spray, fertilize, cut below or above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree that has its trunk on any
public property, or cause such acts to be done by others.
(2) Deposit, place, store or maintain materials that will compact the soil or impede the free passage of water and
air to the roots of any tree.
(3) Park vehicles or construction equipment within the dripline of a tree having its trunk on public property.
(4) Excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches, grade changes, or lay out any private driveway within twenty
(20) feet from an existing tree.
(5) Permit any toxic chemical, either liquid or solid, to seep, drain or to be emptied on or about any tree.
(6) Break, injure, mutilate, or destroy any tree, or set fire within the dripline area of a tree.
(7) Fasten any sign, wire, rope, or other material to any tree or to the guard or stake intended for the protection
of such tree.
(8) Attach any electric wires or electrical insulation devices to any tree.
(D) Requirements Regulating the Work of Public and Private Utilities. Public and private utilities that install
overhead and underground utilities, including CATV installations, are required to accomplish all work affecting
trees according to the provisions of this section.
(1) A permit for each project is required.
(2) A permit for each project is not necessary if the utility has standard operational procedures for working
around trees, and has these procedures prior approved by the Town. A copy of these utility standards
concerning trees shall be on file with the Town.
(3) When a permit or prior approval is given by the Town, the amount of such trimming or extent of other
operations shall be limited by the actual necessities of the service, such work shall be done in a neat and
workmanlike manner according to applicable ANSI standards for tree work, and shall be performed according
to specifications outlined by the permit.
(4) The Town shall review these written specifications or procedures regularly. All utility work is subject to
inspection by the Town for compliance with this Chapter.
(5) The removal of specific trees is not subject to prior approved guidelines and shall be handled on an
individual permit basis.
(E) Vegetation Control
(1) No trees on public property shall be pruned by topping.
(2) The Town will keep trees located on the public right-of-ways pruned to maintain prescribed sight distances
for vehicular traffic. In general, the pruning or removal of right-of-way trees simply to afford a better view of
private signs is not permitted.
§ 99.09 TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
(A) Trees Endangering the Public Safety.
7
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(1) The Town Board hereby declares it a public nuisance for any tree or part thereof on public or private
property to be in an unsafe condition, hazardous, damaging to sewers or other public improvement facilities, or
infested by an injurious disease, insects, or other pests.
(a) The Town may order the removal of any tree hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) The Town, alternatively, may cause or order necessary treatment for any tree on private property which
is infested by any injurious disease, insect, or other pests when it determines such action is necessary to
abate the nuisance.
(2) Trees standing in or upon land abutting Town property and having branches, limbs, trunks, or other parts
projecting onto Town property shall be maintained by the owner of the property so that no foliage shall extend
from private property onto any portion of public property below a height of eight (8) feet above the grade of the
property. The Town may cause or order corrective action to prevent any such condition.
(3) Before exercising the authority conferred by this Section, the Town shall advise the owner or occupant of
the property by first class mail, overnight shipping delivery, or by telephone, to take corrective action. This
order shall be in writing and shall state that the action specified must be taken within ten (10) consecutive
calendar days after the order is delivered. If the condition has not be corrected within the time specified above,
the Town may enter upon the property, perform the work necessary to correct the conditions and assess the
owner or occupant for the actual costs incurred by the Town. In situations involving an imminent threat to the
public health, safety or welfare, the Town shall make reasonable attempts to contact the property owner, but
may proceed expeditiously without prior notice.
(4) The costs of such work, if not paid within fifteen (15) calendar days shall constitute a lien against the
property. An aggrieved property owner may appeal such orders in this section pursuant to §99.15(D).
(B) Removal of Regulated Trees
(1) Trees located within the Town that have been designated as Regulated Trees by the Town Board of
Commissioners have been identified and classified as unique to the Town.
(2) The removal of a Matthews Specimen Tree or other regulated trees requires a permit. The Town may deny a
permit and prohibit the removal of a regulated tree. The following factors may be the basis for a denial:
(a) There is no current plan to develop the property.
(b) A planned development can be designed and constructed without removing the Regulated Tree.
(c) The purpose of the removal can be accomplished by an alternative design.
(d) The overall good health of the tree.
(e) An unsatisfactory proposal for replacement of the Regulated Tree.
(f) A significant, adverse effect on adjacent property values.
(g) Any other factors reasonably related to the tree.
(3) No individual shall willfully cause the death of a tree that has been classified as a Regulated Tree.
(4) The Town may attach reasonable conditions to the removal. The owner may appeal the decision in
accordance with § 99.15(D).
(C) Utility Work on Private Property. Public and private utility companies which install overhead and underground
utilities (including CATV) are encouraged to accomplish all work affecting trees located on private property with
as little damage to the canopy, trunk, and root zone as possible.
§ 99.10 TREE HARVESTING AND FORESTRY OPERATIONS
8
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(A) Purpose. The Town seeks to monitor timber harvesting activities within the Town limits. The Town shall
review all timber harvesting operations that occur on any parcel of two (2) or more acres. Itis the intent of the town
not to discourage legitimate forestry operators, but to monitor and control clearing activities unrelated to forestry,
for example general land clearing or land clearing for future development.
In the conduct of this review the Town will not only consider the fundamental rights of property owners, but shall
also weigh the intended long-term use of land and the overall safety, health and welfare of the community.
(B) Permits and Standards.
(1) The harvesting of timber may take place only after a permit has been issued by the Matthews Public Works
Department. The application shall at a minimum include a plan drawing of the site, the areas to be harvested,
and a full description of the forestry operations to be conducted during the harvest and the planned use for the
property after harvest. Application for a permit must be submitted at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to
the desired start date.
(2) For woodlands being harvested under an “Approved Forestry Plan”, this plan may be submitted in lieu of
the required application in (1) above. Any existing plan of operation on the adoption date of this ordinance shall
also be submitted.
(3) The Town, at its discretion and expense, may ask a Registered Forest to review submitted applications or
plans and comment on the same.
(4) A permit shall not be withheld if a permit application or plan is submitted and there is general compliance
with the standards of this section.
(5) While selective cutting shall generally be the preferred harvesting technique, clear cutting is permitted
where the intent of the landowner is to restore the land to forestry use. In the case of land intended for
development, landowners may clear-cut, but should refer to the Matthews “Post Construction ordinance”,
“Zoning Ordinance” and/or “Unified Development Ordinance” so as to retain in an undisturbed state the
minimum areas required by those ordinances.
(6) When adjacent to residential property, timber harvesting should be conducted with a minimum twenty-five
(25) foot undisturbed buffer. In no case shall any trees that exist within a public road right-of-way be removed
without approval of the Town. One access point, not more than twenty-five (25) feet in width may penetrate an
undisturbed buffer to facilitate equipment access, if needed. If additional buffers are allowed to remain on all
sides of the parcel, the recapture time listed in Section C (1) below may be reduced to four (4)years.
(7) Reforestation shall be accomplished under the general guidelines established by the N.C. Forest Service
and/or recommendations of the N.C. Forestry Association.
(8) No portion of this section shall modify or abrogate any requirements of the County, State or Federal
governments that might apply. In the case of any conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
(C) Recapture and Penalties
(1) Recapture – The Town may deny a building permit or refuse to approve a site plan or subdivision plan for a
period of up to seven (7) years if a tree harvest results in the removal of all or substantially all of the trees that
were protected under Town “Post Construction Ordinance”, “Zoning Ordinance” and/or“ Unified Development
Ordinance” governing the development of the tract of land that the permit or approval is sought.
(2) Penalties - Failure to file an application or Forestry Plan, failure to obtain a permit, failure to follow the
terms of a permit or a submitted Forestry Management Plan and/or violation of any other part of this section
shall result in the assessment of a civil penalty in the amount of$500 plus $500 per acre of land actually
affected.
(D) Operation Enforcement Operation and Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the Public
Works Director or his designee.
9
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
§ 99.11 STANDARDS FOR PRESERVATION, PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE
(A) Preservation Standards. Existing trees specified on an approved landscape plan to remain on site during any
land disturbing activity are protected trees. Special criteria apply to protected trees either as individuals or in a
stand.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of preservation standards is to ensure that preserved trees are protected from injury
during the construction process. Special requirements apply.
(2) Applicability. Tree protection measures as outlined herein are required for any land disturbing activity in the
following circumstances:
(a) For any tree scheduled to be preserved on an approved Landscape Plan for the site.
(b) For any land disturbing activity taking place within the drip line of a protected tree.
(c) For any existing tree with an eight (8) inch DBH or larger, or any tree planted within the last three (3)
years with a two (2) inch caliper or larger, having all or a portion of its trunk in or upon any public
property.
(3) The Root Protection Zone. Since a tree is unable to heal any sustained damage to its trunk or roots,
protecting both of these parts of the tree are equally important. The area to be protected around the tree provides
a rough approximation of the tree’s root zone from the trunk outward. The root protection zone shall have the
following characteristics:
(a) For each inch of DBH a minimum of one (1) foot of protected space from the trunk is measured in all
directions. This area is designated as the Root Protection Zone. Unless physical obstructions are
encountered within this area, the entire zone will receive protection. If physical obstructions such as
building foundations or concrete curbing are encountered and will not be disturbed, then this protected
space may be modified to follow the actual edge of such obstructions. The Root Protection Zone may be
required to be increased in other directions to compensate for the loss of this root growth area if the
impervious surface covers more than one-third (1/3) of the calculated zone.
(b) For tree stands the Root Protection Zone shall extend five (5) feet beyond the perimeter dripline of the
entire stand.
(c) All grading plans shall show the vertical elevation of the trunk at the soil line, the existing topography,
and proposed grade changes within and immediately surrounding the root protection zone.
(d) All construction plans of the project shall show the vertical and horizontal location of the preserved
tree’s trunk and the associated root protection zone surrounding it.
(4) Protection Requirements of the Root Protection Zone.
(a) A durable fence of plastic or wood with a minimum height of 4 feet shall protect the zone. No soil
disturbance will occur in the zone. The fence will be maintained at all times during any land disturbing
activity until construction is complete.
(b) No storage of materials, piling of soil, parking of equipment, or dumping of debris shall occur in the
zone.
(c) The natural grade shall be maintained within the zone. Stripping topsoil from the zone is prohibited.
(d) Excavation for buried utilities is prohibited. Boring may be permitted in individual situations.
(e) No trenching for irrigation lines shall take place.
(f) Removal of understory vegetation within the zone shall be restricted to hand- pruning or to the use of
hand-operated, power equipment.
10
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(g) A minimum of one sign designating the Root Protection Zone shall be placed on the fence and should
be visible for a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet.
(h) Minor pruning of branches to accommodate the construction of nearby buildings or planting of shrubs
or ground covers within the zone can be allowed with the approval of the Town’s Landscape Manager.
(i) The Town will evaluate any requests for utility encroachment into the zone. Review of the request shall
consider the overall needs of the site development. Utility line encroachments will be considered if the
encroachment is unavoidable and damage to existing root systems is kept to an accommodating level. In
these cases, encroachment will only be allowed on one-side of the tree and no closer than two-thirds of the
distance from the edge of the zone to the trunk.
(j) The requirements of this section shall remain in effect throughout the construction period or the duration
of the land disturbing activity.
§ 99.12 PLANTING STANDARDS
(A) Purpose. Planting standards apply uniform and commonly acceptable guidelines to the installation of new trees
into the landscape. Standards help ensure tree survivability and long-term health.
(B) Requirements. The following standards comprise a list of specifications for tree planting in fulfilling the
requirements of this Chapter. The standards could equally apply in some cases to integrating existing trees into a
new landscape.
(1) Except for Streetscape Trees, which can be variable, the minimum distance to the nearest property line or
public right-of-way for planting shall be six (6) feet for large trees and three (3) feet for small trees.
(2) The minimum distance to a sidewalk, curb, or other impervious surface is four (4) feet for large trees and
three (3) feet for small trees.
(3) For large maturing trees a minimum planting area of 256 square feet with a minimum dimension of eight (8)
feet and a tree center no closer than four (4)feet to the edge of the planting area is required. For small maturing
trees a minimum planting area of sixty-four (64) square feet with a minimum dimension of eight (8) feet and a
tree center no closer than three (3) feet to the edge of the planting area is required.
(4) Trees shall normally not be guyed or staked, except in an extreme situation to salvage a damaged tree after
planting. If guying is employed, it must be removed as soon as possible or within one year at the latest. Mulch
shall be applied (two- to three-inch layer around the tree pit) in accordance with accepted practices in the
landscape industry.
(5) Good drainage shall be provided for all planting areas and specific plant materials shall be chosen to adapt
to the anticipated drainage conditions.
(6) No trees identified as large maturing trees shall be located within thirty-five (35) feet from thecenter line of
a power distribution line.
(7) No trees identified as reaching a mature height of more than twenty (20) feet shall be placed within
transmission power line right-of-way.
(8) Normally, trees should not be planted within a utility easement. When a tree is to be located within an
easement, a written statement to the Town should indicate why this is necessary. When the planting is within a
dedicated easement for underground utilities, trees planted shall be of the small maturing size to minimize
future root conflict.
(9) At all points of egress from off-street parking areas to a road, and at corners of road intersections,
unobstructed visibility for sight triangles shall be maintained as defined in the Matthews Zoning Ordinance §
153.007.
(10) Tree holes shall normally be back-filled with the native soil that was excavated. Amending thes oil with
organic additives shall only be employed when extremely poor site conditions are encountered.
11
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(11) All trees and shrubs to be planted must comply with the American Standard for Nursery Stock, published
by the American Association of Nurserymen (current edition).
(12) Trees to be planted shall generally be on the Town’s approved tree list, as referenced by §99.13 of this
Chapter. The Town must approve the use of trees not on the list.
§ 99.13 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
(A) General. The maintenance of all public trees shall be performed as per the Matthews Urban Forestry
Management Plan.
§ 99.14 APPROVED TREE LIST
(A) A list of approved trees for planting has been prepared to increase the likelihood of survival and to reduce
future maintenance requirements. All trees utilized should be generally adapted to the normal climatic and
environmental conditions expected for the Matthews area. The listed trees satisfy these general criteria. This list is
not intended to be a comprehensive survey, but it will serve as a guide to plant selection. Plants on the approved
plant list shall normally be used in a landscape plan The Matthews Approved Tree List can be found in the Guide
to the Town of Matthews Tree and Landscape Requirements.
(B) Plant materials that are not on this list may be used if it can be shown that the selected species satisfies one or
more of the following criteria:
(1) A species native to the area that can be shown to be adapted to the proposed site conditions.
(2) A non-native species that is well suited for use in this area.
(3) A non-native species, meeting a specialized use that will not be adversely affected by normal climatic
environmental conditions.
(4) Any plant species that has been previously approved for use. in a similar site situation.
(C) The use of any plant not on the list should be so noted on the Landscape Plan with a brief explanation of
purpose. Final approval will be made by the Town Landscape Manager.
(D) Many of the tree species on the Approved Tree List are native to the Matthews area. Most of these species are
well adapted to the soil and climate found here. Accordingly, the planting and preservation of native trees is
encouraged whenever design and site characteristics permit their use.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 99.15 MODIFICATIONS
In the event that strict compliance with the standards of this Chapter conflict with existing federal or state statutory or
regulatory requirements, with unusual site characteristics, or undue health or safety consequences, then a modified plan
can be made to the Town Landscape Manager. This plan must meet the purposes and standards of this Chapter. A
written explanation of the problem and how the new plan satisfies both the problem and the intent of this Chapter must
accompany the alternate plan. The Town shall review the alternate proposal and advise the applicant of the disposition
of the request within 15 working days of receipt by the Town. Any appeals by the applicant shall be in accordance with
§99.15.
§ 99.16 INSPECTIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES, AND APPEALS
(A) Inspections. The Town may periodically inspect areas subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
12
Chapter 99. Tree Ordinance
(1) Inspections shall be made at a reasonable time and with reasonable notice made to the personnel present on
the construction site. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative of the Town who
requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials.
(2) No person shall obstruct or interfere with such inspection.
(B) Enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be notified by the Town of the
specific violation. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation, the measures required to comply with this
Chapter, if compliance is at all practicable, and a reasonable time period within which compliance must be made.
(C) Penalties. In addition to mitigation of tree loss occurring on public or private properties, a civil penalty may be
imposed by the Town for the purposeful destruction or removal of a Regulated Tree, a Specimen Tree, or a
Protected Tree, in an amount equal to one and one-half (1 ½) times the value of the tree as established by appraisal
procedures prepared by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.
(D) Appeals. Any person having been given notice of violation and/or the imposition of civil penalties may appeal
the decision by giving written notice of appeal within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the notice or violation
citation directed by the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall render a decision based on the facts as submitted
by the appellant and by the Town staff. The Town Manager may seek the assistance of a certified arborist as an
outside neutral consultant to provide expert opinion in tree loss diagnosis or mitigation concerns. All fees charged
by said arborist shall be borne equally by the appellant and the Town.
§ 99.17 EMERGENCIES
In an emergency such as a windstorm, ice-storm, fire or other disaster, the requirements of this Chapter may be waived
by the Town during the emergency period. In addition, a county wide ban on outdoor watering due to drought may be
cause for a waiver by the Town. If a waiver in the context of an environmental emergency is granted by the Town, an
amended landscape plan may still be required.
§ 99.18 EDUCATION AND GUIDELINES
In order to make the execution of this ordinance as simple and straightforward as possible, the following shall be
available to aid in compliance:
(1) The Guide for Matthews Tree and Vegetation Requirements Written as a supplement to this Chapter, the
Guide is available to clarify and amplify its specific requirements. In addition, it provides specific formats for
many of the reports, surveys, and plans required.
(2) Special Educational Sessions to be made available to the public on an as-needed basis as determined by the
Planning Department. The sessions will be sponsored by the Town and be furnished at no cost to participants.
(Ord. No. 1606, passed 12-10-07; Ord. No. 1803, passed 5-23-11)
13
Chapter 100. Gated Communities
1
Chapter 100. Gated Communities
Section
100.01 Definitions
100.02 Intent
100.03 Requirements
100.04 Access Dimensions
100.05 Gate Development Specifics
100.06 Process
100.07 Maintenance
100.08 Violations
§100.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:
KNOX BOX. An approved secure, tamper-proof device with a lock operable only by a fire department, police
department, or emergency services department master key, and containing building entry keys and other such devices
that may be required for access in an emergency. Knox is the only approved key lock box.
GATED PROPERTY. A development, whether single-family, multi-family, commercial, industrial, or accessory uses
that are enclosed within a geographical area by restrictive gates.
GATES. A gate, crossbar, door, or other obstructive device which is utilized for the purpose of restricting, controlling,
or obstructing entry or exit by motor vehicles or pedestrians to or from a private roadway.
INGRESS/EGRESS. The point where vehicles or pedestrians enter and exit a development.
PRIVATE STREETS. Internal streets that are not owned or maintained by the Town of Matthews and/or the North
Carolina Department of Transportation and that are owned and maintained by an entity responsible for upkeep and
maintenance, such as a homeowners association, community group, property management company, or similar type of
organization.
PUBLIC STREETS. Internal streets that are owned and maintained by the Town of Matthews, and/or the North
Carolina Department of Transportation.
§100.02 INTENT
The intent of this section is to regulate the installation and construction of all electronic access gates into private
developments, commercial properties where entrance is restricted by a gate, and/or other uses specifically for
emergency response access. The Fire and EMS Department shall inspect the gates annually, and at the same time
inspect the Knox Box as part of the annual maintenance and inspection program. The Town of Matthews currently uses
the Click-2-Enter system.
§100.03 REQUIREMENTS
The following are requirements for new and existing developments regarding the construction of gates around a
development and commercial properties with the entrance restricted by a gate:
(A) The development inside the gated property shall contain no public streets.
Chapter 100. Gated Communities
2
(B) The location of the gate(s) shall comply with §100.05 regarding the development requirements for the
Town of Matthews.
(C) The ingress/egress gates should be in working order and inspected annually. (See §100.06)
(D) Existing gates constructed before this chapter was approved are grandfathered into the Town until such
gates need to be replaced and/or modified. After such gates are replaced and/or modified, they lose their
grandfathered status and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(E) This ordinance will apply to commercial properties where the entrance is restricted to any/all areas of the
site by a gate(s).
§100.04 ACCESS DIMENSIONS
(A) DIMENSIONS. Fire apparatus access route shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet except
as specified in Section 100.05(B), for approved security gates in accordance with Sections 503.6 of the North
Carolina Fire Code and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches.
(B) SECURITY GATES. The installation of security gate(s) across a fire apparatus access road shall be
approved by the Fire Chief. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of
emergency operation. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained to be operational at
all times.
§100.05 GATED DEVELOPMENT SPECIFICS
Gated developments, whether for an existing community or proposed community, and gated commercial properties
need to adhere to dimensional requirements that are set forth in this chapter.
(A) The ingress/egress for fire department, and emergency vehicles should be at least 20 feet (20') wide, where
there is only one driveway
(B) The ingress/egress area at the location where there are separated lanes for ingress and egress should have a
gate width of at least 12 feet for each lane and should be separated by a minimum five foot (5') landscape
island.
(C) The gates shall be electrical in operation. All electrical vehicular gates shall be provided with access control
using a radio transceiver for public safety and authorized users. This transceiver will allow emergency vehicles
to open the gate from a mobile or portable radio. The Town of Matthews currently uses the “Click2Enter”
company to provide this device. Any other type of device than the “Click2Enter” must be approved by the
Town of Matthews Fire and EMS Department.
(D) All electrical vehicular gates must be provided with a fail-open device to open it during power failures.
During a power failure, the gates will open and remain open. These devices usually restore the gate(s) to the
closed position after the power is restored. In the event a mechanical malfunction prevents a gate from opening
as intended, sufficient access to any mechanism allowing a manual over ride must be provided.
(E) Gates need to be opened for appropriate personnel to enter the community during an emergency. A Knox
dual key activating switch or padlock shall be installed to allow emergency personnel access through vehicular
gates.
(F) An approved Knox dual key lock box shall be installed to allow emergency personnel access through all
pedestrian gates.
(G) If the vehicular gate is a swing-type or roll-type gate, it should be designed so that when the gate is fully
opened it does not obstruct the path of travel for vehicles or pedestrians.
(H) If there are two or more gates in any single development, all gates must be operated in the same fashion.
The egress gate should be constructed so that when the apparatus approaches the gate it will automatically open.
If this option is not feasible then the gate must be activated by the Click-2-Enter (C2E) system. The control box
Chapter 100. Gated Communities
3
shall be positioned so the exiting emergency apparatus can easily see the C2E activation device in order to
activate the gate without having to come close to the retaining bar.
(I) Gate activation shall not be altered or placed out of service without prior notification to the Matthews Fire &
EMS Department.
(J) Any existing and/or proposed communities or commercial properties that cannot meet these specifics cannot
construct gates around the development or at the ingress/egress points.
(K) The owner/or property manager releases, and shall indemnify and hold harmless the department and the
Town of Matthews and its officers and employees from any liability, loss and cost including, but not limited to,
liability for property damage, loss of income, personal injury, and reasonable attorney’s fees, arising or
allegedly arising from the condition, operation, testing or inspection of the gates and related improvements.
§100.06 PROCESS
The required steps in the process for Town of Matthews’ approval of new or modified gates are listed in order below.
(A) The applicant must submit a detailed plan, including but not limited to, scaled drawings showing the
location of the gates, turn radius, dimensions of the gates, pavement, sidewalks, curbs, etc. Information such as
topography lines, vegetation, sight triangles, etc., will also need to be included with the submittal.
(B) The applicant must submit these plans for review by the Planning Department, Police Department, Fire &
EMS Department, and Public Works Department. Approval by all of these departments is required before a
permit can be applied for in Mecklenburg County.
(C) All applicable permits for the construction of gates will be required to be obtained from Mecklenburg
County. Mecklenburg County will be required to verify with the Town of Matthews Planning Department that
departments listed in §100.6(B) have approved the gate plan. Applicant must obtain approval by all the Town
departments or a permit will not be issued.
(D) The applicant must obtain a yearly permit through the Fire and EMS Department for the annual inspection
of the gates.
§100.07 MAINTENANCE
(A) The gated ingress/egress areas, along with the exterior gates encompassing the development, shall be kept
in working order and shall be repaired and/or replaced in the event they are disabled and/or damaged. The Fire
and EMS Department shall be notified immediately when the gate is inoperable and after the repairs have been
completed. It is not the responsibility of the Town to maintain these gates.
(B) It is also a requirement that the gates be inspected by the Town of Matthews Fire and EMS Department
annually to verify the gates are in operable condition in the event of an emergency. A permit will need to be
issued by the Matthews Fire and EMS Department and be kept on file within that department.
(C) The Matthews Fire and EMS Department shall conduct an annual inspection of the gates and at the same
time inspect the Knox Box on the property and insure that the Knox Box system will open the gate as required.
§100.08 VIOLATIONS
The following are violations and the penalties of this chapter:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain any blocking device, such as a gate or
any other type of barrier, without first review and approval from the Town of Matthews and obtaining a permit
from the Fire and EMS Department.
(B) Violators will be notified in writing by the Town of Matthews and will be required to remedy the problem
immediately. Any violation that has not been remedied within seven (7) business days shall be subject to a Civil
Chapter 100. Gated Communities
4
Penalty to be assessed at the rate of $200.00 per day until the violation has been corrected. After the passage of
fifteen (15) days of non-compliance, the assessed fine will be increased $50 per day, each day, thereafter until
the violation has been corrected.
(C) Violations may be appealed to the Town Commission within ten (10) days of a written violation notice and
a hearing will be scheduled at a regular Board of Commissioners meeting.
(Ord. No. 1765, passed 12-13-10)
1
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
Section
101.1 Definitions
101.2 Prohibitions
101.3 Parade
101.4 Picketing
§101.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this section, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(A) Chief of Police means the police chief of the Town of Matthews or his/her designee.
(B) Town means the Town of Matthews, North Carolina. Town Manager means the Town
Manager of the Town of Matthews or his/her designee.
(C) Public assembly or parade means any march, demonstration, ceremony or procession of
any kind which moves from place to place completely or partially in or partially along a
specified route, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public grounds, or forms in a single
or multiple places owned or under the control of the Town.
(D) Public assembly or parade permit means prior written authorization to utilize the street,
sidewalk or other Town-owned areas for an event.
(E) Picket or picketing means to make a public display or demonstration of sentiment for or
against a person or cause, including protesting, which may include the distribution of
leaflets or handbills, the display of signs and any oral communication or speech, which
may involve an effort to persuade or influence, including all expressive and symbolic
conduct, whether active or passive.
§101.02 PROHIBITIONS
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or otherwise participate in a parade unless a
permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or otherwise participate in any parade that
convenes before sunrise or terminates after sunset.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing focused on and taking place in
front of a particular residence.
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
2
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably obstruct, impede or interfere with any
parade or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.
§101.03 PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AND PARADES
(A) General responsibility of participants and persons in charge.
(1) Participants in a public assembly or parade are required to abide by this division,
and the terms of the public assembly or parade permit. Willful violation thereof is
unlawful.
(2) The person designated in the application as responsible for the conduct of the event
shall be responsible for monitoring the conduct of the participants in the event.
Upon actual notice of any violation given to the responsible person by a law
enforcement officer on the scene of said event, such responsible person shall make
immediate attempts to correct the violation. It shall be unlawful for such
responsible person to refuse to make attempts to correct the violation.
(3) The person(s) designated in the application as the person(s) responsible for the
conduct of the event shall be physically present, and accept responsibility for
compliance with any and all terms of the public assembly or parade permit as set
forth in this division.
(B) Permit. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any public assembly or
parade unless a permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police.
(C) Exception to permit requirement. This article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities,
provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the
proper school authorities;
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
(4) A public demonstration in a traditional public forum; and
(5) Permits are not required for assemblies on public property including but not limited
to parks or sidewalks, subject to compliance with applicable Town ordinances
concerning public sidewalks, unless it is known or reasonably probable that the
assembly may necessitate the use or temporary closure of the streets, in which case
a permit is required. If an assembly begins off the street but attracts an unexpected
number of participants such that the assembly begins to occupy a portion of the
street, the Matthews Police Department shall accommodate the assembly by
closing a segment, lane, or portion of the street where so doing will not jeopardize
the participants or unreasonably inhibit the flow of traffic on a major traffic route;
however, the Matthews Police Department is authorized to limit the available
portion of the street, where a segment, lane or portion of the street is capable of
3
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
accommodating the assembly.
(D) Permit and escort fees.
(1) The Town shall charge an administrative fee of $100.00 to cover expenses
incidental to processing the application.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible for hiring and paying off-duty law enforcement
officers or reimbursing the Town for the cost of providing off-duty law
enforcement officers and fire personal, to provide internal festival safety and
security.
(3) The applicant is responsible for reimbursing the Town to cover expenses for
logistical support, including barricades and parking restrictions, when said support
is requested, or in the judgment of the Town, needed for the safety of the event,
whether or not such request or determination is made in advance of the event. The
fees shall be waived in whole or in part as necessary to ensure that constitutional
rights of the applicants are not infringed, as follows:
a. The Town shall waive a permit fee, in whole or in part, for indigent
individuals or groups as necessary to ensure that the constitutional rights
of indigent applicants are not infringed. In cases where an indigency
waiver is requested, the Police Chief shall consider, but not be limited to,
the following: whether the applicant is employed; the financial resources
available to the applicant; whether the applicant receives federal, state, or
local financial assistance; whether the applicant owns real property, and
whether alternative arrangements are available. The Police Chief may
base his determination of indigency on the identity of the real party in
interest.
b. Even if the applicant is not determined to be indigent, the Town shall
waive a permit fee, in whole or in part, if the applicant demonstrates that
a waiver of fees is necessary, to avoid an infringement of constitutional
rights. The applicant shall provide a statement supporting this assertion
and shall identify the issue for which the parade is being organized.
c. Furthermore, if it is later determined that there has been an intentional,
material misrepresentation of the applicant’s financial status or other
information provided on the application, the Town reserves the right to
charge the organizers an appropriate fee based on actual events.
(E) Application
(1) A person seeking issuance of a public assembly or parade permit shall file a
completed application with the Chief of Police at least 30 days before the
commencement of the event, on a form provided by the Chief of Police. The form
shall include a place for the applicant to indicate if the applicant is indigent and
desires a waiver of permit fees. A copy of the Town’s schedule of fees from its
fees and charges manual shall be furnished to the applicant.
(2) An application for a public assembly or parade permit shall be filed with the Chief
4
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
of Police not less than thirty days before the time when it is proposed to conduct
the parade, unless the applicant can show that the parade pertains to a current or
emergent public issue. If the applicant makes this assertion in the application, the
Chief of Police shall permit such an application to be filed within fifteen days of
the event. Additionally, a permit may be issued if filed less than ten days before
the time for commencement of the parade when the Chief of Police finds that:
a. There is no conflict in schedule with some other previously schedule
events; and
b. That the time for filing is sufficient to prepare for the parade pursuant to
the standards set forth in this subsection.
(F) The applicant for a public assembly or parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such
public assembly or parade.
(2) If the public assembly or parade is proposed to be conducted for, or on behalf of,
or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters
of the organization and of the person who will be responsible for the conduct of
the parade.
(3) The date when the event is to be conducted and the hours when such event will
start and terminate.
(4) The proposed route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point.
(5) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will
constitute such event; the type of animals and description of the vehicles.
(6) The location by streets and designation by time of an assembly area of such parade.
(7) If the public assembly or parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the
Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the
event, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit in his/her behalf.
(8) The person or person to be in charge of the event for all purposes and who will
accompany it and carry the permit at all times.
(9) The maximum lengths of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
(10) Any additional information which the Chief of Police may need to clarify any of
the specific information set forth above.
(G) Issuance standards. The Chief of Police shall issue a public assembly or parade permit
upon submission of the completed application, unless he finds one or more of the following
conditions present:
5
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
(1) The application is not fully completed and executed;
(2) The applicant has not tendered the required application fee or has not tendered
other required user fees or costs necessary for the event to be conducted;
(3) The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation;
(4) The applicant has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding
the nature or scope of the event;
(5) The applicant has previously permitted a violation or has violated the terms of the
parade permit issued to or on behalf of the applicant;
(6) A fully executed prior application or board action for the same time and place has
been received and a permit or board approved action has been or will be granted
to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit
multiple simultaneous events;
(7) The proposed event would conflict with previously planned programs organized,
conducted or sponsored by the Town and previously scheduled at or near the same
time and place;
(8) The proposed event would present an unreasonable danger to the public health or
safety;
(9) The proposed event would substantially or unnecessarily interfere with traffic; the
event would likely interfere with the movement of emergency equipment and
police protection in areas contiguous or in the vicinity of the event;
(10) There would not, at the time of the event, be sufficient law enforcement officers to
adequately protect participants and non-participants from traffic related hazards in
light of the other demands for police protection at the time of the proposed event;
(11) The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law;
(12) Adequate provisions cannot be made for the safe and orderly movement of the
parade and of other traffic, pedestrian and vehicular, contiguous to its route;
(13) Adequate provisions cannot be made for police protection without requiring the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the Town to police properly the
lines of movement and the areas contiguous thereto, thereby preventing normal
police protection to the Town;
(14) The applicant for the parade permit has not agreed to abide by the standards set
forth in this division which are necessary measures to promote the safety and
welfare of the community; and
(15) For non-First Amendment protected events, the following criteria shall also apply:
a. The cultural and/or educational significance of the event;
6
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
b. The extent to which the event contributes to the economic revitalization and
business development of the Town;
c. The impact and/or cost of the event to the Town support staff;
d. The impact of the event to the public health, safety and welfare;
e. The impact of the event on business and residential populations within or
adjacent to the proposed site;
f. The evaluation of any previous event produced by the event organizer with
regard to planning, quality, public safety and payment of invoices; and
g. The frequency and timing of the event or similar events.
All costs for staging the parade, including fees and charges assessed by the Town, shall be itemized
and provided to the applicant with the permit.
Such determinations may not be based on the estimated number of non-participant observers.
Such determinations may not be based on the content of speech expected to be expressed during
the parade.
Each applicant shall be considered upon its own merits and shall not be granted or denied based on
political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds.
(H) Notice of rejection. The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a public assembly
or parade permit within 20 days after the filing thereof. If the applicant has filed an
application for a parade permit under the “current or emergent public issue exception” set
forth in subsection (E)(2), the Chief of Police shall make every effort to act on the
application within 72 hours and in any event not later than 24 hours before the event. If
the Chief of Police disapproves the application, he shall notify the applicant, stating the
reasons for his denial of the permit.
(I) Alternative permit. The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a public assembly
or parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the event on a date, at a time, or over a
route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant, desiring to accept an
alternative permit shall, within one day after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file
a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate public assembly or
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a public
assembly or parade permit under this division.
(J) Right to appeal. Any person denied a public assembly or parade permit or who rejects an
alternative permit, or who objects to any of the costs to be assessed by the Town, shall have
the right to an immediate appeal to the Town Manager. The hearing of a public assembly
or parade permit appeal shall be prioritized so as to allow the Town Manager the
opportunity to review the appeal and render a decision prior to the requested date and time
of the public assembly or parade. Any applicant desiring to file an appeal shall, within 24
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after notice of the action of the Chief of Police,
7
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
enter either a written or oral notice of appeal with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
shall be responsible for forwarding the notice of appeal, along with all documents related
to the appeal, to the Town Manager and arranging for the appeal hearing to take place
within a reasonable period of time prior to the date of the proposed event.
(K) Post event appeal. In the event an appeal based on costs cannot be resolved prior to the
event, or if the applicant believes that the logistical support deployed for the event is not
justified based on actual experience, or that a request for a fee waiver was wrongfully
denied, that appeal may be made to the Town Manager within 48 hours after the event has
occurred, and the Town Manager shall determine said appeal within the times prescribed
above.
(L) Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway of
vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof, constituting a part of the route or location
of the public event or parade. When necessary the Chief of Police shall see that “No
Parking” signs are posted to such effect at least 12 hours prior to the event, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park, remain parked or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof. No person, however, shall be liable for parking on a street un-posted in violation
of this section.
§101.04 PICKETING
(A) General requirements. Peaceful picketing shall be allowed in the Town provided the same
is done in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Picketing shall be conducted only on sidewalks or other Town-owned areas normally
used or reserved for pedestrian movement, including easements and rights-of-way, and
shall not be conducted on a portion of any street used primarily for vehicular traffic.
(2) Picketers shall observe the right of non-picketers to utilize the public rights-of-way for
passage on foot and shall at all times keep the public rights-of-way free and clear for
utilization by other pedestrian movement.
(3) Picketers shall walk in single file and not abreast.
(4) Picketers are encouraged to provide notice to the Chief of Police of intent to picket.
(B) Interruption of passage.
(1) Whenever the free passage of any street or other public area in the Town shall be
obstructed by picketers, persons picketing shall disperse or move along when directed
to do so by a police officer of the Town.
(2) Whenever the free passage of any street or other public area in the Town shall be
obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move
along when directed to do so by a police officer of the Town.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from reconvening after dispersing so
long as free passage of any street or other public area is not obstructed.
8
Chapter 101A. Parades and Picketing
(C) If more than one group of picketers desire to picket at the same time at or near the same
location, law enforcement officers may, without regard to the purpose or content of the
message, assign each group a place to picket in order to preserve the public peace.
Members of a group shall not enter an area assigned to another group. Priority of location
shall be based upon which group of picketers arrived first.
(D) Spectators of pickets shall not physically interfere with individuals engaged in picketing.
Picketers and spectators of pickets shall not speak fighting words or threats that would tend
to provoke a reasonable person to a breach of the peace.
(Ord. No. 2440 repealed Chapter 101 9-23-2019; Ord. No. 2441, Chapter 101A passed 9-23-2019)
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
1
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
DIVISION 1. GENERAL:
*State law references: Authority to levy, G.S. 160A-211.
Section
110.01 Purpose
110.02 Definitions
Levy
110.14 Levy
110.15 Who must pay tax
110.16 License required
110.17 Exemptions
110.18 Notice to taxpayer presumed
110.19 Period; due date
110.20 Proration of tax
Licenses
110.35 Application
110.36 Tax based on gross receipts
110.37 Change in business during the tax
year; fee for re-issuance of license
110.38 Duty to determine whether tax due
110.39 Refunds for discontinued business
110.40 Free licenses prohibited; exception
Duties, enforcements and collections
110.50 Finance Specialist’s authority; duties of business operators
110.51 Duty to post
110.52 Reasons for refusal or revocation
110.53 Penalties
110.54 Unqualified applicants; right to a conference
110.55 Amount of tax disputed
110.56 Licensee’s remedies
110.57 Providing notice to an applicant or licensee
110.58 Enforcement actions
§ 110.01 PURPOSE
(A) The intent of this chapter is to raise funds for general municipal purposes. Therefore, it should be construed
to require payment of the maximum tax permitted for the privilege of carrying on a business, trade, profession,
calling or occupation within the corporate limits of the Town.
(B) A license issued pursuant to this chapter reflects that the appropriate tax has been paid. Issuance of a license
does not constitute regulatory approval and does not excuse a licensee from compliance with any other
applicable ordinance, regulation, or statute. By issuing a license, the Town has not determined that the recipient
is in compliance with any applicable local, state or federal regulation or law or that the recipient is otherwise
engaged in a legal activity or operating a business in a legal manner.
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
2
(C) This chapter does not prevent the Town from imposing license taxes on additional businesses, from
increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax or from regulating any business taxed.
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS
Whenever used in this Ordinance (unless the context requires a different meaning):
AGENT means a person authorized to promote, represent, and/or sell for an agency or business.
BUSINESS includes each trade, occupation, profession, business and franchise or other activity engaged in by any
person for gain, profit, benefit or advantage, taxed under this Ordinance.
FISCAL YEAR means the period beginning with May 1 and ending on April 30.
GROSS RECEIPTS of the business means total receipts from sales or services as indicated on the federal or state
income tax return for that business.
LICENSEE means a person who has paid the privilege license tax levied by this Ordinance and obtained a privilege
license.
PERSON includes any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated association,
partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm or other legal entity.
FINANCE SPECIALIST means the individual(s) in the office of the Matthews Finance Department who is charged
with the responsibility of administering this Ordinance.
TOWN means Town of Matthews.
LEVY
§ 110.14 LEVY
Levy of tax. An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business conducted within this Town, in the
amounts set forth in this chapter. Additionally, every license issued under this chapter shall be a personal privilege and
shall not be transferable.
§ 110.15 WHO MUST PAY TAX
Each person who conducts a business within the Town is subject to this chapter.
(A) A person “conducts a business” when he engages in one act of any business.
(B) A person conducts a business “within the Town” if he maintains a business location within the Town, or if,
either personally or through agents, he:
(1) Solicits business within the Town, or
(2) Picks up or delivers goods or services within the Town.
§ 110.16 LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent to engage in or carry on a business in this Town for which there is
required a license. A violation, of this Chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, and each day, that such person shall
engage in or carry on such business, shall be construed to be a separate offense. A conviction under this section does
not relieve a person of his liability for the license tax or taxes imposed by this Chapter.
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
3
§ 110.17 EXEMPTIONS
(A) Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by state law, no person is exempt from the
payment of a privilege license tax levied by this Chapter.
(B) Charitable organizations. A person, who operates a business for a religious, educational, civic, patriotic,
charitable or fraternal purpose, when the entire gross income of the business is used for such a purpose, is
exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this chapter.
§ 110.18 NOTICE TO TAXPAYER PRESUMED
Each person who conducts a business may be subject to a business license. It is the duty of the taxpayer to verify what
his requirements are. If licenses are not paid, the proceedings allowed by law may be taken against such business. This
notice shall be conclusively presumed, whether or not such persons have actual notice.
§ 110.19 PERIOD; DUE DATE
Unless otherwise specified, the license issued pursuant to this chapter is valid for the 12-month period beginning May 1
and ending April 30.
(A) The tax is due and payable no later than May 1 of each year.
(B) However, if a person begins a business after May 1 of a year, the tax for that year shall be due and payable
before the business is begun.
(C) A person may not commence a business conducted within the Town which is taxed pursuant to this Chapter,
until the privilege license tax due is paid, and may not continue such business beyond the period for which the
license is issued.
(D)The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to beer and wine licenses, which shall be as provided by
state law.
(Penalty, see § 110.53)
§ 110.20 PRORATION OF TAX
If a business begins after October 31 and before May 1 the amount of tax due is half the amount otherwise due unless
otherwise provided. However, beer and wine licenses are never prorated.
LICENSES
§ 110.35 APPLICATION
(A) A person shall apply to the Finance Specialist for each license required by this chapter no less than thirty
(30) days before the date the tax is due. The application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the
Finance Specialist, shall contain:
(1) The start date in which the business began in Town, along with the application date.
(2) The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation, or some
other entity.
(3) Where the business is conducted.
(4) All telephone numbers applicable to business
(5) The nature of the business.
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
4
(6) An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as required by this chapter.
(7) Any other information the Finance Specialist determines to be necessary to compute the amount of tax
due.
(A) Each new application or an established business moving to a new location must be approved as to zoning
requirements by the Town.
(B) Each applicant has the responsibility to comply with other sections of this chapter concerning health, police,
building standards, and/or fire department requirements as provided, before the license shall be issued.
§ 110.36 TAX BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS
(A) Requirement. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section if a license tax required by this chapter is
based upon the gross receipts, an applicant for a business privilege license shall be required to submit the exact
amount of its gross receipts as reported on their most recent completed federal tax return, in such detail and in
such manner as the office of the Finance Specialist may require.
(B) Procedures. When a license tax required under this Chapter is based on gross receipts, the licensee will
compute its license tax by applying all gross receipts per location to the rate established in this section and
purchase a license per location. The licensee, however, may be subject to additional license taxes which the state
authorizes the Town to levy, depending on the licensee's business, and for which a separate license must be
purchased. If the licensee is required to obtain multiple licenses, these revenues may be excluded from the total
gross receipts. New businesses and/or businesses that have not been in business 12 months must give a goodfaith
12-month projection of their gross receipts. If necessary, the Finance Specialist shall estimate gross receipts
for the business on the basis of gross receipts of comparable businesses, or any other information that the
Finance Specialist considers useful.
(C) Definitions. The term "gross receipts," as used in this section, shall mean all earnings, receipts, fees, rentals,
commissions, broker's charges and income whatsoever arising from or growing out of the conduct of the
business, occupation or profession licensed under this chapter during the tax year immediately preceding the
license tax year for which the tax is being computed, without any deduction whatsoever, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
(D) Exception. Any business that pays the maximum annual tax on its gross receipts shall not be required to
submit the amount of its gross receipts in order to purchase a license.
(E) Confidentiality of information. All information regarding gross receipts or other information furnished or
secured under the authority of this Chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the office of the Finance
Director, its officials and employees, and shall not be subject or open to public inspection, except as provided in
this Chapter. The aforementioned shall be utilized solely by the office of the finance director, its officials and
employees for administering the provisions of this chapter. However, summaries of such information may be
shared with appropriate Town officials and employees for purposes of research and analysis.
§ 110.37 CHANGE IN THE BUSINESS DURING THE TAX YEAR; FEE FOR RE-ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
(A) A licensee under this Chapter shall report a change in the information contained in the license application to
the Finance Specialist within ten days after the change occurs. If information shown on the license itself is
affected thereby, the licensee shall surrender the license to the Finance Specialist when reporting the change. The
Finance Specialist shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of $5.00. The license shall be
subject to cancellation for failure to comply with this section.
(B) Duplicate copy. Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the Finance Specialist shall
furnish a duplicate upon payment of $5.00. Any other duplication of a license shall constitute a misdemeanor,
and is punishable as provided in section 10-99.
§ 110.38 DUTY TO DETERMINEWHETHER TAX DUE
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
5
(A) Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he conducts is taxed under this chapter, and if
so, whether that tax has been paid for the current tax year.
(B) No license shall be transferable or assignable.
(C) A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax must be paid for each place of business
unless two or more places of business under common ownership are contiguous to each other, communicate
directly with and open into each other and are operated as a unit.
§ 110.39 REFUNDS FOR DISCONTINUED BUSINESS
(A) Except as otherwise provided, there shall be no refund or abatement of any part of the license taxes where
the licensee discontinues his business before the end of the period for which such license was issued.
(B) Any licensee under this Chapter who enters the armed forces of the United States and as a result thereof, the
operation of the business for which the license was issued ceases and terminates and who, within 30 days after an
induction into the armed forces, makes an application to the Finance Specialist of the Town for same, shall be
entitled to a refund of the license fee in proportion to the number of full months remaining in the license period.
§ 110.40 FREE LICENSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
No free license under this Chapter shall be granted except to disabled veterans for peddling, provided such peddling is
done on foot and not from any vehicle. Any such person must be approved by the County Director of Veteran’s Affairs
in order for the license to be granted.
DUTIES, ENFORCEMENTS AND COLLECTIONS
§ 110.50 FINANCE SPECIALIST’S AUTHORITY; DUTIES OF BUSINESS OPERATORS
(A) Investigations by the Finance Specialist. If the Finance Specialist has reason to believe that a person is
conducting a business in Town in violation of this Chapter, the Finance Specialist shall conduct an investigation
to determine the person's tax liability.
(B) Duty to permit inspection. Each person who conducts business in Town shall permit the Finance Specialist or
his/her designee to inspect the business premises during normal business hours to determine the nature of the
business conducted there and to examine the books and records to determine the nature and amount of business
transacted.
(C) Duty to keep books. Each person who conducts a business taxed under this chapter shall keep all records and
books necessary to compute the tax liability. If a person fails to keep books and records as required, the Finance
Specialist shall make a determination of that person's tax liability from the information available.
(D) Ability to produce additional facts. If the Finance Specialist requires additional proof before rendering a
determination of a person’s tax liability, the Finance Specialist may require a sworn statement of sales or other
proof as needed prior to making that decision.
§ 110.51 DUTY TO POST
(A) A licensee under this Chapter shall post the license conspicuously in the place of business licensed. Failure
to post this license shall raise the presumption of not being a licensed business.
(B) If there is no regular place of business, the license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by the
proper Town officials.
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
6
(C) Each coin-operated machine, device, or other equipment for which a Town privilege license is required, shall
have affixed thereto in a conspicuous place, a sticker as provided by the Finance Specialist, indicating that the
privilege license tax has been paid. Failure to display this sticker shall raise a presumption that the machine,
device or other equipment is operated by the owner, and/or tenant of the premises, whereupon such person shall
be responsible for payment of all Town taxes and penalties which may be due and payable.
(D) Every coin-operated machine, equipment or device for which a Town privilege license is required shall have
affixed thereto in a conspicuous place, identification showing the name and address of the owner, operator,
distributor or other person responsible for such coin-operated machine. Failure to display this information shall
indicate the machine or device is owned by the operator on the location, as set forth in subsection (C) of this
section.
§ 110.52 REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION
The Finance Specialist shall refuse to issue or shall revoke a license required by this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
(A) The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of tax due or the qualifications for a license.
(B) The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to compute the amount of tax due.
(C) The applicant fails or refuses to provide all information required in the application.
(D) Upon the revocation of any license, it shall be unlawful for the person to whom such license was granted to
continue to conduct such business.
§ 110.53 PENALTIES
(A) All license taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be due and payable in advance by May 2. If any person
conducts any business without first paying such tax and obtaining a license by that date, there shall be assessed
an additional tax equal to five percent (5%) of the amount prescribed for the license per month or fraction thereof
until paid, not to exceed 25 percent (25%) of the amount so prescribed, but in any event shall not be less than
five dollars ($5.00). Beer and wine licenses must be paid in advance by May 2, if delinquent; the above
described penalty will also apply.
(B) No license shall be granted until the license tax plus the additional tax assessed has been paid.
(C) All licenses imposed on businesses under Section 110.20 shall be paid prior to the beginning of such
business. If not paid within 30 days, the penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply
from the date such business began.
§ 110.54: UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO A CONFERENCE
(A) After receipt of the completed application, if the Finance Specialist believes that a reason exists for refusing
a license under Section 110.43, he/she shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall not issue the license. At
the applicant’s request, the Finance Specialist shall give him a written statement of the reasons for refusing the
license. The applicant may, within ten days after the day he receives notice, request a conference to discuss the
refusal. In his request he shall specify why his application for a license should not be refused. The Finance
Specialist shall arrange the conference within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty days.
(B) If the Finance Specialist refuses to issue a license, the applicant may reapply for a license at any time
thereafter. If the reason for which the application was refused no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the Finance Specialist shall issue the license.
§ 110.55 AMOUNT OF TAX DISPUTED
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
7
If the applicant disputes the amount the Finance Specialist determines to be due, he may either refuse to pay the tax and
request a conference with the Finance Specialist to discuss the determination, or pay the amount and request a
conference to discuss his right for a refund. If a conference is requested, the Finance Specialist shall arrange it in a
reasonable time, not to exceed thirty days.
(A) The Finance Specialist shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke it as set forth in Section 110.43.
Before the Finance Specialist may revoke a license, he/she shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds
for revocation. The licensee may, within ten days after the day on which the notice is served, request in writing a
conference with the Finance Specialist. The request shall specify the reasons why the license should not be
revoked. The Finance Specialist shall arrange the conference within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty days.
(B) If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days after the day on which notice is served, the
Finance Specialist shall revoke the license. If the licensee requests a conference, the Finance Specialist may not
revoke the license until after the conference.
(C) If the Finance Specialist revokes a license, the former licensee may apply for a new license at any time
thereafter. If the reason for which the license was revoked no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the Finance Specialist shall issue the license.
§ 110.56 LICENSEE'S REMEDIES
(A) Assertions of valid defense. Any licensee asserting a valid defense to the enforcement of the collection of any
license levied in this chapter shall proceed as provided in this section:
(1) A valid defense shall include the following:
a. A license imposed through clerical error.
b. An illegal license.
c. A license levied for an illegal purpose.
(2) If the license has been paid, the licensee, at any time within three years after such license became due,
may make a demand for a refund of the license paid by submitting to the Town Commissioners a written
statement of his defense and a request for a refund thereof.
(B) Action of governing body. Upon receiving a licensee’s written statement of defense and request for release or
refund, the Town Commissioners shall within 90 days after receipt of such request determine whether the
licensee has a valid defense to the license imposed or any part thereof and shall either release or refund that
portion of the amount that is determined to be in excess of the correct license liability or notify the licensee in
writing that no release or refund will be made. The action of the Town Commissioners on applications for
refunds shall be recorded in its minutes. If a refund is made, the finance department shall forward such refund to
the Finance Specialist, who shall note on all records the amount of refund, check number and refund date.
(C) Suit for recovery of license taxes. If within 90 days after receiving a licensee's request for refund and the
Town Commissioners have failed to refund the full amount requested by the licensee, or has notified the licensee
that no refund will be made, or has taken no action on the request, the licensee may bring a civil action against
the Town for the amount claimed. Such action may be brought at any time within three years from the expiration
of the period in which the Town Commissioners are required to act.
(D) Civil action Civil action brought pursuant to subsection (C) of this section shall be brought in the appropriate
division of the general court of justice in the county. If, upon the trial, it is determined that the license or any part
of it was illegal, or levied for an illegal purpose, or excessive as a result of a clerical error, judgment shall be
rendered therefore with interest thereon at six percent (6%) per annum plus costs. The judgment shall be
collected as in other civil actions.
§ 110.57 PROVIDING NOTICE TO AN APPLICANT OR LICENSEE
Whenever this Chapter requires the Finance Specialist to give a written statement or notice to an applicant or a licensee,
he may do so in any one of three ways:
(A) By personally delivering the statement or notice to the applicant or licensee.
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
8
(B) By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address
specified for that purpose in the licensee application or to the last known address.
(C) By causing the statement or notice to be served on the applicant or licensee in accordance with the
procedures for service or process under Rule 4, North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 110.58 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS
(A) Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in subsection (A) of this section, pursuant
to G.S. 160A-175(d), the Town may seek an injunction against any person conducting a business in violation of
this Chapter.
(B) Garnishment and levy remedies. The Finance Specialist may set forth the sale of tangible personal property
(levy) or attach wages, rents, bank deposit and other compensation (garnish) to eliminate any delinquent license
tax in accordance with G.S. 105- 368 and G.S. 160A-207.
(C) Criminal remedies. Conducting business within the Town limits without having paid the license tax imposed,
or without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter, or without posting a license pursuant to section 110.42,
is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 10.99. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings
pursuant to this section does not relieve a person of his liability for taxes imposed under this chapter.
(D) Use of remedies. The Town may maintain an action or procedure to enforce any remedy provided by law for
the collection of privilege license tax within three (3) years from the date the taxes became due.
DIVISION 2. SCHEDULES
§ 110.70: License tax schedules.
Schedule A
Privilege License Taxes Based on Gross Sales/Receipts/Income:
Businesses that are taxed under this schedule will use the formula below to calculate the tax amount due. In addition to
paying on a gross receipts tax there may be other tax classifications required listed in Schedule B and Schedule C.
(101) All businesses, trades, professions, game devices or other undertaking, prosecuted for profit or gain:
Gross Receipts License Tax
$0.00-$50,000 $25.00
$50,001-$100,000 $35.00
$100,001-$150,000 $50.00
$150,001-$200,000 $75.00
$200,001-$250,000 $100.00
Over $250,000 $100 plus $0.20 per $1,000; maximum $2,000
(Ord. No. 1808, passed 6-13-11; effective 7-1-11)
Schedule B
Privilege License Taxes Limited under North Carolina General Statutes:
Listed below are classifications of business activities governed within the North Carolina Revenue Laws, pursuant to
G.S. 160A-211. Businesses conducting these activities are taxed under this schedule in addition to Schedule A and
Schedule C, if applicable.
(201) Advertising (outdoor) .................................................................................................................................... $35.00
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
9
Every person who is engaged in the business of outdoor advertising by means of signboards, poster boards or printed
bulletins or any other outdoor advertising devices erected upon grounds, walls or roofs of buildings, or other
advertising.
(202) Auto garage .................................................................................................................................................... $12.50
(203) Auto service station and accessories ............................................................................................................ $12.50
Engaging in the business of servicing motor vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers, or engaged in retail selling of automotive
accessories or delivering to the user or consumer parts, tires, tools, batteries, electrical equipment or supplies, motor
fuels or lubricants, any or all of the above. Such license tax shall be paid for each place of business so operated or
maintained.
(204) Auto accessories at wholesale
(A) Every person engaged in receiving, buying, selling, distributing, exchanging or delivering automotive
accessories, parts, tires, tools, fuels, lubricants, batteries or other automotive equipment or supplies, any or all of
the above at wholesale, for each place of business. ......................................................................................... $37.50
(B) Plus, for each tank wagon or truck operated on public streets ................................................................... $25.00
(C) Every person engaged in the business of selling wholesale and having no place of business but selling to retail
dealers by use of some form of ........................................................................................................................ $25.00
The term “wholesale” shall apply to those who receive, buy, sell, distribute, exchange or deliver to retail dealers, or sell
otherwise to the consumer.
(205) Amusements ................................................................................................................................................... $25.00
(206) Barbers (each operator) .................................................................................................................................. $2.50
(207) Beauty parlors - (each operator)………………………………………………………………………......... $2.50
(208) Beer licenses - from May 1 to April 30, not prorated
(A) On-premises …........................................................................................................................................... $15.00
(B) Off premises ................................................................................................................................................. $5.00
(C) Wholesale beer ........................................................................................................................................... $37.50
(209) Bicycles, each dealer or agent selling, renting or repairing ....................................................................... $25.00
(210) Boardinghouses, per room .............................................................................................................................. $1.00
Minimum ................................................ $25.00
(211) Bowling alleys, whether used or not, each alley .......................................................................................... $10.00
(212) Chain store, each store over one ................................................................................................................... $50.00
(213) Circuses, dog and pony shows, and like amusements, per day ................................................................. $25.00
(214) Collection or claim agencies .......................................................................................................................... $50.00
Every person engaged in the business of operating for profit a collection agency for the purposes of collecting bills,
notes, or to pay other indebtedness from one person in favor of another.
(215) Electricians ..................................................................................................................................................... $50.00
(216) Elevators or sprinkler systems, selling and/or installing ......................................................................... $100.00
(217) Employment agencies .................................................................................................................................. $100.00
(218) Firearms (rifles, handguns, etc.)
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
10
(A) Firearms sale and/or manufacturers, including, but not limited to, rifles, handguns, shotguns, etc........... $50.00
(B) Dealers in bowie knives, dirks, slingshots, leaded canes, iron or metallic knuckles or similar weapons...$200.00
(219) Games, for sports or plays operated for profit (golf, putt-putt) ................................................................ $25.00
(220) Heating contractors ....................................................................................................................................... $50.00
(221) Hotel, motels
Every person engaged in the business of operating any hotel or motel, tourist court, tourist home or similar place
advertising in any manner for transient patronage, or soliciting such business, in the town:
For each room .............................................................................................................................................................. $1.00
Minimum tax ............................................................................................................................................................. $25.00
The tax provided for in this section shall apply whether the rental charges are made by patrons on a daily, weekly,
biweekly or monthly basis. It is immaterial as to any particular room whether such room is occupied by a permanent
guest.
(222) Ice cream, at retail ........................................................................................................................................... $2.50
(223) Laundries, launderettes, and similar type businesses ................................................................................ $50.00
Each steam or electric laundry, including wet or damp wash laundry, and each business supplying or renting clean linen
or towels or wearing apparel.
(224) Loan companies, personal ........................................................................................................................... $100.00
Persons lending money on personal securities, such as household and kitchen articles, watches, jewelry, automobiles,
etc., by mortgage, pledge or otherwise.
(225) Manicuring (each operator) ............................................................................................................................ $2.50
(226) Merchant itinerant (cash or money order) ................................................................................................ $100.00
Merchant, other than an established retail merchant in county, who transports goods to a building, vacant lot or alley,
etc., and offers for sale at retail for less than six consecutive months.
(227) Motion picture shows, indoor, per screen……………….......................................................................... $200.00
(228) Motorcycle dealers ......................................................................................................................................... $12.50
Every person engaged in buying, selling, servicing, distributing or exchanging motorcycles, motorcycle supplies or
equipment, for each place of business so operated.
(229) Motor vehicle dealers
(A) Every person engaged in buying, selling or exchanging motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers, tires, tools,
batteries, electrical equipment, fuels, lubricants or automotive equipment, for each place of business so operated at
retail and/or wholesale…………………………………….............................................................................. $25.00
(B) Seasonal, temporary, transient or itinerant nature, each location ………………………........................ $300.00
(230) Music box (juke box) each .............................................................................................................................. $5.00
License must be attached to machine before being placed in operation.
(231) Oil dealers in lubricating (see 101)
For each tank, wagon or truck operated on the public streets ................................................................................... $25.00
(232) Pawnbrokers ................................................................................................................................................ $275.00
(233) Peddlers (cash or money order)
(A) Person who travels from place to place with inventory and offers for sale at retail the actual inventory,
occupying no space for more than 30 minutes during any 24-hour period. Must comply with the regulations of this
Chapter, in Division 3 and state regulations .................................................................................................... $25.00
(B) Farmers selling their own produce must apply for grower’s certification .............................................. Exempt
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
11
(234) Phonographs/tapes/recorders, etc.
(A) Each dealer or agent ..................................................................................................................................... $5.00
(B) Service or repair ........................................................................................................................................... $5.00
(235) Piano and/or organ dealers ............................................................................................................................. $5.00
(236) Plumbers ......................................................................................................................................................... $50.00
(237) Pool tables, pocket billiards, or bagatelle tables, unless used for private amusement alone without charge,
per location ………………………………………………………………………………………………………... $25.00
The above tax shall apply whether the pool tables are operated by slot or otherwise.
(238) Pressing clubs (dry cleaning) ........................................................................................................................ $50.00
Includes nonresident and coin-operated dry cleaning machines.
(239) Radio and/or TV
(A) Each dealer or agent ..................................................................................................................................... $5.00
(B) Repair or service .......................................................................................................................................... $5.00
(240) Restaurants
(A) Seating capacity of four customers or fewer ............................................................................................. $25.00
(B) Seating capacity of five or more customers ............................................................................................... $42.50
(241) Shooting Galleries .......................................................................................................................................... $25.00
Whether used or not a place for any other games or play with or without name (unless used for private amusement or
exercise alone, without charge)
(242) Sign erectors, sign hangers ........................................................................................................................... $35.00
Construction, repairing, repainting or erecting any sign on walls, buildings or roofs, or hanging or supported steps over
streets or sidewalks, any and all work in which is used ladders or scaffolding.
(243) Skating rinks/swimming pools ...................................................................................................................... $25.00
(244) Slot machines
No license tax shall be charged upon or issued for a slot machine illegal under the state law.
(A) Pinball machines and other amusement games and devices, per location ................................................. $25.00
(B) Each panorama or other machine for the showing of small motion pictures, whether with or without music,
and requiring a deposit of more than $0.09 ...................................................................................................... $25.00
(245) Sundries (soft drinks, tobacco) ......................................................................................................................... $4.00
The sundries license shall be procured and tax paid on any one or more of the following business activities:
(A) Sale of pre-wrapped sandwiches in drugstores, service stations or any stands or places not licensed and taxed
as a restaurant.
(B) Operating, maintaining or placing on location any of the following types of dispensers or machines:
(1) Dispensers of cigarettes or other tobacco products.
(2) Dispensers of soft drinks.
(3) Dispensers of food or other merchandise.
(4) Weighing machines. (Not to exceed 4 machines of like kind.)
(C) Operating a soda fountain or soft drink stand.
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
12
(D) Retailing or jobbing cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff or any other tobacco product. License for each
location, regardless of the number of activities engaged in.
(246) Specialty markets (flea markets) ................................................................................................................. $200.00
Person who rents space, other than permanent retail store, to someone selling retail.
(247) Trailer parks .................................................................................................................................................. $12.50
(248) Undertakers .................................................................................................................................................... $50.00
(249) Video games, (each machine) .......................................................................................................................... $5.00
Each electronic video game’s serial number must be provided with the application. The license must be shown in a
conspicuous place.
(250) Video sales and rentals .................................................................................................................................. $25.00
(Subject to (212) and other applicable licenses)
(251) Wine license - from May 1 to April 30, not prorated
(A) On-premises ............................................................................................................................................... $15.00
(B) Off-premises .............................................................................................................................................. $10.00
(C) Wholesale wine .......................................................................................................................................... $37.50
(D) Chain stores applicable, per State Revenue Act.
Schedule C
Privilege License Taxes Limited by Town Ordinance
Business categories in this schedule are specifically taxed. Businesses conducting these activities are taxed under this
schedule in addition to Schedule A and Schedule B, if applicable.
(301) Bankrupt or fire stock ................................................................................................................................. $450.00
Every itinerant salesman or merchant who shall expose for sale, either on the street or in a house rented temporarily for
that purpose, any goods, wares or merchandise, bankrupt stock, or fire stock, not being a regular merchant in the town,
shall apply in advance and procure a license for the privilege of transacting such business.
(302) Catering trucks, each truck .......................................................................................................................... $50.00
Selling tobacco, soft drinks, wrapped sandwiches and prepared food from a truck; does not include sale of ice cream
and must be approved by health department.
(303) Christmas trees .............................................................................................................................................. $50.00
Dealers in Christmas trees and perishable Christmas decorations, not prorated, each lot.
(304) Ice cream vendors, each vehicle ....................................................................................................................$75.00
Ice cream and flavored ice products peddlers who retail from a cart, truck, wagon or other type vehicle.
Internet Access Providers/Internet/Phone Sweepstakes ……………………………………………………..$2,000.00
Any for-profit business having as a part of its operation the running of one or more games or processes with any of the
following characteristics:
(A) For payment, directly or as an intended addition to the purchase of a product, the customer receives one or
more electronic sweepstakes tickets, cards, tokens or similar items entitling or empowering the customer to enter a
sweepstakes, and without which item the customer would be unable to enter the sweepstakes; or
Chapter 110. Privilege License Tax
13
(B) For payment, directly or as an intended addition to the purchase of a product the customer can request a no
purchase necessary free entry of one or more sweepstakes tickets or other item entitling the customer to enter a
sweepstakes.
This category shall not include libraries, hotels, motels or other businesses offering lodging, businesses operating
only electronic video games which require the insertion of entry of either money or tokens, passwords or other
items purchased from the business. This category does not apply to any game or process prohibited by NCGS
§14-304–14-309. (Ord. 1718, passed 1-25-10)
(305) Miscellaneous
Every person engaged in business carried on or enjoyed within the corporate limits of the town shall apply for and pay a
privilege license tax unless specifically exempted by a local, state or federal authority. In those cases where the
privilege license tax amount cannot be determined by any other means, the Finance Specialist shall determine the tax
amount due using the following basis:
(A) 1 to 5 full- or part-time employees at any one time during the year ....................................................... $150.00
(B) 6 to 15 full- or part-time employees at any one time during the year ..................................................... $500.00
(C) 16 to 25 full- or part-time employees at any one time during the year ................................................. $1,000.00
(D) 26 or more full- or part-time employees at any one time during the year …………………………… $2,000.00
The tax is not subject to be prorated for a period of less than one year. The number of full or part-time employees
to be used in determining this tax shall be the maximum number of full or part-time employees working out of
this business location at any one time during the license year and shall include owners, management and persons
compensated in any way, including commission for work done at or for this business location.
(306) Pushcarts ........................................................................................................................................................ $50.00
(307) Taxicabs .......................................................................................................................................................... $15.00
An applicant under this category must first obtain a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity to operate one or
more taxicabs pursuant to Chapter 113 of the Town Code, which is subject to approval of Police Department and the
Town Board. As of May 2 delinquent license fees and/or penalties shall become the responsibility of the taxicab
company under which it operates.
(Ord. 1589, passed 8-27-07)
1
Chapter 111. Advertising
Section
111.01 Distribution of handbills; requirements
111.02 Use on public rights-of-way and private property regulated
111.03 Temporary banners or signs
§ 111.01 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; REQUIREMENTS.
(A) No person shall promiscuously distribute or cause to be distributed handbills or advertisements of any kind by
placing or throwing the same on any street or lot or otherwise, and those handbills or advertisements shall be either
handed to persons or, if placed upon private premises, the same shall be placed behind the screen door or placed
securely under the door knob of the front door of the building upon those premises, in a manner as not to be easily
displaced.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in, paste on, or attach to any automobile any advertising matter
without the consent of the owner. ('72 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 176, passed 11-14-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.02 USE ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PRIVATE PROPERTY REGULATED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post, nail, stick or otherwise affix bills, posters,
advertisements, notices or any other printed or graphic matter upon public rights-of-way in the town, except as
hereinafter provided in this chapter. This section shall not apply to notices, signs or advertisements required to be
posted by law; signs or plates on residential premises giving the name or address of the occupant; mailboxes or
newspaper tubes; municipal, county, state or federal traffic signs; historical markers, monuments or signs erected by
public authority; temporary displays as a part of customary holiday decorations; and signs denoting the location of
underground utilities. ('72 Code, § 18A-1)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to nail, stick or otherwise affix bills, posters,
advertisements, notices, or other printed or graphic matter upon private property within the town without the consent
of the owner. ('72 Code, § 18A-2) (Ord.42, passed 12-10-79; Am. Ord. 54, passed 5-12-80; Am. Ord. 62, passed 9-
22-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.03 TEMPORARY BANNERS OR SIGNS (Deleted; Ord. No. 1381, passed 9-27-04)
Chapter 112. Charitable Solicitation Control
1
Chapter 112. Charitable Solicitation Control
Section
General Provisions
112.01 Title
112.02 Purpose
112.03 Definitions
Permit Requirements
112.15 Solicitation permit required; application
112.16 Reasons for refusal
112.17 Permits for charitable literature distribution
112.18 Permit fees
112.19 Cancellation of permits
112.20 Application of rules and standards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 TITLE
This chapter shall be known and cited as Matthews Charitable Solicitation Control Regulations.
('72 Code, § 17B-1) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89)
§ 112.02 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this chapter to control more effectively charitable solicitations and literature distribution on the
public rights-of-way, to protect the traveling public as well as persons desiring to solicit for charities, to balance the
legal rights of each group, and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
('72 Code, § 17B-2) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any person, firm, group, partnership, corporation or association whose avowed
purpose and object is to benefit, assist, aid and further the following causes:
(1) Philanthropy;
(2) Assistance to persons who are poor, impoverished, destitute, under privileged, needy, diseased, injured,
crippled, disabled, handicapped or in need of physical or mental rehabilitation;
(3) Churches, religious societies or the religious sects, groups or orders espousing spiritual and altruistic motives
or conduct;
(4) The teaching of patriotism or promoting relief and assistance to this nation's war veterans;
(5) Beneficial education of the mind or assistance to educational institutions; or
Chapter 112. Charitable Solicitation Control
2
(6) The protection, shelter, and sustenance of animals.
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION. Seeking money donations, pledges thereof, or anything of value to benefit, assist,
aid and further the cause of a charitable organization, either orally or by literature distribution.
LITERATURE. Books, pamphlets, handbills, tracts, cards, circulars, pictures, films, magazines or any other written or
printed material.
('72 Code, § 17B-3) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 112.15 SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds for charitable purposes on the public rights-of-way without first
applying for and obtaining a permit on forms prescribed by the Board of Commissioners. The application shall be
submitted to the Board of Commissioners prior to actual solicitation and shall state:
(A) The full name and mailing address of the applicant, and the organization sponsoring, conducting or promoting
the fund drive; if the mailing address is a post office box number, the actual street address shall also be stated;
(B) Whether or not the applicant shall be soliciting for a branch or division of a national organization, and if so,
the name thereof, and the mailing and street address of same;
(C) If the applicant is soliciting for a North Carolina corporation, a copy of its corporate charter, as amended, shall
be furnished; if it is a foreign corporation, a copy of its authorization certificate to do business in this state shall
accompany the application;
(D) The purpose or object of the charitable solicitations; and
(E) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime involving either assault, battery, fraud, theft or
moral turpitude.
('72 Code, § 17B-4) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
(F) The Matthews Police Department is hereby authorized to utilize the Division of Criminal Information (DCI)
System to verify the criminal history of the applicant.
(Ord. 1255, passed 12-9-02)
§ 112.16 REASONS FOR REFUSAL
The application shall be granted and the permit required by § 112.15 shall be issued unless one or more of the following
facts is found to exist:
(A) That one or more of the statements in the application is not true; or
(B) That the applicant has violated any of the terms and provisions of any prior permit.
('72 Code, § 17B-5) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89)
(C) That the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving either assault, battery, fraud, theft or moral
turpitude.
(Ord. 1255, passed 12-9-02)
(D) In the event an applicant has been refused to be issued a permit or in the event a permit holder has had an
issued permit cancelled, see Section 112.19, then in either event said applicant/or holder shall have the right to
appeal the action to a hearing at a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners, said hearing to be held at the
next possible regular Board meeting.
(Ord. 1255, passed 12-9-02)
Chapter 112. Charitable Solicitation Control
3
§ 112.17 PERMITS FOR CHARITABLE LITERATURE DISTRIBUTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute literature or any other article on the public rights-of-way in connection
with charitable solicitation without first applying for and obtaining a permit as provided in § 112.15.
('72 Code, § 17B-6) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.18 PERMIT FEES
A fee of $6 for a permit issued under this chapter shall be charged and collected in advance to defray a part of the cost
of preparing and issuing a permit.
('72 Code, § 17B-7) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89)
§ 112.19 CANCELLATION OF PERMITS
Any permit granted under this chapter may be cancelled after issuance if any of the reasons set forth in this chapter for
prior refusal should be discovered, or become apparent during the solicitation period.
('72 Code, § 17B-8) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89)
§ 112.20 APPLICATION OF RULES AND STANDARDS
When permits for charitable solicitation, charitable literature distribution, or a combination of the two are granted, the
following rules and standards shall apply:
(A) Location. Permittees shall be restricted to the use of the sidewalks and/or street rights-of-way between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Sunday through Saturday.
(B) Time. Permits shall be issued for 14 days.
(C) Manner of operation:
(1) Each person included in a permit shall be issued and shall wear a photo identification card on the upper
clothing and in a manner clearly visible to the public. This identification shall state the true and correct legal
name of the solicitor and the organization or cause represented. It shall not be transferred to another person and
must be returned to the issuing town official at the expiration of the permit.
(2) No permittee shall make loud noises or create any other disturbances. No dancing, chanting, use of drums,
cymbals or other musical instruments, or noise making devices shall be permitted.
(3) Permittees at all times are subject to all laws - federal, state or local - regarding frauds, assault, battery, theft,
littering, and all other laws relating to the conduct of persons in public places.
(4) Permittees, when soliciting donations in connection with the distribution of literature or the distribution of
other articles, shall inform the person approached by them that a donation is solicited prior to the time that
material is delivered to the prospective donor, and the solicitor shall make the proper money change when
informed of the amount being donated.
(5) No permittee shall erect or place a table, bench, chair or other structure on any sidewalk or street rights-ofway.
(6) No permittee shall distribute candy, gum or other food snacks or any food product, and shall not pin, tie or
attach any flower or their symbol, insignia or article on the clothing, or vehicle or passengers or other persons
within the public rights-of-way.
(7) No permittee shall interfere with the free passage of, or access of, other persons along sidewalks or street
rights-of-way; no permittee shall ever obstruct passage to solicit donations or distribute literature or other
articles.
('72 Code, § 17B-9) (Ord. 608, passed 8-28-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
1
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
Section
General Provisions
113.01 Title
113.02 Definition
113.03 Violation of regulations; revocation or suspension
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
113.15 Certificate required
113.16 Application
113.17 Hearing on application
113.18 Issuance
113.19 Expiration
113.20 Renewal
113.21 Certificate display
113.22 Non-transference of certificate
113.23 Change of ownership
113.24 Designation and replacement of taxicabs
113.25 Suspension and revocation
113.26 Surrender of certificate
Standards of Operation
113.40 Compliance with state law
113.41 Payment of license fees
113.42 Vehicle and equipment specifications; inspection
113.43 Vehicle registration; licenses
113.44 Insurance policies; liability
113.45 Chauffeur license for drivers required
113.46 Conduct of drivers
113.47 Rates
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 TITLE
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Taxicab Regulations of Matthews, North Carolina.
('72 Code, § 20-1-1) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77)
§ 113.02 DEFINITION
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers operated upon any street or highway on call or on
demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between such points along streets or highways as
may be directed by the passenger so being transported, and shall not include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as
defined in G.S. § 62-103(k).
('72 Code, § 20-1-2) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77)
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
2
§ 113.03 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Upon being convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, the Town Board of Commissioners may suspend or revoke any certificate or
certificates held by that person.
('72 Code, § 20-1-3) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
§ 113.15 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED
No owner shall operate any taxicab in the town without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and
necessity from the Town Board of Commissioners authorizing that operation.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4A) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.16 APPLICATION
All persons or owners applying to the Town Board of Commissioners for a certificate for the operation of one or more
taxicabs shall file with the Board a sworn application therefore stating as follows:
(A) The name and address of the owner, and in the event that the owner be a corporation, a certified copy of
the Articles of Incorporation;
(B) The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by that owner on the
date of the application, if any;
(C) The number of vehicles for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity is desired;
(D) The make, type, year of manufacture, factory or serial number, engine number, weight, title number, and
passenger capacity of each taxicab for which application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity
is made;
(E) Court record of applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the court record of the officers, directors, and
supervising employees thereof, including general manager, if any; and
(F) Any other information as the Town Board may, in its discretion, require.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4B) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77)
(G) The Matthews Police Department is hereby authorized to utilize the Division of Criminal Information
(DCI) System to verify the criminal history of the applicant and any driver employee of the applicant.
(Ord. 1253, passed 12-9-02)
§ 113.17 HEARING ON APPLICATION
No certificate shall be granted until the Town Board of Commissioners shall, after hearing, declare by resolution, that
public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service.
§ 113.18 ISSUANCE
Having declared that public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service, the Town Board of
Commissioners shall grant to every person who shall have filed application therefore as herein provided, a certificate of
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
3
public convenience and necessity for such taxicab or taxicabs subject to those conditions as the Town Board may deem
that public convenience and necessity require, provided:
(A) The owner thereof shall have complied with all the provisions of this chapter; and
(B) The court record of the applicant is not such that would make it against the public interest for that
application to be granted.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4D) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77)
§ 113.19 EXPIRATION
All certificates shall expire on April 30 of the year during which those certificates were granted.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4E) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) (Ord. 1253, passed 12-9-02; Ord. 1588, passed 8-27-07)
§ 113.20 RENEWAL
Upon application, prior to the termination of each fiscal year, the Town Board of Commissioners may renew any
certificate, or cause a new certificate to be issued for the ensuing year, in the absence of any contrary evidence and
finding of the Town Board regarding the continued necessity for that taxicab service.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4F) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77; Ord. 1588, passed 8-17-07)
§ 113.21 CERTIFICATE DISPLAY
For each taxicab for which a certificate has been granted, a memorandum certificate shall be issued by the Board of
Commissioners and this memorandum certificate will be displayed at all times, in a conspicuous place in the taxicab for
which it was issued, as hereinafter provided in this chapter.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4G) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.22 NONTRANSFERENCE OF CERTIFICATE
No certificate of necessity shall be assigned or transferred without the approval of the Town Board of Commissioners.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4H) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.23 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP
(A) Change of ownership of, or title to, any taxicab or taxicabs, shall automatically revoke any certificate
previously granted for the operation of that taxicab or taxicabs. The purchaser of any taxicab or taxicabs may
not operate those vehicles as taxicabs until he has applied for and been granted new certificates in the manner
provided in this chapter.
(B) For the purposes of this chapter, a change of ownership is deemed to have taken place in addition to other
methods usually employed if the owner of any taxicab leases the same to any person under any lease or other
arrangement whereby that person shall have the right upon the payment of an amount of money or other
consideration to acquire title at any future date to that taxicab.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4I) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
4
§ 113.24 DESIGNATION AND REPLACEMENT OF TAXICABS
Whenever an owner replaces or permanently retires from service, title to a taxicab or taxicabs for which a certificate or
certificates have been granted, and, within 90 days after that replacement or retirement, purchases other taxicabs, the
Town Board of Commissioners shall, as a matter of right, upon written application to the Town Board within 90 days of
that purchase, issue a new certificate or certificates for the operation of no greater number of taxicabs than those so
replaced or retired, and provided the owner has complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4J) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.25 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
(A) Certificates may be suspended or revoked by the Town Board of Commissioners at any time in case:
(1) The Town Board finds the owner's past record to be unsatisfactory;
(2) The owner fails to operate the taxicab or taxicabs in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; and
(3) For any other reason that the Town Board may deem warrants suspension or revocation.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4K)
(B) No certificate shall be revoked unless and until 48 hours' notice of a hearing shall have been given the
holder of that certificate and the hearing is duly had thereon.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4L) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77)
§ 113.26 SURRENDER OF CERTIFICATE
Certificates which shall have been suspended or revoked by the Town Board of Commissioners shall forthwith be
surrendered to the Town Board together with the corresponding memorandum certificates, and the operation of any
taxicab or taxicabs covered by those certificates shall cease.
('72 Code, § 20-1-4M) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77)
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§ 113.40 COMPLIANCEWITH STATE LAW
Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with the laws of this state and the ordinances of this town and with due
regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers; for the safe and careful transportation of property; and for
the safety of the general public.
('72 Code, § 20-1-7B) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.41 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES
No owner shall operate any taxicab in the town without first having paid to the town a license fee in the sum of $15 per
fiscal year upon each vehicle to be operated in the town as a taxicab.
('72 Code, § 20-1-9) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) (Ord. 928, passed 7-28-97) (Ord. 1253, passed 12-9-02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
5
§ 113.42 VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATIONS; INSPECTION
(A) Conformity. No vehicle shall be granted a certificate unless it conforms with all the provisions of this
chapter.
(B) Equipment required. All taxicabs shall be equipped in accordance with the state and federal regulations
governing the equipment required for the operation of motor vehicles. In addition, every taxicab shall be
equipped with a card frame for the proper display of the owner's memorandum certificate, rate card and
taxicab driver's permit, and the same shall be located as to be, at all times in plain view of the passenger.
(C) Color scheme for taxicabs. All taxicab companies shall adopt a separate color scheme for painting of their
cabs, distinct from that of any other cab company. All taxicabs of each company shall be of the same color
scheme.
(D) Inspection. Before a certificate is issued to any owner, the owner of the taxicab or taxicabs for which the
certificate or certificates are requested shall deliver the taxicab or taxicabs to a place designated by the Town
Board of Commissioners for inspection, and the Town Board shall designate agents to inspect the taxicab or
taxicabs, and their equipment, to ascertain whether the taxicab or taxicabs comply with the provisions of this
chapter. Any taxicab which is found, after any inspection, to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab
service may be immediately ordered out of service by the Town Board, and before again being placed in
service, shall be delivered to the Town Board at a designated point for re-inspection.
('72 Code, § 20-1-6) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.43 VEHICLE REGISTRATION; LICENSES
No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a taxicab until that vehicle has been registered in accordance with all the
requirements of this state and all proper licenses have been obtained therefore.
('72 Code, § 20-1-7A.) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.44 INSURANCE POLICIES; LIABILITY
(A) Insurance policies. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any taxicab over the streets of the town
without first taking out and keeping in full force and effect at all times a policy or policies of insurance with
some insurance company licensed to do business in North Carolina. The insurance policy shall be conditioned
on such operator's responding in damages for any liability incurred on account of any injury to persons or
damage to property and shall be in at least the minimum amounts required by state law.
(B) Policy of insurance to be filed with town. As a condition precedent to the operation of any taxicab on the
streets of the town, any person who has otherwise qualified for operating taxicabs in the town shall file first
with the Town Board a copy of the policy or policies of insurance carried by that person, which policy of
insurance shall, among other things, set forth a description of each and every taxicab operating under the terms
of the policy, including the make, model, motor number, state license number and the number of the certificate
for each and every taxicab.
('72 Code, § 20-1-7D)
(C) Liability. Any policy of insurance submitted hereunder and every bond herein provided for shall be
conditioned upon the payment of any final judgment recovered by any person as a result of the negligent
operation of any vehicle or taxicab permitted to operate hereunder, within the limits herein provided, no matter
by whom operated or driven at the time of the injury or damage. The insurance or bond shall contain a
provision for the continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery
thereon. ('72 Code, § 20-1-7E)
(Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77; Am. Ord. 831, passed 10-24-94) Penalty, see § 10.99
Chapter 113. Taxicabs
6
§ 113.45 CHAUFFEUR LICENSE FOR DRIVERS REQUIRED
No person shall drive a taxicab within the town without first having obtained a North Carolina Automobile Chauffeur's
license.
('72 Code, § 20-1-8.A) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.46 CONDUCT OF DRIVERS
No driver of a taxicab shall:
(A) Deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may ride in his taxicab as to his destination or the rate of
fare to be charged or shall convey any passenger to a place other than directed by him, and in no event shall
any operator take a longer route to the designation than necessary unless so requested by the passenger or
passengers.
(B) Fail to comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of the passenger or passengers as to the speed of
travel and the route to be taken.
(C) Permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab in the town at any one time than the seating capacity of that
taxicab, including the driver and children in arms excepted.
(D) Refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or
forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.
('72 Code, § 20-1-8B) (Ord. 23, passed 12-12-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.47 RATES
Every taxicab operated within the town or operated between the town and points unincorporated within a radius of five
miles of the town shall have at all times prominently posted and displayed in the taxicab, so as to be visible to the
passengers therein, the rates and fares for the use of such cab.
(Ord. 831, passed 10-24-94) Penalty, see § 10.99
Page 1 - 1
Chapter 114. Privilege Tax on Motor Vehicles
Section
114.01 Privilege tax imposed; scope
114.02 Administration; enforcement
§ 114.01 PRIVILEGE TAX IMPOSED; SCOPE
Each motor vehicle which is resident within the town when registration with the Department of Motor Vehicles
becomes due for the year shall be subject to an annual privilege tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The tax shall be
imposed for the fiscal year within which the tax is billed. Such tax shall be due and payable upon receipt. For purposes
of determining whether the motor vehicle is resident within the town, the provisions of the Machinery Act (G.S. § 105-
271 et seq.) Department of Motor Vehicles records shall be applicable, and any such motor vehicle which under the
Machinery Act would be taxable for town ad valorem property taxes shall be subject to the tax imposed herein. Motor
vehicle privilege taxes shall be subject to proration, release and refund in the same manner as are ad valorem taxes on
motor vehicles pursuant to G.S. § 105-22A.
(Ord. 817, passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. 819, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 881, passed 3-25-96; Ord. No. 1736 passed, 6-14-
10; Ord. No. 2094, passed 6-8-15)
§ 114.02 ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT
The town hereby delegates to the Mecklenburg County Tax Collector the authority to issue the tax bills for the tax
imposed herein and the authority to collect the tax imposed herein. The Tax Collector shall have the powers authorized
under G.S. § 105-330.
(Ord. 817, passed 6-27-94; Am. Ord. 819, passed 7-25-94)
Chapter 115. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Retail Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles
Chapter 115. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Retail Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles
Section
115.01 Preamble
115.02 Definitions
115.03 Levy of Tax
115.04 Collection of the Tax
115.05 Report and Payment of Tax
115.06 Taxpayer to Keep Records
115.07 Tax Collector to Provide Forms
115.08 Situs
115.09 Penalties and Remedies
115.10 Administration
115.11 Severability
115.12 Authority
§115.01 PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the North Carolina General Assembly has ratified Senate Bill 1076, which has been designated as
Session Law 2002-2 (the “Act”) and made effective for taxable years beginning on or after July 1, 2000; and
WHEREAS, the Act repealed the property tax on certain vehicles leased or rented under retail short-term leases or
rentals and authorized municipalities to replace the lost tax revenue through enactment of a local tax on gross receipts
derived from retail short-term leases or rentals.
§115.02 DEFINITIONS
(A) Customer shall mean any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term lease or rental basis.
(B) General Statutes shall refer to the North Carolina General Statutes and any reference to a particular section
thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or
superseded.
(C) Gross receipts shall mean the amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts on a business’s state
income tax return, or on the federal income tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does
not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes collected hereunder are not
subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in gross receipts.
(D) Lease or rental shall mean a transfer, for consideration, of the use but not the ownership of property to another
for a period of time. [G.S. §105-164.3(7a)]
(E) Long-term lease or rental shall mean a lease or rental made under a written agreement to lease or rent property
to the same person for a period of at least three hundred sixty-five (365) continuous days [G.S. §105-187.1(3)]
(F) Person shall mean any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated association,
partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm, or other legal entity.
(G) Short-term lease or rental shall mean any lease or rental of a vehicle that is not a long-term lease or rental.
[G.S. §160A-215.1(e)(2) and G.S. §105-187.1(4)]
(H) Tax Collector shall refer to that individual appointed by the governing body pursuant to (G.S. §105-349) (the
provisions of the municipal charter) to collect taxes on behalf of the Town and any other person authorized to carry
out the duties and functions of such individual.
1
Chapter 115. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Retail Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles
(I) Taxpayer means any person liable for the taxes imposed by this Ordinance.
(J) Vehicle shall mean any of the following:
(1) A motor vehicle of the private passenger type, including a passenger van, minivan, or sport utility vehicle.
(2) A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo van, pickup truck, or truck with a gross vehicle
weight of 26,000 pounds or less used predominantly in the transportation of property for other than
commercial freight and that does not require the operator to possess a commercial driver’s license.
(3) A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle weight of 6,000 pounds or less. [G.S. §160A-215.1(e)(1)]
§115.03 LEVY OF TAX
A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the gross receipts derived
from the short-team lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to
the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. §160A-211.
§115.04 COLLECTION OF THE TAX
Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public
shall collect at the time of the lease or rental the tax herein levied, place the tax so collected in a segregated account,
and thereafter remit such tax to the Tax Collector in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The taxpayer
shall include a provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement stating that the percentage amount enacted
by this Ordinance of the total lease or rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The
amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown separately on the taxpayer’s records. The
tax shall be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the Town. The taxpayer shall be liable
for the collection thereof and for its payment to the Tax Collector and the taxpayer’s failure to charge or to collect said
tax from the customer shall not affect such liability.
§115.05 REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX
Taxes levied under this Ordinance are due and payable when a return is required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall,
within the time specified, submit a return to the Tax Collector on the form prescribed by the Tax Collector. A return
must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent. Returns of taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector each month
on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S.
§160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record and information contained in a return may be disclosed
only in accordance therewith.
§115.06 TAXPAYER TO KEEP RECORDS
The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts received by such taxpayer in the conduct of
business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which such
taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a
period of three years all such records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All records, books and
accounts herein described shall be open for examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector or
his duly authorized agent.
§115.07 TAX COLLECTOR TO PROVIDE FORMS
The Tax Collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to all taxpayers operating within the municipal
boundaries of the Town forms and instructions for filing returns to insure a full collection of and an accounting
for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive forms shall not relieve such taxpayer from the payment of
the tax at the time and in the manner provided.
2
Chapter 115. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Retail Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles
§115.08 SITUS
The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to have occurred at the location of the entity from
which the customer takes delivery of the vehicle. [G.S. §160A-215.1(b)]
§115.09 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use
Tax) of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes, as contained in Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105 thereof,
shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this ordinance, to the extent that
the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the Town may exercise any power the
Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting sales and use taxes. [G.S. §160A-215.1(f)]
§115.10 ADMINISTRATION
In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of the taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered
in the same manner as the Sales and Use Tax as provided in Article 5, Subchapter 1, Chapter 105, of the General
Statutes. [G.S. §160A-215.1(d)]
§115.11 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, or provision of this Ordinance shall be found to be invalid, the validity of the remaining sections,
clauses or provisions shall not be affected thereby.
§115.12 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §160A-215.1.
(Ord. No. 1122, passed 6-26-00)
3
1
Chapter 116. Alcohol Beverage Commission Permits/Local Opinion Form
Section
116.01 Authority
116.02 Required Information
116.03 Processing of Application
§116.01 AUTHORITY
The Matthews Police Department is hereby authorized to utilize the Division of Criminal Information (DCI) System
to verify the criminal history of the applicant and any employee of the applicant regarding an ABC permit
application. (Ord.1254, passed 12-9-02)
116.02 REQUIRED INFORMATION
Upon or in addition to the information required upon the Local Opinion Form, the applicant shall provide the
following information for the applicant and any employee of the applicant as requested by a representative of the
Town: full name, date of birth, social security number, vehicle operator’s license number. (Ord.1307, passed 08-11-
03)
116.03 PROCESSING OF APPLICATION
Upon completion of the stated requirements, the mayor, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to recommend
approval/denial of the ABC Local Government Opinion Form application. (Ord.1307, passed 08-11-03)
Chapter 117. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Short-Term Lease or Rental of Heavy Equipment
Chapter 117. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Short-Term Lease or Rental of Heavy Equipment
Section
117.01 Definitions
117.02 Levy of Tax
117.03 Administration
117.04 Collection
117.05 Report and Payment of Tax
117.06 Taxpayer to Keep Records
117.07 Tax Collector to Provide Forms
117.08 Situs
117.09 Assessment Procedure
117.10 Penalties, Interest and Remedies
117.11 Appeals
117.12 Severability
117.13 Authority
§117.01 DEFINITIONS
(A) Customer shall mean any person that leases or rents heavy equipment on a short-term lease or rental basis.
(B) General Statutes shall refer to the North Carolina General Statutes and any reference to a particular section
thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised, or
superseded.
(C) Gross receipts shall mean the total lease or rental price charged to a customer for the short-term lease or rental
of heavy equipment, excluding sales taxes and excluding the taxes imposed by this Ordinance.
(D) Lease or rental shall mean a transfer, for consideration, of the use but not the ownership of the heavy
equipment to another for a period of time.
(E) Person shall mean any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, unincorporated association,
partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm or other legal entity.
(F) Short-term lease or rental shall mean any lease or rental, whether written or verbal, which is made to the same
person for a period of less than three hundred sixty-five (365) continuous days.
(G) Tax Collector shall mean the Mecklenburg County Director of Revenue Collections.
(H) Taxpayer shall mean any person liable for the collection, reporting and payment of the taxes imposed by this
Ordinance.
(I) Heavy equipment shall mean the following: Earthmoving, construction or industrial equipment that is mobile,
weighs at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds and meets any of the descriptions listed below in this
subdivision. The term includes an attachment for heavy equipment, regardless of the weight of the attachment.
(1) It is a self-propelled vehicle that is not designed to be driven on a highway.
(2) It is industrial-lift equipment, industrial material handling equipment, industrial electrical generation
equipment or a similar piece of industrial equipment.
1
Chapter 117. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Short-Term Lease or Rental of Heavy Equipment
§117.02 LEVY OF TAX
A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to eight-tenths of one percent (0.8%) of the gross receipts from
the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment by a person whose principal business is the short-term lease or rental
of heavy equipment at retail; provided that the place of business from which the heavy equipment is delivered is located
in the Town of Matthews. A person is not considered to be in the short-term lease or rental business if the majority of
the person’s lease and rental gross receipts are derived from leases and rentals to a person who is a related person under
N.C.G.S. 105-163.010. The tax authorized by this ordinance applies to gross receipts that are subject to tax under G.S.
105-164.4(a)(2).
§117.03 ADMINISTRATION
The Tax Collector, as agent for the Town Finance officer, shall administer and collect the taxes levied herein from
every person engaged in the business of short-term leasing or rental of heavy equipment and the Tax Collector may
promulgate additional rules and regulations necessary for implementation of the taxes. In addition to the provisions
herein, the levy and collection of the taxes herein imposed shall be administered in the same manner as the sales and
use tax as provided in Articles 5 and 9, Chapter I of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes. In the event a change in the
General Statutes relating to any provisions in this Ordinance is made by the State Legislature, such change shall be
made applicable in this Ordinance without formal adoption thereof by the Town Board of Commissioners.
§117.04 COLLECTION
Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental of heavy equipment to customers shall collect at
the time of the lease or rental tax herein levied, place the tax so collected in a segregated account and thereafter remit
such tax to the Tax Collector in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance., the taxpayer shall include a
provision in each short-term lease or rental agreement stating that the eight-tenths of one percent (0.8%) of the total
lease or rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The amount of the tax shall be
stated separately from the lease or rental amount and shall be shown separately on the taxpayer’s records. The customer
shall pay the tax to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the Town of Matthews. The taxpayer shall be liable for
the collection thereof and for its payment to the Tax Collector and the taxpayer’s failure to charge or to collect said tax
from the customer shall not affect such liability. The taxes collected under this Ordinance are not subject to sales tax.
The taxes collected under this Ordinance belong to the Town of Matthews and are not subject to creditor liens against
the taxpayer.
§117.05 REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX
The taxes levied hereby are due and payable when a return is required to be filed. The taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent
must sign the return. Returns of taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector quarterly and are due by the last day of the
month following the end of the calendar quarter. A return filed for this purpose is not a public record as defined by
Section 132-1 of the General Statutes and information contained in a return may not be disclosed except as required by
law. The return may be filed by personal delivery to the Tax Collector or by United States mail. Returns submitted by
mail shall be deemed to be filed as of the date shown on the postmark affixed by the United States Postal Service. If no
date is shown on the postmark, or if the postmark is not affixed by the United States Postal Service, the return shall
deemed to be filed when received in the office of the Tax Collector (a return having a metered stamp does not satisfy
the postmark requirement unless there is also a postmark by the United States Postal Service). The burden of proof shall
be on the taxpayer to show that the return was timely filed.
§117.06 TAXPAYER TO KEEP RECORDS
The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts received by such taxpayer in the conduct of
business and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which such
taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a
period of three (3) years all such records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described. All records, books
and accounts herein described shall be for examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector or
his duly authorized agent.
2
Chapter 117. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Short-Term Lease or Rental of Heavy Equipment
§117.07 TAX COLLECTOR TO PROVIDE FORMS
The Tax Collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to all taxpayers operating within the municipal
boundaries of the Town of Matthews forms and instructions for filing returns to ensure a full collection of and an
accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive forms shall not relieve such taxpayer from
the payment of the tax at the time and in the manner provided.
§117.08 SITUS
The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to have occurred at the place of business from
which the heavy equipment is delivered.
§117.09 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE
If the Tax Collector discovers that any return or tax is due from a taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of
the failure to file and of the proposed assessment, if know, by the Tax Collector. The assessment may be made on the
best information of the Tax collector. A proposed assessment is presumed to be correct. The notice shall be delivered
either in person or by United States mail sent to the taxpayer’s last known address. The notice is presumed to have been
received by the taxpayer unless the taxpayer makes an affidavit to the contrary within 90 days after the notice was
mailed. If the taxpayer makes this affidavit, the time limitations for a request for hearing as hereafter provided, apply as
if the notice had been delivered on the date the taxpayer makes the affidavit. A taxpayer who objects to the proposed
assessment or to the requirement to file a return is entitled to a hearing upon written request within 30 days after the
date the notice was mailed, or within 30 days after the date of personal delivery. If no request for a hearing is timely
made, the proposed assessment becomes final without further notice. If a taxpayer files a timely request for hearing, the
Tax Collector shall set a hearing date within 90 days and notify the taxpayer at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.
Within 90 days after the hearing the Tax Collector shall notify the taxpayer of the final decision. The taxpayer may then
appeal the decision as set forth in Sub-Section 11 of this Ordinance. The Tax Collector shall have no authority to
waive or compromise any interest or penalty imposed by this Ordinance.
§117.10 PENALTIES, INTEREST AND REMEDIES
The provisions with respect to penalties, interest and remedies applicable Subchapter VII (Local Government
Sales and Use Tax) of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes, as contained in Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter I,
chapter 105 thereof, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax levied and collected under this Ordinance, to the extent
that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. Without limiting the foregoing, and subject to any changes
in the General Statutes with respect to penalties, interest and remedies, the following shall be applicable with respect to
the levy and collection of the taxes imposed herein:
(A) Any taxpayer who fails to file a return on the date it is due, determined with regard to any extension of time for
filing, shall pay a penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the amount of the tax if the failure to file is for not more
than one (1) month, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continue, not exceeding twenty-five percent (25%)
in
the aggregate, or Five and 00/100 Dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater.
(B) Any taxpayer who fails to pay the tax levied herein when due, without intent to evade the tax, shall pay a
penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the tax, except that the penalty shall in no event be less than Five and 00/100
($5.00).
(C) Taxes shall be payable at par or face amount if paid on or before the filing date as set forth in Subsection 5.
Taxes paid after the filing date will be delinquent and shall be subject to interest charges. Interest shall accrue at the
rate
of three-fourths of one percent (3/4%) a month or fraction thereof until the principal amount of the taxes, the
accrued interest and any penalties are paid.
(D) When the bank upon which any uncertified check tendered to the Tax Collector in payment of taxes, penalties
or interest returns the check because of insufficient funds or the nonexistence of an account of the drawer, the Tax
3
Chapter 117. Tax on Gross Receipts Derived from Short-Term Lease or Rental of Heavy Equipment
Collector shall assess a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the check, subject to a minimum of One and 00/100
Dollar ($1.00) and a maximum of One Thousand and 00/100 ($1,000.00).
(E) Any taxpayer who willfully attempts, or any person who aids or abets any taxpayer to attempt in any manner to
evade or defeat a tax imposed herein or its payment shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty
of a Class H Felony.
(F) Any taxpayer required to collect, withhold, account for and pay over any tax who willfully fails to collect or
truthfully account for and pay over the tax shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a Class
1 Misdemeanor.
(G) Any taxpayer required to pay any tax, to make a return, to keep any records or supply any information who
willfully fails to pay the tax, make the return, keep the records or supply the information at the time or times as
required by law or rules issued pursuant thereto shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a
Class 1 Misdemeanor.
(H) The Tax Collector shall have the remedies set forth in Sections 242 or 368 of Chapter 105 of the General
Statutes in enforcing the collection of taxes imposed herein and any other remedies authorized by law.
§117.11 APPEALS
The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Matthews, exercising the powers of the Secretary of Revenue in collecting
sales and use taxes, designates the Mecklenburg County Manager, or his designee, to act as deputy for the purpose of
compromising or forgiving for good cause shown any penalty or additional tax imposed herein and for conducting any
hearings and making decisions to determine the validity of a tax imposed by the Tax Collector. If a taxpayer claims that
a tax, additional tax, penalty or interest is excessive, a notice of appeal must be filed by the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days after the final notice of the Tax Collector is mailed or personally delivered to the taxpayer as provided in
Subsection 9 of this Ordinance. The final decision of the deputy shall be made and mailed or delivered to the taxpayer
within thirty (30) days after the hearing. The taxpayer shall pay the tax, additional tax, penalty or interest without
prejudice to any defense the tax payer has. The taxpayer may file suit for a refund in the Superior court of Mecklenburg
County pursuant to the provisions of Section 267 of Chapter 105 of the General Statutes.
§117.12 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be found to be invalid, the validity of the remaining sections,
clauses or provisions shall not be affected thereby.
§117.13 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §160A-215.2.
(Ord. 1689, passed 5-11-09)
4
Chapter 118. Peddlers, Solicitors and Itinerant Merchants
1
Chapter 118. Peddlers, Solicitors and Itinerant Merchants
Section
118.01 Purpose
118.02 Definitions
118.03 Permit
118.04 Fee
118.05 Penalty
§118.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the solicitation and business
activities of itinerant merchants, salesmen, promoters, drummers, peddlers, and hawkers within the town. This article
will provide the policy and procedures for conducting criminal history checks through SBI/DCI for all permit
applicants.
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MERCHANT ITINERANT (ITINERANT MERCHANT) means merchant, other than an established retail merchant
in county, who transports goods to a building, vacant lot or alley, etc., and offers for sale at retail for less than six
consecutive months.
PEDDLER means a person who travels from place to place with inventory and offers for sale at retail the actual
inventory, occupying no space for more than 30 minutes during a 24-hour period.
§ 118.03 PERMIT
(A) No itinerant merchant/peddler shall operate in the town without a permit from the town.
(B) Every application for a permit shall be made under oath and shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information or material:
(1) A state issued identification card;
(2) The applicant’s full name, date of birth, social security number, full address, a description of the
product he is offering for sale and the name, address and telephone of the product vendor;
(3) A complete statement of all convictions and arrests of any person whose name is required to be
given in subsection (B)(2) of this section for any felony or any crime involving fraud, theft or the
receiving or possessing of stolen goods; and
(4) The submission of fingerprints by the applicant.
(C) Prior to issuance of a permit, the Police Department will conduct a background check on the applicant.
(1) The Police Chief, or his/her designee, will conduct a criminal history check of the applicant
utilizing the SBI/DCI network.
Chapter 118. Peddlers, Solicitors and Itinerant Merchants
2
a. The criminal history check will be conducted to verify the applicant’s qualifications, pursuant
to the conditions of this article, for issuance of the requested permit.
b. Any results produced that would disqualify the applicant for the issuance of the permit will be
verified through the submission of fingerprint cards to the SBI.
c. Results of the criminal history check will be provided to the Town Manager or his/her
designee, provided all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigation’s Division
of Criminal Information (DCI) have been executed.
(2) No permit will be approved or denied until the verification process has been completed.
(D) Upon issuance of the permit, the permit shall designate the date and hour of issue and expiration.
(E) The holder of the permit shall first present such permit to any person before attempting to offer an article
for sale to such person.
(F) Hours of door-to-door sales are restricted to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to one (1) hour prior to sunset.
(G) The Police Chief or his designee has the authority to deny or revoke a permit for just cause.
(1) A permit shall not be issued:
a. To any person who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors narcotic
drugs;
b. To any person who has been convicted of a felony, or misdemeanors involving drugs; or
c. For other lawful reasons including conviction of a misdemeanor carrying a penalty of
imprisonment of not less than 90 days
d. To any person previously denied or having had a permit revoked pursuance to this ordinance.
(2) A permit may be revoked if it is determined that:
a. The holder of the permit violates any provisions of this article; or
b. The holder of the permit conducts himself in a manner constituting a public nuisance.
§ 118.04 FEE
(A) Every applicant will pay at the time of application a fee as established by the State Bureau of Investigation
for the processing of fingerprint card submissions.
(B) Every application will pay at the time of issuance of the permit a fee as established by the Town Manager
to cover the cost of the production of the permit.
§118.05 PENALTY
Violations of this Ordinance shall constitute an infraction punishable up to thirty (30) days in jail and/or up to $500.00
in fines. (Ord. 1728, passed 4-12-10)
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
1
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
Section
130.1 Disorderly conduct
130.2 Public intoxication
130.3 Discharge of firearms
130.4 Electric fences
130.5 Begging and alms solicitation
130.6 Laws concerning carrying and display of firearms within municipal buildings, premises and parks
130.7 Causing harm to law enforcement’s dogs
130.8 Posting of street addresses
130.9 Masturbation in public
130.10 Urination or defection on certain property prohibited
130.11 Camping and other activity prohibited on public property
130.12 Possession of obstruction devices prohibited; placing objects in roadway, public right-of-way prohibited
130.13 Possession and dispersal of noxious substances
130.14 Police lines and barricades
130.15 Kindling bonfires
130.16 Attachments to public and private property
130.17 Beer and Wine Consumption; Possession of Open Container; Disposal of Containers
130.99 Penalty
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a breach of the peace or engage in any riotous or disorderly conduct
within the town; and it shall also be unlawful for any person to disturb the good order and quiet of the town by
fighting, making loud noises, using profane, boisterous or indecent language, or in any other manner.
('72 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 59, passed 8-11-80) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
No person shall consume, serve or drink wine, beer, whiskey or alcoholic beverages of any kind on or in the
public streets, boulevards, alleys, parks, sidewalks, or public buildings within the town except where appropriate
ABC permits have been issued to an organization in connection with any outdoor festival or event of a national,
state or local significance, and additionally, where appropriate public rights-of-way or public property use permits
containing a provision concerning sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages has been approved by the Town
Board of Commissioners.
('72 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 6, passed 8-21-75; Am. Ord. 756, passed 9-28-92) Penalty, see § 130.99
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
2
§ 130.03 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
It shall be unlawful for any person (except an officer of the law) to shoot any firearm, being defined as any
weapon which will propel a projectile by the use of explosive action, including bow and arrow and crossbow, in
the corporate limits of the Town, except in licensed shooting galleries.
('72 Code, § 9-1) (Ord. 3, passed 3-9-73; Ord. 1639, passed 10-14-08; Ord. 1690, passed 6-8-09; Ord. 2367,
passed 1-14-19) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.04 ELECTRIC FENCES.
It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or maintain electric fences within the town, except as provided in this
section. It shall be lawful to have electric fences that an electric current of six volts or less is allowed to be
conducted and is U.L. listed.
('72 Code, § 6-1.1) (Ord. 58, passed 7-28-80) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 BEGGING AND ALMS SOLICITATION.
(A) Title. This section shall be known and cited as the town begging and soliciting alms ordinance.
(B) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to more effectively control begging or soliciting alms on the
public rights-of-way and to protect the traveling public as well as persons desiring to beg or solicit alms
on their own behalf, to balance the legal rights of each group, and to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(C) Prohibited conduct.
(1) Except when performed in the manner set forth in division (C)(2) of this section, it shall not
be unlawful to beg or solicit alms.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg or solicit alms or contributions, or exhibit
oneself for the purpose of begging or soliciting alms or contributions, by accosting another or
forcing oneself upon the company of another. It shall further be unlawful for any person to stand
on any street, highway, or right-of-way, excluding sidewalks, while soliciting, or attempting to
solicit, any employment, business, or contributions from the driver or occupants of any vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1538, passed 2-12-07)
(D) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply.
ACCOSTING. Approaching or speaking to someone in such manner as would cause a reasonable person
to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his or her person, or upon
property in his or her immediate possession.
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
3
ASK, BEG or SOLICIT. Includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other
acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms or contributions.
FORCING ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER.
(1) Continuing to request, beg or solicit alms in close proximity to the person addressed after the
person to whom the request is directed has made a negative response;
(2) Blocking the passage of the person addressed; or
(3) Otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or
force a person to accede to demands.
(Ord. 758, passed 10-21-92) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 LAWS CONCERNING CARRYING AND DISPLAY OF FIREARMS WITHIN MUNICIPAL
BUILDINGS, PREMISES AND PARKS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry and/or display a firearm including pistols, shotguns, rifles,
or any gun or handgun within any building owned by the town, any property or premises owned by the
town, and within any park owned or operated by the town. It shall further be unlawful for any person to
carry a concealed handgun (the term includes possession of a concealed handgun) within any building,
premises, or any property owned by the town or recreational facilities, which include a playground, an
athletic field, a swimming pool or an athletic facility; except, with regard to recreational facilities, a
concealed handgun permittee may secure the handgun in a locked vehicle within the trunk, glove box or
other enclosed compartment within or on the vehicle.. For the purposes of this section, HANDGUN shall
be defined as a firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and fired by the use of a single
hand.
(B) The provisions of this section are adopted pursuant to N.C.G.S. §§ 160A-189 and § 14-415.11(c); and
further, the provisions of this section and its prohibitions shall not apply to the following persons:
(1) Officers and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces of the United States when in discharge of
their official duties as such and acting under orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;
(2) Civil officers of the United States while in the discharge of their official duties;
(3) Officers and soldiers of the militia and the National Guard when called into actual service;
(4) Officers of the state, or of any county, city, or town, charged with the execution of the laws of
the state, when acting in the discharge of their official duties.
(5) Sworn law-enforcement officers when off-duty, if:
(a) Written regulations authorizing the carrying of concealed weapons have been filed
with the Clerk of Court in the county where the law-enforcement unit is located by the
sheriff or chief of police or other superior office in charge; and
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
4
(b) Such regulations specifically prohibit the carrying of concealed weapons while the
officer is consuming or under the influence of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 876, passed - -95) Penalty, see § 130.889
(6) Any person who is a District Attorney, an Assistant District Attorney or an Investigator
employed by the Office of a District Attorney [District Attorney personnel] who has a concealed
handgun permit.
(7) Any person who is a qualified retired law enforcement officer as defined in G.S. 14-415.10
[definitions applicable to concealed handgun statutes], is a holder of a concealed handgun permit.
(8) Detention personnel or correctional officer employed by the State or a unit of local
government who parks a vehicle in a space that is authorized for their use in the course of their
duties, may transport a firearm to the parking space and store that firearm in the vehicle parked in
the parking space, provided that the firearm is secured.
(9) That divisions of Subsection (B) shall not apply if the permittee is consuming alcohol or an
unlawful controlled substance.
(Ord. No. 1826, passed 11-14-11)
§130.07 CAUSING HARM TO LAW ENFORCEMENT DOGS
It shall be unlawful for anyone to kick, hit, bite, hurt, poison, or otherwise cause harm to a dog owned by a law
enforcement agency, including the Matthews Police Department. (Ord. 917 passed 5-27-97)
§ 130.08 POSTING OF STREET ADDRESSES
(A) Permanent Posting Required
In order to facilitate the response of emergency services and other public and private services, the owner
of each lot or parcel of land upon which a structure or dwelling unit is located shall permanently display
assigned street address number in a manner that is clearly visible from the street.
(B) Design
(1) All street address numbers shall be displayed numerically. Written, printed or scripted words
shall not be used as required display.
(2) Numerals for multi-family dwelling buildings and nonresidential buildings shall be at least six
inches in height.
(3) The color of the numerals shall be in sharp contrast to any background color and/or texture so
as to be clearly legible.
(C) Location of Number Display
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
5
(1) The assigned address number for single family residential units shall be displayed so as to be
clearly visible from the street.
(2) The assigned address number for multi-family dwelling buildings and nonresidential buildings
shall be placed on the front of the building facing the road or on the end of the building nearest
the road so that it is most clearly visible from the street.
(3) If the building or dwelling unit is set back more than sixty feet from the edge of the improved
portion of the street, or if the structure is not visible from the roadway, the property address shall
additionally be displayed nearest the road which provides access to the building, so as to be
clearly visible from the street.
(4) The assigned address number shall be displayed so that its view from the street is not
significantly obstructed by trees, yard ornaments, shrubbery, porches, building architecture or
other physical impediments.
(D) Maintenance
It shall be the responsibility of the building or dwelling unit owner or landlord to maintain at all times said
number display. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or obscure any number placed on any
property, or to fail to display numerically the assigned street address number as required by this Section.
(Ord. 1045, passed 4-12-99)
§130.09 MASTURBATION IN PUBLIC
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully masturbate in any public place, including, but not limited to any
public place, sidewalk, street, alleyway, any public park or restroom facility, in the presence of any other person.
§130.10 URINATION OR DEFECATION ON CERTAINPROPERTYPROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public place, sidewalk, street, alleyway, or rightof-
way, or in any public building (except in designated water closets or toilet facilities), or on any private
property. Having the written permission of the owner or person in lawful possession shall constitute an
affirmative defense to the charges of urinating or defecating in public.
(Ord. No. 1141, passed 11-27-00)
§130.11 CAMPING AND OTHER ACTIVITY PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
(A) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
6
Camp or camping means the use of Town property for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping, or
making preparation to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing
personal belongings, or placing any tents or a temporary shelter on Town property for living
accommodation purposes.
Temporary shelter means tents, tarps, or any type of structure or cover that provides partial shelter from
the elements.
(B) It shall be unlawful for anyone to camp on any public property owned by the Town, including public
rights-of-way and sidewalks.
(C) Camping as defined in this section is deemed a public nuisance and the Town may summarily remove
a temporary shelter, bedding or personal belongings.
(D) It shall be unlawful to light or use a campfire or bonfire on public property except as may be
specifically authorized by a permit.
§130.12 POSSESSION OF OBSTRUCTION DEVICES PROHIBITED; PLACING OBJECTS IN
ROADWAY, PUBLICRIGHT-OF-WAYPROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than governmental employees in the performance of their
duty, to possess any obstruction object or instrument with the intent to obstruct a public road, public
sidewalk, public right-of-way, entrance or exit to private property or any other area open to the public.
Obstruction object or instrument as used in this section means a device commonly known as a “lock box”
or “sleeping dragon” or any of the components of such a device including but not limited to: pipes, tubes,
wire handcuffs, chains, carabiners, or padlocks, or containers either weighted or not.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than governmental employees in the performance of their
duty, to place any instrument, tripod, bipod or other pole or object with the intent to obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular movement on a public road, public sidewalk, public right-of-way, entrance or exit to private
property, or any other area open to the public.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than governmental employees in the performance of their
duty, to attach themselves to another person, building, vehicle or fixture with the intent to obstruct
pedestrian or vehicular movement on a public road, public sidewalk, public right-of-way, entrance or exit
to private property or any other area open to the public.
(D) Obstruct, as used in this section, means to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular movement on a public
roadway, public sidewalk, public right-of-way, entrance or exit to private property, or any other area open
to the public.
§130.13 POSSESSION AND DISPERSAL OF NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any noxious substance with the intent to use the noxious
substance to interfere with a lawful assembly or to interfere with emergency services or to interfere with a
person’s right of entry or right to leave a place.
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
7
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, emit, or cause to be used as a projectile, or otherwise
disperse any noxious substance.
(C) Noxious substance as used in this section means any substance that is harmful or destructive or foul or
offensive to human beings, such as but not limited to garbage, trash, refuse, animal parts or fluids, manure,
urine, feces or other organic waste by-products.
§130.14 POLICE LINES AND BARRICADES
(A) Officers of the Matthews Police Department are authorized to establish police lines and barricades to
preserve the public peace, arrest offenders and to protect the rights of persons and property.
(B) It shall be unlawful for anyone to intentionally cross over a police line or barricade.
§130.15 KINDLING BONFIRES
It shall be unlawful for anyone to set a fire on any public street, avenue, highway, public property or right-of-way
unless expressly allowed by a permit.
§130.16 ATTACHMENTS TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful to hang, fasten, or attach any rope, wire, chain, sign, banner, or electrical device or power
cord to any public or private property including buildings, bridges, overpasses, vehicles, construction equipment,
memorials, utility poles or artwork unless express permission has been granted by the owner or manager of the
property.
(Ord. No. 1893, passed 8-13-12)
§130.17 BEER AND WINE CONSUMPTION; POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER; DISPOSAL OF
CONTAINERS
(A) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Open container means a container that has a broken seal or a container other than the
manufacturer’s unopened original container.
Public street means any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard or other way within and under
the control of the Town and open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such street.
Wine means the same as the term “unfortified wine” as defined by G.S. ch 18B.
Chapter 130. Offenses Against Town Regulations
8
(B) Consumption in public. Except as permitted in subsection (F) of this section, no person shall consume
any beer or wine upon or within the limits of any public street or sidewalk in the Town.
(C) Consumption on private premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any wine or beer
upon the private business premises of another without permission of the owner or person in control of
such premises.
(D) Possession of open container in public. Except as permitted in subsection (F) of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of beer or wine upon or within the limits of any
public street or sidewalk in the Town.
(E) Container disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, throw, cast or deposit any used wine
or beer container upon any public street or sidewalk or upon the private business premises of another
without permission of the owner or person in control of such premises.
(F) Except; permit required. Consumption of beer and wine is permitted during any communitysponsored
public function, festival or celebration being conducted within a public street, sidewalk or other
publicly owned area pursuant to a written permit issued by the Town Manager or his duly authorized
designee. This permit, when issued, will also allow the sale, service and distribution of beer and wine on
designated streets, sidewalks and areas reserved for the event, subject to all applicable ABC regulations.
However, before such permit is issued under this section, the Town Manager or his duly authorized
designee shall designate the boundaries of the event and temporarily close those streets within the
boundaries for general public use.
(G) Application for permit. Application forms for the permit referred to in subsection (F) of this section,
are available from the office of the Town Manager and must be filed at least 21 days prior to the opening
day of the event.”
(Ord. 2166, passed 8-8-2016)
§ 130.99 PENALTY
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable on conviction by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
('72 Code, § 5-3) (Ord. 6, passed 8-21-75; Am. Ord. 755, passed 9-28-92)
Chapter 150. Building Regulations
Section
General Provisions
150.01 Building permit on lots larger than one acre required
150.02 Installation of smoke detectors required
Building Code
150.15 Adoption by reference
Installation Contractors; Licensing
150.30 Purpose
150.31 Statutory authorization
150.32 Required license
150.33 Applications
150.34 Procedure for issuance
150.35 Bond required
150.36 Termination and renewal of licenses
150.37 Suspension; revocation
150.38 Notice of change of location to be given
150.39 Required permit; fee; exceptions
150.40 Required forms
Sidewalk and Drainage Facilities Construction
150.50 Purpose; statutory authorization
150.51 Definitions
150.52 Construction requirements; exception
150.53 Standards of construction
150.54 Approval of plans
150.55 Variances
150.56 Occupancy of building in violation of provisions prohibited
150.57 Application to new construction
150.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 BUILDING PERMIT ON LOTS LARGER THAN ONE ACRE REQUIRED.
Before any building permit is granted on a land area larger than one acre, satisfactory proof must be provided to the
town official granting the permit that the soil erosion control ordinance(s) of the county applying to that land area shall
have been complied with.
('72 Code, § 6-2)
§ 150.02 INSTALLATION OF SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.
1
(A) Every dwelling unit, whether located within a single-family dwelling, a duplex, a multi-family dwelling, a
condominium, or a town house, shall contain at least one operable smoke detector installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
('72 Code, § 6-3A)
(B) It shall be unlawful for anyone to rent or lease to another a dwelling unit, whether located within a single family
dwelling, a duplex, or a multi-family dwelling, condominium or town house, unless that dwelling unit has in it at least
one operable smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
('72 Code, § 6-3B) (Ord. 619, passed 4-9-90) Penalty, see § 150.99
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.15 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
The town does hereby adopt the Building Code of the State of North Carolina pursuant to G.S. § 143-138(b),
specifically making it adaptable to the following types of buildings:
(A) Dwellings and out-buildings used in connection therewith;
(B) Apartment buildings used exclusively as the residence of not more than two families; and
(C) Temporary buildings or sheds used for construction purposes exclusively, not exceeding 20 feet in any
direction and not used for living quarters.
('72 Code, § 6-1) (Ord. 5, passed 4-13-73)
INSTALLATION CONTRACTORS; LICENSING
§ 150.30 PURPOSE.
This subchapter is to license insulation contractors and others who install materials and equipment designed to meet
the energy conservation standards of the State Building Code.
('72 Code, § 6-4) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.31 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
This subchapter is adopted pursuant to Chapter 703, North Carolina Session Laws of 1977, and G.S. § 160A-194.
('72 Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.32 REQUIRED LICENSE.
No person, firm, or corporation may for a consideration install, alter, or restore within the town any insulation or other
materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the State Building Code requirements for
insulation and energy utilization standards who is not either:
(A) Licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under G.S. Chapter 87,
(B) Working under the supervision of a registered architect or professional engineer,
(C) An owner working upon his own building, or
(D) Licensed under this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 6-4-2) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78) Penalty, see § 150.99
2
§ 150.33 APPLICATIONS.
Every person desiring a license under this subchapter shall submit an application for a license to the Town Clerk
conforming to the following requirements:
(A) Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the Town Clerk.
(B) Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and home address of the applicant, if an individual, or home office address, if a corporation or
partnership;
(2) Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership;
(3) Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation;
(4) Place where the proposed business is to be located;
(5) Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit by the
applicant or any employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other state or
jurisdiction;
(6) Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or any employee, partner, officer, or director of the
applicant authorizing activities of the type authorized herein or other activities involving construction,
alteration, or modification of buildings and structures; and
(7) Information as to the circumstances in which any local, state, or federal government or agency has
refused, suspended, or revoked a license of the type described in division (B)(6) of this section to the
applicant or any employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant.
(C) Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $25 for the license, this amount to be
for the calendar year and prorated by quarters to the end of that year.
(D) False statements. False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation
or denial of that license.
('72 Code, § 6-4-3) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.34 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.
(A) Review by town officers. Each application received by the Town Clerk shall be promptly forwarded to the
Building Inspector for review. This officer shall promptly make any comments and recommendations pertaining
to the application and forward it to the Town Board of Commissioners.
(B) Licensing agency. The application and any comments and recommendations relating thereto shall be
considered by the Town Commissioners, who shall then issue or deny the license pursuant to the following
standards.
(C) Standards. The Town Commissioners shall issue the license unless they shall find that the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant:
(1) Has been convicted within the last three years of a felony or an act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit,
whether in this or any other state or jurisdiction;
(2) Has been refused a license to do the type of work authorized herein or has had such a license suspended
or revoked by any local, state, or federal government or agency, and that government or agency has not
subsequently granted or restored the license;
(3) Has knowingly made a false statement in the application;
3
(4) Has failed to post the bond or other security required by § 150.35.
('72 Code, § 6-4-4) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.35 BOND REQUIRED.
(A) Before a license shall be issued to any applicant, the applicant shall post a bond with the town in the amount
of $1,000. In lieu of posting a bond, the applicant may deposit a cashier's check or cash in the same amount.
(B) The security required by division (A) of this section shall be available to indemnify any person for any
damage which may accrue by reason of the applicant's failure to properly provide or install insulation, energy
utilization equipment, or other materials designed or intended to meet the State Building Code standards for
insulation and energy utilization.
('72 Code, § 6-4-5) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.36 TERMINATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year for which issued. Renewal of those
licenses shall be pursuant to the same procedures and requirements set forth for initial issuance.
('72 Code, § 6-4-6) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.37 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
(A) The Board of Commissioners may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder at any time upon a
showing that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant has:
(1) Knowingly made a false statement in the application for a license;
(2) Violated the State Building Code requirements as to insulation or energy utilization equipment or
materials, whether in this or any other jurisdiction; or
(3) Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with respect to any contract entered into
for work requiring this license.
(B) Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal the suspension to the Town Commissioners.
After reasonable notice to the licensee, the Town Commissioners shall afford the licensee an opportunity to show
why its license should not be suspended or revoked.
('72 Code, § 6-4-7) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.38 NOTICE OF CHANGE OF LOCATION TO BE GIVEN.
The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided ten days' notice thereof is given to the town, and
operation at the new location does not violate any applicable state or local law, ordinance, or regulation.
('72 Code, § 6-4-8) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.39 REQUIRED PERMIT; FEE; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) No person, firm, or corporation may for a consideration install, alter, or restore any insulation or other
materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the State Building Code requirements for
insulation and energy utilization without first securing a special insulation and energy utilization permit from the
Board of Commissioners for each item of work, which permit shall evidence compliance with the insulation and
energy utilization standards of the State Building Code.
(B) Fees for each permit shall be determined by the following schedule:
4
Structure
New Building (1)
Existing Building
Ceiling
Floors
External Walls
All (2)
One or two family
dwellings
-To 1,000 square
feet
-Over 1,000 square
feet
20
20
5
10
5
10
10
10
15
20
One or two family
additions or
outbuildings
10
—
—
—
—
Multi-family (per
unit)
8
2
$10 minimum
2
$10 minimum
2
$10 minimum
—
Commercial or
industrial
-To 5,000 square
feet
-Over 5,000 to
20,000 square feet
-Over 20,000
square feet
20
30
40
10
20
20
10
20
20
20
30
40
—
—
—
Signs (No charge)
(C) The following shall not be required to obtain the permit required by division (A) of this section:
(1) An owner working upon his own building;
(2) An installer working under the supervision of a registered architect or professional engineer, when the
work is being performed under a general building permit; or
5
(3) A contractor licensed to do the proposed work under G.S. Chapter 87, when the work is being performed
under a general building permit.
('72 Code, § 6-4-8) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
§ 150.40 REQUIRED FORMS.
The following forms shall be used in accordance with §§ 150.30 through 150.39 in applying for a license, special
permit, or certificate of compliance:
(A) Insulation contractor license.
License Number __________
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE – INSULATION CONTRACTORS
1. A. Name and address of applicant (if a corporation or partnership, give home office address):
B. If a partnership, list names and home addresses of all partners:
C. If a corporation, list names and home addresses of all officers and directors:
2. Location (local address) of your business:
3. If you or any employee, partner, officer, or director of your company has ever been convicted of any crime involving
fraud, deceit, or dishonesty, whether in this state or in any other jurisdiction, list the crime and date of conviction:
4. List all licenses held by you or any employee, partner, officer, or director of your business which authorizes
construction or repair work on buildings or structures (such as general contractor's license, plumbing and heating
contractor's license, or electrical contractor's license):
5. A. Has any license of the type described in question No. 4 ever been revoked, suspended, or refused to you, or any
employee, partner, officer, or director of your business? Yes___ No___
B. If yes, state the time, place, the state or local agency involved, and all other circumstances:
6. Any other information you wish to provide:
I hereby certify that the information on this application is true and correct.
Contractor: _________________________
Date: ______________________________
************************************************************************************************
License Number __________
INSULATION CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE
Date: _____ License Fee: _____
This license is issued to the applicant and is conditioned on the applicant complying with the Insulation and Energy
Utilization Standards of the State Building Code and all applicable state and local regulations.
Inspector: ________________________
Expiration Date: ___________________
(B) Application for special permit for installation of insulation.
6
APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT INSTALLATION OF INSULATION
Town of Matthews, North Carolina Date: ____________________
Contractor: ______________________________________________________________________________________
Address: ________________________________________________________________________________________
Estimated Cost: _____________________State License No. ______________ or Local License No. ______________
Owner: ____________________________________________________________New________Existing___________
Address: _______________________________________________________________Residential ___Commercial___
Exterior Walls Type _____ Thickness _____ R Factor _____
Ceiling *Type _____ Thickness _____ R Factor _____
Floor Type _____ Thickness _____ R Factor _____
This is to certify that all work proposed under this permit will comply with the Insulation and Energy Utilization
Standards of the State Building Code and is in compliance with all applicable state and local regulations.
Contractor _____________________________ Architect or Engineer________________________________________
if new building designed by same**
* If blown type is used, contractor also certifies density/weight is lbs. per square feet installed.
** Separate certificate required by Chapter 32 and H.B. 1333 acceptable in lieu thereof.
************************************************************************************************
Permit Number __________
SPECIAL PERMIT TO INSTALL INSULATION
Date: __________ Permit Fee: __________
This permit is issued to the applicant above and is conditioned on the applicant complying with the Insulation and
Energy Utilization Standards of the State Building Code and all applicable state and local regulations.
Inspector _____________________________________________
(C) Certificate of Compliance.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
Date: __________
This is to certify that the work performed under Permit No. __________ on building located at ____________(address)
to the best of my knowledge and ability complies with the Insulation and Energy Utilization Standards of the State
Building Code and is in compliance with all applicable state and local regulations.
Contractor __________________________ Inspector _____________________________
Architect or Engineer _______________________________________________________
if new building designed by same.*
* Separate certificate required by Chapter 32 and H.B. 1333 acceptable in lieu thereof.
('72 Code, § Ch. 6-4, App.) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
SIDEWALK AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.50 PURPOSE; STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
(A) The Town Board of Commissioners finds that certain uses of property within the town generate significant
levels of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along public streets abutting the property used for those purposes; that
7
convenient and safe pedestrian passageways should be provided in the public interest so as to separate the traffic;
and that properties which may be used for those purposes along public streets are without adequate, convenient
and safe pedestrian sidewalks.
(B) Further, the Town Board of Commissioners finds that certain uses of property generate appreciable levels of
surface water runoff which in turn collects trash and litter; that adequate drainage facilities should be provided in
the public interest so as to allow the proper regulation and disposal of surface water runoff; and that property
which may be used for those purposes along public streets are without adequate and necessary drainage facilities,
such as concrete curb and gutter, catch basins, storm drainage pipes and the like so as to control surface water
runoff.
(C) Therefore, the Town Board of Commissioners pursuant to the authority conferred by G.S. § 160A-174 does
ordain and enact this subchapter into law which requires the construction of sidewalks and necessary drainage
facilities in conjunction with the construction of structures or buildings for certain uses.
('72 Code, § 18-2-1) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.51 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
ADDITION. Any new structure or building which is added to an existing building by an enclosed usable connector,
this connector having the same type of heating, plumbing, and utility fixtures as the existing building or structure and
does not attract or generate appreciable levels of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
AUXILIARY BUILDING. A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of
the principal structure or use of the land, which does not attract or generate appreciable levels of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal building or use. By way of illustration only, auxiliary
buildings may include maintenance shops and lawn care storage areas.
BUILDING. Any structure built for the support or enclosure of persons, goods, or equipment, having a roof supported
by walls.
INDUSTRIAL BUILDING. Any building whose primary function is the performance of work or labor in connection
with the fabrication, assembly, processing, or manufacture of products or materials.
NECESSARY DRAINAGE FACILITIES. Those improvements as concrete curb and gutter, catch basins, storm
drainage pipes, junction boxes, and any improvements in accord with acceptable engineering practices as maintained by
the Town Engineer.
SIDEWALK. Permanent all-weather pedestrian ways in accordance with acceptable engineering practices as
maintained by the Town Engineer.
WAREHOUSE. A building which is used for the storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, excepting limited storage
incidental to the display, sale, or manufacture of those items.
('72 Code, § 18-2-2) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.52 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION.
(A) (1) Except as provided in divisions (B), (C), and (E) of this section, the construction of sidewalks and
necessary drainage facilities shall be required in conjunction with the construction of any new building used for
any of the following purposes:
(a) Office;
(b) Institutional;
(c) Multi-family residential where any building contains three or more dwelling units;
(d) Retail sales;
(e) Retail services; or
8
(f) Business.
(2) Sidewalk and drainage facilities may not be required along streets scheduled and funded for
improvement by either the town or the North Carolina Department of Transportation when such improvements
include all sidewalk and drainage facilities normally required by this subchapter.
(B) (1) Except as required by Chapter 152, sidewalk facilities shall not be required in conjunction with
the construction of any new buildings used solely for the following purposes:
(a) Warehouse;
(b) Industrial; or
(c) Auxiliary building.
(2) However, necessary drainage facilities as provided herein shall be required except for auxiliary
buildings.
(C) If the new building as referred to in division (A) of this section is an addition as defined in this subchapter,
the construction of sidewalk facilities shall not be required except as provided by Chapter 152. However,
necessary drainage facilities as provided herein shall be required.
(D) Construction of sidewalks or necessary drainage facilities required by this subchapter shall be accomplished
along the entire length of the frontage of the property abutting each publicly maintained street.
(E) Exception. In cases where the Town Engineer determines that the likelihood of future street widening and
other street improvements, considered together with the expense of acquiring rights-of-way to accommodate
those improvements, makes the value of the applicant's dedication to the town of additional property along the
present right-of-way exceed the cost to the town of itself installing curb, gutter, and/or drainage which would
otherwise be required of the applicant, the Town Engineer may recommend to the Town Board of
Commissioners an acceptance of dedication in lieu of street improvements. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant for such exception to request and supply information sufficient to support the exception. The Town
Engineer's determination that grounds for the exception do not exist and decision not to forward a
recommendation to the Town Board shall not be appealable.
(F) In cases where the applicant's proposed plat requires approval under the provisions under Chapter 152, the
Planning Commission or Town Board of Commissioners shall have the variance powers otherwise granted the
Town Engineer under the provisions of § 150.55, but this power shall be exercised only after consultation with
and the receipt of a recommendation from the Town Engineer.
('72 Code, § 18-2-3) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.53 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
Sidewalks and drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards established by the
Town Engineer.
('72 Code, § 18-2-4) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.54 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
Approval of sidewalks and drainage construction plans shall be obtained from the Town Engineer upon application for
a building permit with the Building Inspection Department. When sidewalk or drainage facilities are required, the Town
Engineer will specify the location of the required facilities. If existing public street right-of-way is not available, the
Town Engineer may require the sidewalk to be constructed outside the street right-of-way.
('72 Code, § 18-2-5) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.55 VARIANCES.
(A) Where, because of the topography, geography, or other unusual physical conditions relating to the land, strict
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter shall cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the
applicant, the Town Engineer may vary the requirements set forth herein.
9
(B) In cases where the proposed developed area will be less than 50% of the total area of the property under
single ownership, the Town Engineer may vary the requirements set forth herein.
(C) In cases where a proposed development for which a sidewalk is required in accordance with § 150.52(A) has
property frontage along a permanently dead-end street and is the sole development on one side of the street, the
Town Engineer may vary the sidewalk requirements set forth herein. Permanently dead-end streets may include
but not be limited to those town-maintained roadways which are discontinuous because of the topography,
geography, or other unusual land features, and the extension of that street is not expected. Consideration shall
also be given to the existing or proposed use of surrounding or abutting property and any preliminary
development plans affecting same.
(D) Every request for a variance of any provision of this subchapter must be submitted in writing to the Town
Engineer not later than 30 days after the initial building permit is issued for the building concerned. Each request
for a variance shall set forth in detail the grounds upon which the request is asserted and any other documents
and information as the Town Engineer may require. Each request for a variance shall be acted upon by the Town
Engineer within a reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days after receipt of a request in proper form.
(E) In granting variances, the Town Engineer may require those conditions as will secure, insofar as practicable,
the objectives of the requirement varied. Variances granted by the Town Engineer shall be reported to the Town
Board of Commissioners on an annual basis.
('72 Code, § 18-2-6) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.56 OCCUPANCY OF BUILDING IN VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS PROHIBITED.
No person, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association shall occupy or allow the occupancy or use of any building
which is in violation of this subchapter.
('72 Code, § 18-2-7) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.57 APPLICATION TO NEW CONSTRUCTION.
This subchapter shall apply to new construction commenced pursuant to building permits issued and approved on and
after the date of its adoption.
('72 Code, § 18-2-9) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to
the penalty provisions set forth in § 10.99.
(B) Enforcement of § 150.02. This section may be enforced in any one or more of the following ways as
prescribed by law:
(1) Equitable remedy. The town may apply for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provision of
this section. It is not a defense to the town's application for equitable relief that there are other remedies
provided under the general law of this section.
(2) Injunction. The provisions of this section may be enforced by injunction. When a violation of this section
occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or
prohibitory injunction commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful
use of the property.
(3) Civil Penalties. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person has failed to comply with the
provisions of this section, the town's inspector may issue a warning citation to the violator. Violations shall
be corrected within ten days of the issuance of the citation. If the violation is not corrected within the
specified time period, a citation subject to a $100 civil penalty shall be issued for the first day of
noncompliance and $10 for each day thereafter until the dwelling unit is brought into compliance with this
10
section. These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties or actions imposed by a court for
violation of the provisions of this section.
(4) Violation of section. Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of a violation of any provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such a conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisoned not exceeding 30 days. After notice of a violation is given, the violator will have ten days to
correct the violation. After that time each additional day that the violation remains will be considered a
separate violation.
('72 Code, § 18-6-3C) (Ord. 619, passed 4-9-90; Am. Ord. 755, passed 9-28-92)
(C) Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of §§ 150.30 through 150.39 shall be subject to all
the applicable punishment, penalties, and equitable relief provided for by G.S. § 160A-175 and Chapter 703,
North Carolina Session Laws of 1977.
('72 Code, § 6-4-10) (Ord. 24, passed 2-13-78)
(D) Enforcement of §§ 150.50 through 150.57.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association which causes or allows or engages in the
construction, occupancy, or use of any building in violation of these sections shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding $500 and/or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days.
Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered to be a separate offense, provided the
violation is not corrected within 30 days after initial notice of the violation has been given.
(2) Any person, firm, or corporation which causes or allows or engages in the construction, occupancy or
use of any building in violation of these sections shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100. Each day that the
violation continues shall subject the offender to an additional $100 penalty provided the violation is not
corrected within the 30 days after the initial notice of the violation is given.
(3) Neither those sections nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the town to define and declare nuisances and cause their abatement through summary action or
otherwise. These sections may be enforced by any and every method provided pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175
or as it may be amended.
('72 Code, § 18-2-8) (Ord. 140, passed 2-14-83; Am. Ord. 755, passed 9-28-92)
11
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 1
Chapter 1. General Provisions
155.101. Introduction
155.101.1 Purpose of this Combined Document
The Town of Matthews adopted long range growth plans and land
development regulations several decades ago, and continues to
update these plans, policies and ordinances as community needs
change, as new land uses emerge, as legal precedents are set for
certain land use provisions, and as state or federal laws are revised.
This Unified Development Ordinance combines regulations
previously established as various separate ordinances in order to
better coordinate local land development regulations. Additional
illustrations, charts, and cross referencing are included to assist in
ease of understanding in how these provisions may be applied.
Performance standards are incorporated to allow a more consistent
application of community standards. It is expected that specific
provisions may require modification over time, which may in turn
impact other sections of the document. By combining all aspects
of land development activities under a single comprehensive set of
local regulations, all users of this document can locate the relevant
codes for any land development activity.
155.101.2. General Community Development
The objective of the Unified Development Ordinance is to carry out and achieve the goals and objectives of the Town
of Matthews Land Use Plan as it may be amended from time to time. The Land Use Plan provides a clear vision of
the community’s expectations and aspirations, and strategies for community character and orderly development in the
Town.
155.101.3. Organization of this Document
The Unified Development Ordinance approaches regulations from the most general to the most specific across the
document and within each Chapter and within each Section. The document is organized into ten Chapters: 1) General
Provisions; 2) Decision-Making, Administration and Enforcement Responsibilities; 3) Nonconformities; 4)
Development Review Procedures; 5) Use Districts; 6) Land Use and Development Standards; 7) Public Improvement
Standards; 8) Post Construction Regulations; 9) Floodplain Regulations; and, 10) Housing Code, and summarized as
follows:
Chapter 1, General Provisions, sets forth all of the regulations affecting the entire Title, including
definitions and legal foundations, and is the most general of all the Chapters of the Unified
Development Ordinance.
Chapter 2, Decision-Making, Administration and Enforcement Responsibilities, establishes the
roles and responsibilities for administering and enforcing the regulations in the Unified
Development Ordinance.
Chapter 3, Nonconformities, addresses the issue of nonconformities in the Town and how to deal
with their eventual elimination.
In Chapter 4, Application Requirements and Review Procedures, establishes the processes,
procedures, and application requirements for Land Use Plan amendments to this Title, site plan
review, subdivision plats, rezoning, zoning variances, appeals and interpretations.
Chapter 5, Use Districts, establishes all of the various zoning districts in the Town and the conditions
for establishing uses in each district and, in some instances, for specific uses. The uses permitted in
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 2
each District may be found in this Chapter.
In Chapter 6, General Development Standards, are found all of the regulations governing the use
and development of buildings and structures, signs, landscaping, parking, and outdoor illumination
in the Town.
In Chapter 7, Public Improvement Standards, are found all of the regulations and specifications
related to the construction of public utilities, streets, sidewalks, and other public improvements in
the Town. This Chapter also includes all of the regulations pertaining to the physical design,
improvement and development of land and public improvements in the Town.
Chapter 8, Post Construction Storm Water Regulations, establishes the minimum requirements and
procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post construction storm water runoff and nonpoint
source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment.
Chapter 9, Floodplain Regulations, establishes regulations intended to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas.
Finally, in Chapter 10, Housing Code, are found the minimum standards of fitness for the initial and
continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation.
155.102. Purpose and General Rules
A. ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE. The Town Board of Commissioners, under the authority granted to the
Board by G.S. 160A, Article 19, adopts this Title 155 as the Unified Development Ordinance for the Town
of Matthews on December 9, 2013. These regulations may be cited as the Unified Development Ordinance,
or UDO, of the Town. The established Enactment Date of April 1, 2014. ('72 Code, § 24-1001) (Ord. 477,
passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as and/or replaces §§ 153.001, 151.01, 154.02, 149.01, 150.15, 150.31,
150.50 and 152.20, 153.002, and 153.098]
B. SEPARABILITY. If any section or specific provisions or standard of this Title or any zoning district boundary
that now exists or may exist in the future is found by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reasons,
the decision shall not affect the validity of this Title except the part in question. The other portions of the
Title not affected by the decision of the court shall remain in full force and be enforceable by any and all
means authorized by law. [formerly known as § 153.097 and replaces § 149.23, § 152.03, and § 154.009]
C. PURPOSE. In an era of increasing complexity in urban life, the subdivision and development of private land
can have a profound impact upon the cost and efficiency of providing public services such as police and fire
protection, sanitary sewer and water service, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm water runoff
control and educational and recreational facilities, and upon environmental qualities conducive to the well
being of citizens. While no set of standards can assure complete and perfect public health and safety
conditions in all circumstances, the adoption of carefully considered standards are intended to create a
consistent and desirable quality of life environment for the community as a whole. The following regulations
are adopted to apply to the subdivision, development, and/or improvement of land within the jurisdiction of
the Town of Matthews.
The purposes for the Title are further defined in order to accomplish a variety of public purposes, including:
-- to advance the public health, safety and welfare while providing appropriate provisions to guide the
improvement of vacant land and redevelopment of land;
-- to encourage the use of the best practices in planning and urban design
-- to promote the growth of the Town of Matthews in a manner that will not only provide a safe, healthy and
beneficial environment for those living, working, or playing within the immediate vicinity and citizens of
the greater community;
-- to encourage and require appropriate development standards to preserve and protect property values which
in turn will secure the fiscal base for public services;
-- to ensure adequate and economical provision of necessary public services caused by and attributable to
development or redevelopment of land;
-- to preserve and enhance the character and quality of our neighborhood areas which have a discernible
character or are harmonious in design;
-- to protect investments in the community;
-- to prescribe the standards for the preparation of preliminary and final subdivision plats and development
plans and land use changes;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 3
-- to specify the types of development or land use for which local review and approval shall be required; and
-- to define and establish the responsibilities and standards for processing, review and approval of plats,
development plans and land use changes, and to designate the reviewing and approving authorities for the
Town. [formerly known as § 153.003]
D. JURISDICTION. These regulations shall govern the development and use of land and structures, the subdivision
of land, the provision of public improvement, and environmental protection efforts related to the subdivision
or development of land in the Town. ('72 Code, § 24-1004) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as
and/or replaces §§ 153.004, 152.20, 149.24, 151.006, and 154.005]
E. INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
1. In the interpretation and application of this Title, the provisions of this Title will be construed to be
the minimum requirements adopted to promote the public convenience, health, safety, comfort, and
general welfare. ('72 Code, § 24-1015) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.005]
2. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Title upon the use of land or buildings or
upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provisions of this Title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulations of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (for which impose higher
standards or requirements) shall govern, except as specifically indicated in the text regarding a
certain provision, such as build-to lines in the downtown area.
3. Nothing in this Title shall be deemed to be a consent, license or permit to use any property, to locate,
construct, or maintain any building, structure or facility, or to carry on any business, industry,
occupation or trade.
F. CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. It is not intended that this Title will in any way repeal, annul, or interfere with
the existing provisions of any other law or ordinance except the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance,
the post construction ordinance, the minimum housing ordinance, and the floodplain ordinance which this
Title replaces. In addition, it is not intended that this Title will in any way repeal, annul, or interfere with
any rules, regulations, or permits which were legally adopted or issued under previous ordinances for the use
or development of land or structures. Finally, it is not intended that this Title will interfere with any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However, if the provisions of this Title impose
greater restrictions or higher standards for the use of a building or land or size of structures than called for
by other ordinances, permits, easements, or agreements, the provisions of this Title will take precedence over
the others and will control the use or development. ('72 Code, § 24-1016) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88)
[formerly known as § 153.006]
G. APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS WITHIN THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. This Title repeats, updates,
revises, adds, and removes provisions found within multiple separate land development ordinances
previously in effect within the Town. In certain situations, the provisions of the UDO may not be consistent
with the provisions in the ordinances which it supersedes and under which prior development plans were
designed and/or approved. The provisions of the UDO shall be used for any land disturbing activity
commenced after the Effective Date of this Title. Exceptions to application of these standards include:
1. Where a permit has been issued prior to the Effective Date for a development site, and construction
is begun within one (1) year of the Effective Date and diligently pursued to completion, then the
provisions of the ordinance in effect at the time of permit issuance may be followed.
2. Any multi-building site or multi-lot development which has at least one (1) building built or under
construction, or has a valid unexpired building permit issued for at least one (1) building prior to the
Effective Date.
3. Any project which has an approved site plan and/or elevation plan, overlay compliance plan, and/or
landscape and lighting plan such that the development project does not require any additional Town
approval, and receives a grading or building permit within six (6) months of the Effective Date.
H. ZONING MAP. The boundaries of zoning districts are established through the adoption of this Title on a map
(or series of maps) entitled “Official Zoning Map, Town of Matthews, N.C. (“Zoning Maps”)” which may
be produced at various scales and geographic areas of the Town. The map, which may be provided in printed
or electronic format, together with all amendments which may have been adopted by the Town Board of
Commissioners are considered to be just as much a part of this Title as if they were fully described in the
Title. ('72 Code, § 24-1005) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.020]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 4
1. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries
of the various districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules will be used to interpret the
map.
a. In cases where a boundary line is located within a street or alley right-of-way, railroad or
utility line right-of-way or easement, navigable or non-navigable stream, it will be
considered to be in the center of the street or alley right-of-way, railroad or utility right-ofway
or easement, or stream. If the actual location of such right-of-way, easement, or stream
varies slightly from the location as shown on the map, then the actual location will control.
b. In cases where a boundary line is shown as being located a specific distance from a street
line or other physical feature, this distance will control. An exact description may be found
in the permanent record of the zoning action.
c. Where a district boundary is shown to coincide approximately with a property line or city
limit line, the property line or city limit line will be considered to be the district boundary,
unless otherwise indicated.
d. In cases where a district boundary does not coincide or approximately coincide with any
street or alley, railroad, stream, or property line and no dimensions are shown, the location
of the boundary will be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map. An exact
description may be found in the permanent record of the zoning action. ('72 Code, § 24-
1006) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.021]
2. LOTS DIVIDED BY ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. In the event that a district boundary line on the
zoning map divides a lot held in one (1) ownership on the date of passage of this Title, each part of
the lot may only be used in conformity with the regulations established by this Title for the district
in which each part is located. ('72 Code, § 24-1014) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as
§ 153.022]
I. ILLUSTRATIONS. The illustrations used in this Title are not drawn to scale and are intended only to graphically
represent the requirements and concepts contained here, and are not intended, nor should they be construed,
to represent every situation or circumstance which may exist in the Town of Matthews. When there is a
conflict between the text of this Title and an illustration, the text shall prevail.
J. INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE. Any and all standards and other codes, regulations and public records
incorporated by reference into this Unified Development Ordinance have been adopted in accordance with
the requirements established in the General Statutes.
155.103. Definitions
A. USE OF DEFINITIONS. In the construction of this Title, the definitions contained in this Article shall be
observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. Definitions relating specifically
to certain Chapters may also be contained within those Chapters. In addition to definitions provided here at
§ 155.103.C, additional definitions may also be found in Chapter 6, Tree Protection and Landscaping
Regulations at § 155.606.1.C, and Outdoor Illumination at §155.609.3, in Chapter 8 Post Construction Storm
Water Regulations at § 155.808, in Chapter 9 Floodplain Regulations at § 155.901.F, and in Chapter 10
Housing Code, at § 155.1002.
B. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. This Title has been written so that the average citizen may use and understand its
provisions. Efforts have been made to avoid the overuse of technical language where the meaning could be
conveyed in another form. For the purposes of this Title, the following rules of construction and
interpretation apply.
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall
include the plural number, and the plural, the singular, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
2. The words “must” and "shall" are mandatory and not discretionary.
3. The words "will" and “may” are discretionary and permissive.
4. The words “will” and "may" when used in the negative are mandatory and not discretionary.
5. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece", "parcel", and “tract”.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 5
6. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
7. Whenever a word or term defined in this Article appears in the text of this Title, its meaning shall
be construed as set forth in the definition in this Article.
8. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
9. All measured distances shall be expressed in feet and shall be calculated to the nearest tenth (0.10)
of a foot.
10. The word "person" shall include the words "association", "corporation", "estate", "governmental
agency", "individual", "joint venture", "partnership", "venture", or any other legal entity.
11. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for",
"maintained for", and "occupied for".
C. DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms when used in the interpretation and administration of this Title
shall have the meaning set forth here except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not
defined here shall be defined as specified in the latest published edition of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate
Dictionary. [formerly known as § 153.007]
Accessory Apartment: shall mean a separate dwelling unit that is located on the
same lot as the principal dwelling unit in a single family district, for use as a complete,
independent living facility, with a separate parking area, cooking facility, and
entrance than the principal dwelling unit. (Ord. No. 1532, passed 1-8-07)
Accessory Building or Structure: shall mean a detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is
clearly incidental and related to that of the principal structure or use of land, and which is located on
the same lot as that of the principal structure or use.
Accessory Use: shall mean a subordinate use, clearly incidental and related to the principal structure, building, or use
of land and located on the same lot as that of the principal structure, building, or use.
Adjacent: shall mean, when referring to parcels of land, that at least one (1) boundary line of one (1) lot touches a
boundary line or lines of another lot or is directly across a street from another lot, such that if the street did not exist
then the two (2) lots would touch.
Adult Care Facility: shall mean a facility which may be operated as a part of a nursing home or as an independent
facility and which provides twenty four (24) hour residential care for aged or disabled persons whose principal need
is a home with the shelter or personal care their age or disability requires. Medical care in an adult care home is
usually occasional or incidental, such as may be required in the home of any individual or family, but the
administration of medication is supervised. These homes vary in size from family care homes of up to six (6) residents
to adult care centers of seven (7) or more residents. (Ord. No. 1532, passed 1-8-07)
Adult Day Care Center: shall mean a facility which meets the definition and standards for an adult day care center,
adult day health, or combination program as outlined by the North Carolina Department of Human Resources, and as
may be amended by the NCDHR from time to time, and does not include residential living facilities. (Ord. No. 1035;
passed 1-11-99)
Adult Uses: shall mean any adult entertainment or sexually oriented business which includes materials or activities
that may be defined and considered of a sexual or provocative nature and inappropriate for viewing by children.
Specific uses are defined in § 155.506.46 (Adult Uses).
Affordable Housing: shall mean one or more dwelling units that are affordable to households with an annual income
no greater than eighty percent (80%) of the same size Mecklenburg County median income as most currently
established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development in accordance with Section 3 of the
US Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or any successor legislation.
Age-and Mobility-Limited Senior Housing: shall mean a building or complex of buildings with 24/7 on-site
management designed and intended for occupancy by persons age 55 and up, as provided by exemption to the federal
Fair Housing Act. Such location will include multiple dwelling units with some common walls and/or floors (duplex,
townhouse, condominium, mutli-family, or similar styles) where the units are intended for senior citizen individuals
or couples who can no longer, or choose to no longer, drive personal vehicles on a regular, daily basis. Such residents
do not require skilled nursing care, memory care, or assisted living oversight for recurring tasks as bathing,
medications, dressing, or personal financial management. Individual dwelling units typically are studios, or one- or
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 6
two-bedroom in layout, and shall include a living space, bathroom, area for sleeping, and area for food preparation.
A resident’s occupancy arrangement with the site shall include at least one meal per day in a congregate dining facility
contained within the building or complex, and some form of scheduled or emergency transportation for residents.
Examples of other services that may typically be made available include: all meals, housekeeping, linen service,
laundry, medical alert system, pharmacy, banking, organized social activities, and concierge services.
Agent (for a Property Owner): shall mean any person, partner, corporation, designated officer, or other business
entity that has been granted written authorization by a property owner to speak for and make decisions on behalf of
the property owner.
Alcohol and Alcoholic Beverage: shall mean distilled or ethyl alcohol, including spirits of whiskey, rum, brandy, gin
and all other distilled spirits and mixtures of cordials, liquor, and premixed cocktails in closed containers for beverage
use regardless of their dilution.
Alley: shall mean a public right-of-way or private easement not more than thirty feet (30’) in width primarily designed
to serve as a secondary means of access to those parcels whose principal frontage is on some other street.
Animal Grooming Facility: shall mean an establishment where domesticated animals may be bathed, brushed and
combed; hair or fur coats and nails may be clipped; flea dips or other methods of removing dirt, odors, and parasites
from skin, fur or feathers may be provided; or related animal treatments and services may be offered that will enhance
animal health, aesthetic value, or appeal.
Applicant: shall mean any person, party, partnership, corporation or other business entity that is seeking local
governmental approval of a proposed plan, permit, variance, interpretation or appeal.
Arboretum: shall mean a place where trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants are cultivated and maintained
for scientific and educational purposes and for public display.
Arcade: shall mean a building frontage type where the building façade above the ground level overlaps
the public sidewalk while the ground level portion of the building maintains a setback or is located at the
build-to line.
Arcade, Amusement: shall mean a business establishment which provides an assortment of equipment
and devises such as pinball and other electronic games, often requiring insertion of coins or tokens to begin the play
sequence, for amusement purposes only, and not including bingo games, children’s mechanical rides, or devices that
sell merchandise, nor does an Amusement Arcade include any gambling devices, computers or software programs
offering games of chance not allowed by law, or defined here in this Title as an Internet Sweepstakes or Adult Gaming
Facility. (Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
Assisted Living: shall mean a special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized assistance, and
health care designed to respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living. A facility
which meets any required state licensing standards, and includes a central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, and
other facilities, with separate bedrooms or living quarters, where the emphasis of the facility remains residential. (Ord.
No. 1532, passed 1-8-07)
Attached outside access storage closet: shall mean an unheated appendage to a principal
residential unit, intended for storage of inanimate household items, which does not have any internal
connection or opening to the main dwelling.
Balcony: shall mean an elevated platform open to the elements, suspended, cantilevered, or
projecting from an upper story and generally enclosed by a railing, or balustrade.
Banquet Hall, Ballroom, or Catering Facility: shall mean a meeting facility designed for use by varying groups of
people, which may be rented or leased to accommodate private functions such as weddings, banquets, anniversaries
and similar celebrations. Such a facility may include a partial or full kitchen for food preparation or catering, the
service and/or sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption to guests of the private events only, an open floor
area which may be used for dancing and similar entertainment and/or seating for guests. A restaurant that only
occasionally leases out to private parties is not a Banquet Hall.
Bar: shall mean an establishment or part of an establishment primarily devoted to selling and/or serving alcoholic
beverages by the drink to on-site occupants and guests. A Bar may be a stand-alone use or within a restaurant, lounge,
nightclub, or similar facility.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment: shall mean an overnight lodging business located within a structure originally
designed and built as a single family residence. Overnight guest facilities are limited in number, and maximum stay
by guests is restricted to seven (7) consecutive days. Meals may be provided to overnight guests only at no additional
cost. Bed and Breakfast establishments are further divided into Bed and Breakfast Guest Homes and Bed and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 7
Breakfast Inns. A Bed and Breakfast Guest Home is an owner occupied single family residential structure with
accommodations for up to six (6) guest sleeping rooms. A Bed and Breakfast Inn has accommodations for up to
twenty three (23) persons in no more than twelve (12) guest sleeping rooms.
Brewpub: shall mean an establishment where beer and malt beverages are made on the premises in conjunction with
a restaurant or bar and where forty percent (40%) or more of the beer produced on-site is sold on-site. Where allowed
by law, brewpubs may sell beer “to go” and/or distribute to off-site accounts.
Build To Line: shall mean a distance from edge of street pavement, back of curb, right-of-way line, back of sidewalk,
or similar to a line along which a building must be built, which may be specified in place of a minimum front setback
in order to create an urban, pedestrian-oriented environment.
Building: shall mean a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the shelter, housing, or enclosure
of persons, animals, or goods.
Building Height: shall mean the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the highest and lowest
finished grade points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of the roof beams adjacent
to the front of the wall in the case of a flat roof, to the average height of the gables in the case of a pitched roof and to
the deck line in the case of a mansard roof.
Building Lines: shall mean the lines that are tangent to the exterior surface of buildings or structures, or the surfaces
of cantilevered projections parallel to front, side, and rear lot lines, and referred to as front, side, and rear building
lines, respectively.
Caliper: shall mean the diameter measurement of a tree trunk taken at six inches (6”) above ground level for trees up
to and including four inches (4”) in caliper. For larger trees, measurement of caliper shall be taken at twelve inches
(12”) above ground level.
Call Center: shall mean a facility that is designed and equipped to accommodate a large volume of telephone calls
occurring at the same time for a business or service operation, with workspace for a concentration of employees to
answer questions, provide technical advice, take orders, verbally offer goods or services available to consumers, and
similar telephone-based communications with customers or the general public.
Canopy: shall mean a permanent, rigid projection intended to provide weather protection, with both top and under
surfaces being generally horizontal. A canopy may be a free-standing cover above an outdoor service facility, such as
a fuel dispensing area, and be supported wholly from the ground, or may be attached to a building, centered over an
entrance, and supported in part or whole by the building. A canopy shall provide a minimum of ten feet (10’) clear
height above ground surface, plazas, or public use areas when separate from a building, and provide a clear vertical
distance between eight feet (8’) and twelve feet (12’) when attached to a building.
Charlotte Regional Transportation Planning Organization, or CRTPO: shall mean the federally designated
Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) for the Charlotte Urbanized Area. The Charlotte Regional Transportation
Planning Organization (CRTPO) consists of voting representatives from counties and municipalities within the
designated region, including the Town of Matthews. It is the CRTPO’s responsibility to coordinate transportation
policy for local governmental jurisdictions within the Charlotte Urbanized Area.
Child Day Care: shall mean any licensed child care arrangement in which three (3) or more children less than thirteen
(13) years old receive care away from their own home by persons other than their parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles,
brothers, sisters, first cousins, guardians or full-time custodians, or in the child's own home where other unrelated
children are in care. Child Day Care does not include seasonal recreational programs operated for less than four (4)
consecutive months in a year. Child Day Care also does not include arrangements that provide only drop-in or shortterm
child care for parents participating in activities that are not employment-related and where the parents are on the
premises or otherwise easily accessible, such as drop-in or short-term care offered in health spas, bowling alleys,
shopping malls, resort hotels, and churches.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 8
Child Day Care Facility: shall mean any licensed child day care center care arrangement (except child day care
home) which provides day care for more than five (5) children, not including the operator's own school aged children,
under the age of thirteen (13) years, on a regular basis of at least once per week for more than four (4) hours but less
than twenty four (24) hours per day, regardless of the time of day and regardless of whether the same or different
children attend.
Child Day Care Home: shall mean any licensed day care program or child care arrangement in an occupied dwelling
which provides day care on a regular basis of at least once a week for more than four (4) hours per day for more than
two (2) children under thirteen (13) years of age, but not to exceed a maximum of eight (8) children at any one time.
All children in the dwelling shall be counted except the operator's own school aged children who reside at the location
of the day care home. Of the children present at any one time, no more than five (5) children shall be preschool aged.
Church, Place of Worship: shall mean an institution used for nonprofit purposes by a recognized and legally
established group of persons as a religious body for the purposes of public worship, prayer and contemplation,
religious education, fellowship, and community outreach, and may include accessory buildings on the same lot as the
primary structure. The terms Church and Place of Worship may include facilities such as a synagogue, temple,
mosque, and similar, when they are used on a regular basis for religious services.
Clear-Cut: shall mean the removal of all trees on a site or portion of a tract of land.
Cluster Development: shall mean a form of single-family detached residential subdivision layout available for use
prior to August 13, 2012 in which a tract of land at least ten (10) acres in area, under single, corporation, firm,
partnership, or association ownership, was planned and developed as an integral unit with reduced lots sizes and
common open space equivalent to underlying zoning maximum density, according to an approved preliminary
subdivision plan, and was recorded at the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds prior to August 13, 2012.
Collocation: shall mean the mounting or installation of communications (transmitting or receiving) equipment on an
structure such as an existing water tower, utility pole, communication tower or facility.
Commercial Kitchen or Catering Kitchen: shall mean a room or any portion of the interior of a building principally
designed and used for the cooking and preparation of a prearranged amount and type of food for consumption off
premises or in a designated meeting room/facility on or off premises, where those individuals being served the finished
food offerings are separate from those conducting the preparation. A Commercial or Catering Kitchen may also
include associated pantry and storage areas for ingredients, equipment, serving items, table décor, cleaning supplies,
and similar items often used by caterers, mobile food vendors, and institutional uses. A Commercial or Catering
Kitchen may exist as a part of a permanent food service establishment (i.e., restaurant, lounge), public use (i.e., school),
or institution (i.e., CCRC), or may be a freestanding use with no provision for on-site
customers/clients.
Common Open Space. shall mean any portion of a development or subdivision that is
not a lot or tract intended to be developed for residential or nonresidential use, which is
designed, designated, and intended for the permanent use and enjoyment of residents of
the development or for the general public, not including streets or off-street parking areas.
Communications Antenna: shall mean any structure or device used to collect or radiate
electromagnetic waves, including directional antennas - such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite
dishes and omni-directional antennas such as whips but not including satellite earth stations for private
use. Where a set or group of devices work as a single unit, such as three (3) panels facing different
directions for three hundred sixty degree (360o) coverage, then that group shall be considered as a single
antenna.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 9
Communications Tower: shall mean a tower greater than thirty five feet (35’) in height from
ground level and which does not exceed four hundred feet (400’) in height (including antenna)
which is principally intended to support communication (transmission or receiving) equipment.
The term communication tower shall not include amateur radio operator equipment, as licensed
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Design examples of communication towers
are described as follows: (a) self-supporting lattice; (b) guyed; and (c) monopole. (Ord. 912,
passed 1-27-97; Ord. 919, passed 4-28-97)
Communications Tower Height or Communications Antenna Height: shall mean overall
height, not to exceed four hundred feet (400’), and shall include antenna, base pad, tower or other
supporting structure (including a building), and other appurtenances and shall be measured from
the average finished grade of the parcel directly under tower, or at finished grade of the parcel at
front of other supporting structure when not a tower. (Ord. No. 912, passed 1-27-97; Ord. No.
919, passed 4-28-97)
Community Garden: shall mean a public or private facility for cultivation of vegetables, fruits, and related
agricultural products which is maintained by more than one (1) person or family and in which harvested products are
intended for more than one (1) person or family.
Comprehensive Transportation Plan, or CTP: shall mean the map(s) and attendant documents approved by the
Matthews Board of Commissioners for locations within the Town of Matthews, or such documents and maps approved
by the Charlotte Regional Transportation Planning Organizations (CRTPO) for the applicable region. Such documents
may include expectations for improvements to existing or future roads, public transit, bicycle facilities, pedestrian
facilities, greenways and multi use paths, and rail.
Comprehensive Transportation Plan, or Thoroughfare Plan: shall mean the map and attendant documents
approved by the Town of Matthews and/or Charlotte Regional Transportation Planning Organization (CRTPO) which
indicates the system of roads expected to serve major access and travel needs with regard to auto, truck, and transit
transportation.
Conditional District: shall mean a Parallel Traditional zoning district or a Conditional-Only zoning district as further
outlined in this Title, or a zoning designation which existed prior to the adoption of this Title and included a site plan,
written notes, or other conditions approved concurrently with the designation, but which is no longer included in the
listing of zoning categories within the Town of Matthews.
Condominium: shall mean a form of real property ownership providing for individual ownership of space within a
building which may be used for residential or nonresidential purposes, where the overall building or development has
multiple units intended for separate ownership, together with an individual interest in the land or other parts of the
building or development held in common with other owners.
Condominium Unit: shall mean enclosed space within a building which is intended to be individually owned from
other portions of the building, and does not include land under or extending around the building. A declaration of the
provided amenities associated with the Condominium Unit may include accessory spaces such as garages, storage
space, patios, balconies, and surface parking available for exclusive or communal use by the occupants of the
Condominium Unit.
Construction Site: shall mean a site where any land disturbing activity is to occur.
Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC): shall mean a residential community
including a range of living units from independent units to assisted care units to skilled nursing care
facilities along with a variety of common amenities and ancillary services. (Ord. No. 1550, passed
3-12-07)
Contiguous: shall mean, when referring to parcels of land, that at least one (1) boundary line of one (1) lot touches a
boundary line or lines of another lot.
Cornice: shall mean a molded and projecting horizontal element on a building that crowns
an architectural feature or wall.
Cottage Cluster Housing Development, Overall: shall mean a tract of land designed to
concentrate a number of dwelling units in close proximity to each other in a specific portion
of the overall site, so that the remaining land may be shared or available for use in common
by residents for recreation, open space, urban farming, or the preservation of visually and
environmentally sensitive land areas. Within an overall development there may be one or more separate groups of
cottage-style or bungalow houses that relate to each other by sharing a small common land area.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 10
Cottage Cluster, Separate or Group: shall mean a group of dwelling units designed around a small shared common
land area and meeting the design standards for one (1) cluster of homes within an overall cottage cluster housing
development.
Crematorium: shall mean an enclosed chamber or building within which human corpses are reduced to ashes by
incineration.
Cultural Community Center: shall mean a governmental or nonprofit operated building or real property available
to the public for the purpose of education about, or display of, cultural issues and items. The facility includes
classrooms or similar space(s) for small learning environments, and display area(s) for items relating to a specific
geographic area, art form, or other cultural topic. A cultural community center does not include a museum, art gallery,
church, or community center/active recreation facility that meets the definition of those uses.
DBH (Diameter Breast Height): shall mean the diameter of a tree four and one-half feet (4 ½’)
above the average ground level.
Deciduous: shall mean plant materials that drop all of their foliage preceding their
dormant season (usually the winter).
Demolition Disposal Site, On-Site: shall mean a small demolition disposal site or stumphole on property being
cleared, graded, or otherwise worked, which shall be used for no longer than twenty four (24) months and shall only
contain approved materials taken from the same site. Any on-site demolition disposal site shall be the only allowed
use on or above that portion of the development site, except outdoor accessory uses not associated with structures or
paving may be placed over such on-site disposal locations.
Demolition Disposal Site: shall mean a demolition landfill, limited to receiving stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete,
brick, wood, uncontaminated earth, or other solid wastes meeting the standards of the state, such materials coming
either from the same site or from a separate parcel.
Digital Device: shall mean a device that can generate, record, process, receive, transmit, or display information that
is represented in discrete numerical form.
Distributed Antenna System (DAS): shall mean a clustered installation of repeater antennas to boost cellular network
coverage in areas with weak to no signals. A DAS generally doesn’t generate a cellular signal, rather they send and
receive signals.
Donation Drop-Off Facility: shall mean a facility where donations such as common
household and clothing items for nonprofit agencies or institutional uses only are
collected. Large and bulky items such as large appliances and furniture that cannot be
easily transported and stored within the collection facility may not be accepted. A
Donation Drop-Off Facility may be sited within another building or may be located in a
stand-alone structure and placed such that it does not cover any required parking spaces
or block any vehicular or pedestrian movement or visibility. A Donation Drop-Off
Facility is not a recycling center.
Drip Line: shall mean an imaginary vertical line extending from the outermost portion of the tree
canopy to the ground.
Drive-Through Service Window: shall mean an opening in the wall of a building designed and intended to be used
to provide for sales and/or service to patrons who remain within their vehicles. A Drive-Through
Service Window may also include a vehicular space designed beside a structure equipped with a
mechanical device, often with interactive technology, in order to briefly conduct a business transaction
such as paying for on-site services or goods or completing a banking transaction.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 11
Dwelling, Attached: shall mean a one-family dwelling connected on at least one (1) side by means of a common
dividing structural or load-bearing wall of at least ten (10) linear feet to one (1) or more other one-family dwellings,
or the end dwelling of a series of such dwellings, each dwelling unit on its own individual lot.
Dwelling, Detached: shall mean a one-family dwelling completely surrounded by permanent open spaces.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: shall mean a building designed, constructed, or reconstructed
and used for more than two (2) dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common
structural or load-bearing wall of at least ten (10’) linear feet with any other dwelling unit
on the same floor or building level.
Dwelling, One-Family: shall mean a building or portion of a building designed,
constructed, and used as a single dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Two-Family, or Duplex: shall mean a building designed, constructed, or
reconstructed and used for two (2) dwelling units that are generally side by side and
connected by a common structural or load-bearing wall of at least ten (10) linear feet.
Dwelling Unit: shall mean an enclosure of one (1) or more rooms and separate
bathroom and kitchen facilities designed and constructed as a unit for permanent
residential occupancy by a single housekeeping unit.
Dwelling, Zero Lot Line: shall mean a one-family dwelling that has one (1) wall
located directly on a side lot line that is not a street side on a corner lot. A zero lot
line dwelling may or may not be attached on one (1) side to another one-family
dwelling. Where the zero lot line wall is not adjacent to any other structure, that
wall shall be solid to a minimum height of eight feet (8’) and without any windows. A zero lot line dwelling shall be
provided with a five foot (5’) maintenance agreement from the adjacent property. (Ord. 947, passed 12-8-97)
Eave: shall mean the lower border of a roof that overhangs or projects beyond the exterior wall of a building.
Evergreen: shall mean plant materials that retain foliage throughout the year.
Façade: shall mean the entire area of a building elevation extending from
the roof or parapet to the ground and from one (1) corner of the building to
another which can be viewed from a single vantage point. Each building
will generally have multiple Facades when no physical or visual obstruction
is immediately present beside the building.
Family: shall mean an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together
as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than six (6) persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Farm: shall mean any tract of land containing at least three (3) acres which is used for dairying or for the raising of
agricultural products, forest products, livestock, or poultry, and which may include facilities for the sale of those
products from the premises where produced but shall not include commercial poultry and swine production, cattle
feeder lots and fur-bearing animal farms, commercial plant nurseries, commercial greenhouses, commercial
hatcheries, or dairy facilities when used solely for the processing of dairy products.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 12
Farm, Urban: shall mean any tract of land of any size devoted to the cultivation of agricultural products, including
vegetables, herbs, and fruits, or to the propagation of horticultural species with nutritional value, all of which are
intended for personal use or for consumption, through donation or sale, within the local region.
Farmers’ Market: shall mean a specified land area, which may be open-air or partially enclosed, managed by a single
operator who leases or designates sales areas or stalls to individuals for the sale to the general public of fresh produce
and fruits, honey, herbs, plants and flowers, nature craft items, baked goods, dairy products, meat or fish items, and
similar locally produced or acquired agricultural-based items. A Farmers’ Market location may be on public or private
property or within public right-of-way, and each location is designated by the Town Commissioners as a community
activity.
Fence: shall mean an artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, metal, wire, and/or other manufactured
or durable natural materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas, but not including hedges, shrubbery, trees,
or other natural growth.
Firing Range, Indoor: shall mean the use of a building for the safe discharge and use of firearms, such as but not
limited to rifles, shotguns, pistols, and bows, for the practice of marksmanship, sport shooting, military or law
enforcement training and certification, and competition.
Floor Area, Gross: shall mean the total floor area enclosed within a building, including interior balconies, exclusive
of mezzanines, stairways and elevator shafts. For multi-family units, the total floor area contained within the
individual unit as measured from the inside of the exterior walls of the unit exclusive of stairways.
Freeway or Expressway: shall mean a multi-lane, grade separated, limited access major road connecting this region,
major activity centers or major roads with other regions, major activity centers or major roads. It is designed to
accommodate larger traffic volumes at high speeds and such a facility may be part of the interstate, federal or state
primary highway system.
Grading, Mass: shall mean changing the grade over an entire construction site through cut and fill operations. Mass
Grading is made possible by clear cutting.
Grading, Selective: shall mean clearing and/or grading a development site such that selected, existing vegetation is
preserved.
Group Home, or Family Care Home: shall mean a “family care home” as defined in Chapter 168, Article 3 of the
North Carolina General Statutes, which is a home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and
board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six (6) resident persons with
disabilities. A person with disabilities is an individual with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental
disability, including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight
impairments, emotional disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally ill persons who are
dangerous to others as defined in G.S. 122C-3(11)b. In addition, a Group Home or Family Care Home shall also mean
a residential use that provides a residential environment for up to six (6) residents who may require various services,
living assistance, or supervision but does not include any facility that provides medical services requiring or
comparable to on-site nursing, physician, or medical care for the residents. All Group Homes or Family Care Homes
must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local licensing requirements and health regulations.
Heliport: shall mean an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, containing cleared, protected space for
loading, landing, and takeoff for helicopters, and which may be required to be licensed by federal or state government.
Home Based Business: shall mean an occupation, service, profession, or enterprise carried on by a resident member
of a family within a dwelling unit.
Hospital: shall mean an institution providing primary health services and medical, obstetric, or surgical care to
persons, primarily inpatients, requiring evaluation and treatment for illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other
temporary or abnormal physical or mental conditions, and may include as an integral part of the facility related services
such as but not limited to emergency or trauma response facilities, urgent care facilities, X-ray and other internal
imaging facilities, laboratories, pharmacies, outpatient treatment, medical offices, cafeteria, training rooms, and
administrative offices.
Housekeeping Unit: shall mean a family, or a group of not more than six (6) individuals of any age, which are not
related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together within a dwelling unit and sharing common spaces inside and
around the dwelling unit, which may include a kitchen, bathroom(s), hallways, exterior access doors, and on-site
parking.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 13
Hotel: shall mean a building or buildings containing five or more guest rooms operated for the specific purpose of
creating temporary lodging of (30) days or less. Accessory facilities may include dining areas, kitchens, meeting
rooms, ballrooms or other amenities. Guest rooms may have amenities such as small refrigerators or microwaves but
do not provide kitchen appliances such as stoves, cooktops, ovens and dishwashers.
Hotel, Extended Stay: shall mean a building or buildings where more than 10% of guest rooms have kitchen
appliances such as stoves, cooktops, ovens and dishwashers and are advertised, designed, and utilized for daily or
weekly occupancy for periods up to or exceeding (30) days. Accessory facilities may include dining areas, kitchens,
meeting rooms, ballrooms or other amenities.
Independent Living: shall mean dwelling units designed for use by older persons who are mentally and physically
capable of taking care of themselves on a regular basis, are under single management or cooperative, and that may
be located within a Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC). Restriction of residency by age must meet
provisions of the Fair Housing Act. These units are grouped together and provided with some level of common
maintenance, recreational facilities, and security. A variety of additional amenities geared for older persons may
also be made available for the residents.
Interior Planting Area: shall mean an area on private property that lies inside of the areas designated for streetscape,
perimeter, or property boundary screening plantings.
Internet Sweepstakes Facility, or Adult Gaming Facility: shall mean any establishment, or use within a commercial
establishment, deemed legal by state law, featuring one or more electronic devices, computers, or gaming equipment
stations, skill-base or otherwise, which are available for patron use and which reward patrons with cash, other
monetary payments, goods or certificates for services or merchandise which are redeemable for cash, merchandise, or
other monetary payment on or off premises and including online redemptions, as well as any rewards which cannot
be legally obtained, consumed, or otherwise used by minors. State of North Carolina sanctioned lottery functions
shall not be considered as internet sweepstakes or adult gaming facilities for the purposes of the Title. (Ord. 2264,
passed10-9-17)
Kennel, Commercial: shall mean a building, along with any combination of other buildings, structures, and land
designed and used for boarding, breeding, and care of five (5) or more domesticated animals for profit.
Kennel, (Animal) Day Care: shall mean a self-contained building that provides partial-day supervision for
domesticated animals during typical business hours, not to exceed ten (10) consecutive hours during a twenty four
(24) hour day, and does not include overnight boarding.
Landscaping: shall mean the preservation and/or modification of an existing landscape for an aesthetic or functional
purpose, which includes live vegetation materials that are required for development.
Landscape Establishment Guarantee: shall mean a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other surety held by the
Town until the satisfactory conclusion of the three (3) year landscape establishment period.
Landscape Establishment Period: shall mean a period of three (3) years commencing with the acceptance by the
Town of an executed landscape plan.
Large Brewery: shall mean an establishment where beer and malt beverages are made on the premises at an annual
beer production rate of over fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels.
Live/Work Unit: shall mean a building which incorporates a dwelling and an enclosed space for employment. These
spaces share some common interior and/or exterior amenities, but shall have separate secured entry/exit locations.
The residential and business use portions may be occupied by the same persons. (Ord. No. 1237, passed 1-14-02)
Loading Area, Service Area, or Outdoor Storage Area: shall mean an area with or without walls that is used for
trash or garbage collection, vehicular loading and unloading, or outdoor storage.
Loading Space: shall mean an area of hard surfaced open land designated for short-term standing, loading, and
unloading of larger commercial vehicles and intended to avoid undue interference with the use of public streets and
alleys.
Lot: shall mean a parcel of land or any combination of several lots, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal
building or a building group, together with their accessory buildings or uses, and the access, yards, and other open
spaces required under this chapter.
Lot, Corner: shall mean a lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of two (2) street lines which make
an angle of less than one hundred thirty five (135o) degrees with each other.
Lot, Through or Double Frontage: shall mean a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) or more
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 14
approximately parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. (Ord. No. 1524, passed 12-11-06)
Lot of Record: shall mean a lot, described by plat or metes and bounds, which has been recorded in the office of the
County Register of Deeds, prior to November 20, 1967.
Lot, Reverse Frontage: shall mean a through lot or double frontage lot which has frontage on more than one (1)
public or private street, but vehicular access to one (1) street, generally a major or minor thoroughfare, federal or state
highway, or commercial arterial, is restricted or prohibited. Reverse frontage does not relate to any particular
orientation of the structure to the street. (Ord. No. 1524, passed 12-11-06)
Lot, Gateway: shall mean a lot which has its front, rear and one side yard bordering on a street and is located at an
entrance to a subdivision or multi-parcel development.
Lot Width: shall mean the distance between the side lot lines, measured along the setback line as established by this
chapter, or the distance between the side lot lines measured along a setback line shown on a duly recorded plat when
that line is greater than the setback established by this chapter along the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac street so
long as that setback line imposed at the time of recordation is not more than twenty feet (20’) further from the street
right-of-way than the minimum setback as stated for the appropriate district in this chapter; or if no setback line is
established, the distance between the lot lines measured along the street line.
Manufactured Home: shall mean a dwelling unit, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is more than eight (8) body feet in width, or
more than forty (40) body feet in length, or, when erected on-site, is more than three
hundred twenty (320) square feet; and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical systems. “Manufactured home” includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of NC-GS
Chapter 143-145 except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and that
complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974, 42 USC Section 5401, et seq. For manufactured homes built prior to June 15, 1976, “manufactured home”
is a portable manufactured housing unit designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary
or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of over thirty two feet (32’) in length and over eight feet (8’) in
width. “Manufactured home” also means a double-wide manufactured home, which is two (2) or more portable
manufactured housing sections that are designed for transportation on their own chassis and that connect on-site for
placement on a temporary or semi-permanent foundation having a measurement of over thirty two feet (32’) in length
and over eight feet (8’) in width.
Manufactured Home Park: shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and
improved for the placement of manufactured homes for dwelling purposes.
Manufactured Home Space: shall mean a designated plot of land within a manufactured home park reserved for the
placement of an individual manufactured home and any exterior additions, such as a deck or patio, and any accessory
structures related solely to the use of the individual dwelling.
Manufactured Home Subdivision: shall mean any subdivision of land developed for the placement of manufactured
homes, for dwelling purposes, on individual lots that front a public street.
Masonry: shall mean brick, block, stone, and similar building materials of natural or synthetic components laid on
top of one another with mortar applied between individual pieces in order to create vertical surfaces, where the
individual pieces are of relatively small scale in relation to the overall surface plane being constructed, and where such
vertical walls may be of substantial depth and durability, or may form a veneer surface when tied to a structurally
independent wall.
Massage Service: shall mean an establishment where any method of applying pressure on, friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body manually or with
the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without supplementary aids such as liniments,
oils, powders, creams, or similar preparations, and where such practice is conducted by a certified massage therapist,
medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed by the state.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 15
Mechanical Equipment: shall mean outdoor machines and devices required for the delivery
of public or public use utilities, or equipment such as HVAC units, fans, vents, backflow
preventers, and generators, regularly and repetitively used in the operation of interior climate
control, electrical, plumbing, or similar building systems. This Mechanical Equipment may be
located within a building, on a rooftop, or on the ground.
Mezzanine: shall mean an intermediate level between the floor and ceiling of a story, covering
less than one-third (1/3) of the area of the story immediately below it.
Microbrewery: shall mean an establishment where beer and malt beverages are made on
the premises and then sold or distributed, and which produces less than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels (a barrel is
approximately thirty one [31] gallons) of beer per year. A Microbrewery sells to the public by one (1) or more of the
following methods: the traditional three-tier system (brewer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer); the two-tier system
(brewer acting as wholesaler to retailer to consumer); and directly to the consumer.
Mixed Use Development: shall mean a development which includes at least two (2) of the following uses: office,
institutional, civic, residential, and/or service/retail in one (1) or more buildings or a combination of single and mixed
use buildings in a pedestrian-oriented environment. (Ord. No. 1652-A, passed 1-10-08)
Modular Home: shall mean a dwelling unit which is constructed in compliance with the North Carolina Building
Code and composed of components substantially assembled in an off-site manufacturing plant and transported to the
building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
Monopole: shall mean an antenna or pylon consisting of a single pole or rod often a straight element, including a slick
stick.
Multi-use Development: shall mean any horizontally integrated development which includes at least two (2) of the
following uses: office, institutional, civic, residential, and/or service/retail in separate but abutting buildings, and
located on one (1) tract of land, or on multiple adjacent sites. Multi-use developments are pedestrian oriented,
compact, and architecturally integrated.
Mural: shall mean a picture or design painted on or attached to an exterior surface of a structure. A Mural is a sign
only if it is clearly related by language, logo, or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or
the identification of any business.
Native (Indigenous) Vegetation: shall mean vegetation that was growing in this geographic area before colonization
by European settlers, as cited by the North Carolina State University Agricultural Extension Service.
Nightclub: shall mean a commercial establishment that may dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises and in which dancing, music, and other live or recorded entertainment and performances by comedians,
magicians, or similar is permitted. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the revenue must be generated by food
purchases. This definition includes, but is not limited to, establishments that serve beverages to persons age twenty
one (21) and older, dance halls, teen clubs and similar establishments. Excluded from this definition are restaurants
that meet both the requirements established by definition in this ordinance and in NCGS-18B-1000(6), retail stores,
convenience stores, clubs and lodges used by nonprofit organizations, theaters and health athletic facilities.
Nonresidential Park: shall mean a tract of land or a combination of parcels planned and designed to be developed in
a coordinated effort with multiple nonresidential uses, under either single or multiple ownership when initially
designed, although parcels may be sold into separate ownership or condominium units upon their completion. The
uses may be any nonresidential uses allowed within the underlying zoning district(s) except exclusively retail uses,
typically including general or professional offices, service or personal businesses, distribution warehouses, industries
and manufacturing facilities. A Nonresidential Park places special attention on common design elements, shared
access, parking and circulation, common utility needs, and compatibility of tenants, and often has a unified
management system.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 16
Occupy (By a Specified Use): shall mean a property which has a specified use operating or functioning within it, or
a property that is arranged, intended or designed to house or be put to use with a specified use or uses.
Outdoor Sales: shall mean the retail sale of any article, substance, or commodity
such as landscape materials and motor vehicles, located outside a permanent retail
establishment, where such goods are available for immediate purchase. Outdoor
display and sales are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the
same parcel of land as the principal use. (Ord. No. 1524, passed 12-11-06)
Outdoor Storage: shall mean the keeping of goods, materials, or merchandise in an
unroofed area, in the same location for a period of forty eight (48) hours or more, but
excluding temporary construction-related materials for an ongoing on-site
improvement, or inventory storage of motor vehicles intended for sale or lease. (Ord.
No. 1524, passed 12-11-06)
Parapet: shall mean a protective wall at the edge of a roof, terrace, or balcony that rises
above the deck line or top surface of the roof.
Park: shall mean a tract of land designated and used by the public for active and/or passive recreation or as a refuge
for protection of natural flora and wildlife.
Parking Space, Motor Vehicle: shall mean an off-street space available for the parking of a vehicle. Minimum
parking space dimensions may vary depending on the configuration of surrounding spaces and activities and size/type
of intended vehicles.
Parking Space, Bicycle: shall mean a rack to which the frame and at least one (1) wheel of a bicycle can be secured
with a user-provided U-lock or padlock and cable.
Penthouse: shall mean a structural enclosure on a rooftop of a building, intended to serve
as either a dwelling or housing for service equipment. When a penthouse is a dwelling,
at least some of its exterior walls will be set back from the outer edges of the supporting
building to allow an outdoor private terrace. When a penthouse provides weather
protection for service equipment, it may house elevator machinery, water tanks, energy
production or conservation components (for solar, wind, green roof gardening, etc.), building signage mechanism, and
similar building-related items, and may have vertical or sloping sides and/or roof and will be attached directly to one
or more building parapets.
Planting Area: shall mean the landscape area reserved for the purpose of providing growth area for required plant
material.
Planting Season: shall mean the recommended time of the year for planting, normally September through May, that
is timed to avoid the summer heat.
Planting Strip: shall mean a strip of land, adjacent to a public right-of-way, that is reserved for landscaping purposes.
Playground: shall mean an improved recreational area with a variety of equipment, facilities, and/or open fields for
active recreation primarily by children.
Principal Building or Structure: shall mean a building or structure containing the principal use of the lot.
Principal Use: shall mean the primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is intended to serve.
Private Stable: shall mean an accessory building or parcel of land where horses are kept for private use and not for
remuneration, hire, or sale.
Public Realm, Public Use Area or Realm: shall mean all areas dedicated to the public or privately owned but
designed and accessible to the public, including but not limited to public streets, sidewalks, pedestrian pathways,
bicycle or multi-modal pathways, and other public right-of-ways, civic greens, squares, plazas, and parks, and which
space may be reasonably assumed to be within view of persons in these areas, or within view of buildings, vehicles,
or rooftops adjacent to or near such areas.
Queue Space or Line: shall mean a temporary waiting area for motor vehicles, generally in an orderly sequence,
obtaining a service or other activity such as at a bank teller window, or near an entrance to a facility where non-driver
passengers are able to either enter or exit vehicles, such as at a school.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 17
Recreational Use, Indoor: shall mean pleasure, hobby, or amusement uses requiring some personal physical activity,
located within a building, such as but not limited to game arcades, indoor arenas/coliseums, gymnasiums, billiard
parlors, bowling alleys, dance halls, roller or ice skating, go-carting, paintball, and similar uses available to the general
public.
Recreational Use, Outdoor: shall mean pleasure, hobby, or amusement uses requiring some personal physical
activity, located principally outdoors, such as but not limited to miniature golf courses, golf courses, putting greens
and driving ranges, batting cages, swimming pools, skateboarding courses, trampolines, water slides, pedestrian and
equestrian trails, sports courts, ball fields, cycle or running tracks, and similar uses available to the general public.
Recyclable Materials: shall mean those materials such as aluminum cans, glass, plastics #1-5 and 7, empty aerosol
cans, paperbacks and magazines, cardboard, and paper which are capable of being recycled and which would otherwise
be processed or disposed of as solid waste.
Recycling Collection Center: shall mean an area containing one or more “recycling containers” operated by a unit
of local government, or its designee, which is set aside and used by members of the public, including business entities,
to collect recyclable materials.
Residential Area: shall mean that portion of a project site designated for residential uses, and more specifically, the
following: residential lots, streets directly serving residential lots, and common open space areas. Residential Area
displays the character of a living environment, which may include a physical resemblance to a residential
neighborhood through similar building height, mass, materials, and architectural elements.
Residential Area, Net: shall mean a calculation of land area for only that portion of a project site designated for
residential lots and common open space areas.
Residential District, Single-Family District: shall mean any zoning category which allows by right, and is
predominately used by, single-family dwelling uses, which may include detached or attached dwellings, manufactured
homes, and modular homes, whether Traditional/Parallel Traditional or Conditional-Only. These districts include: R-
20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R-VS, and CrC.
Residential Use: shall mean any detached, duplex, attached, or multi family dwelling, manufactured home, group
home for up to six (6) individuals, boarding house, family care home, sheltered household, accessory dwelling, or
dormitory when legally used as a place for one (1) or more individuals to sleep, eat, bathe, and store clothing and other
daily use and personal care items.
Restaurant: shall mean an establishment designed, in whole or in part, for the preparation, serving, and consumption
of food and/or beverages. Food and beverages are primarily made available for purchase to customers or patrons
located at tables, counters, vehicles, or in a buffet line by restaurant employees, or by phone or electronic ordering
methods.
Restaurant, Carry-Out: shall mean a restaurant, designed in whole or part, where food and
beverage orders are prepared and wrapped in disposable containers and either handed to
walk-in patrons for consumption off-premises or delivered by restaurant employees to offsite
customers. When part of a restaurant that also provides on-site dining, the Carry-Out
counter may be physically separated from the eat-in section.
Restaurant, Drive-In: shall mean an establishment designed, in part or whole, for the
preparation, sale and consumption of food and beverages, where customers may remain
within their parked motor vehicles to order, pay for, be served, and consume their food
and beverage orders without leaving their vehicles. A Drive-In Restaurant may also
provide indoor and/or outdoor customer seating.
Restaurant, Drive-Through: shall mean an establishment designed, in part or whole,
for the preparation, sale and consumption of food and beverages, where customers
may remain within their motor vehicles to order, pay for, and receive their food and
beverage orders from employees within the restaurant building by traversing a drivethrough
lane. Upon receiving a complete food and/or beverage order, those customers
remaining within motor vehicles generally leave the restaurant premises to consume it
elsewhere. A Drive-Through Restaurant may also provide indoor and/or outdoor customer seating.
Restaurant, Entertainment: shall mean a restaurant incorporating both on-site dining and family-oriented recreation
where neither the dining nor recreation activity is clearly secondary or accessory to the operation of the other.
Recreation may include but is not limited to television or motion pictures; sound and sight systems, mechanical-,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 18
digital-, and/or electronic-operated games; animated mechanical devices and/or rides; and live entertainment.
Restaurant, Specialty: shall mean a restaurant whose primary business is the sale of a single specialty type of food
or beverage that is not considered a complete meal, such as candy, coffee, or ice cream. The sale of other food,
beverages, or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the specialty food or beverage. Customers may consume their
orders on-site or take them off-site.
Restaurant, Sidewalk Café or Outdoor Dining: shall mean a portion of a restaurant located on a public sidewalk or
private outdoor patio, which functions as an extension of the interior building, with direct doorway access to the
restaurant, where patrons may sit and be served or consume their food or beverage orders. A Sidewalk Café or Outdoor
Dining area may be enclosed with low fencing, landscaping, or similar materials to separate it from the adjacent
outdoor or sidewalk area, and has no permanent walls, windows, ceiling, or roof.
Roof: shall mean the outside covering of the top of a building, and may include the structural framework supporting
the covering. Roof shape and style may vary, including but not limited to varieties of pitched roofs (gable, hip,
mansard, gambrel, etc.) and flat, domed, and shed (single sloped). A roof may extend beyond the perimeter of the
exterior building walls to create overhanging rakes or eaves, or may be enclosed by exterior walls and parapets.
Roof, Green: shall mean a roof that is partially or completely covered with materials that reduce energy consumption
for the building below it. This may be accomplished through the use of vegetation planted in a growing medium over
a waterproof membrane, or may accommodate some environmentally sustainable technology such as but not limited
to solar thermal collectors, photovoltaic panels, insulated or heat reflective materials, and storm water
recovery/irrigation systems. A Green Roof may be designed to absorb rainwater, create wildlife habitat, and lower
urban heat islands.
Root Protection Zone: shall mean an area measuring approximately eighteen to twenty inches (18” to 24”) deep and
at a horizontal distance from the truck of a tree in all directions equal to one foot (1’) for each inch of DBH.
Sale, Garage, Rummage, or Yard: shall mean the occasional casual sale to the public of tangible personal property
that was obtained by the person(s) making the sale, through purchase or otherwise, for his or her own use. Such Sales
do not involve the resale of merchandise acquired for that purpose. The location of a Garage Sale may be on vacant,
residential, institutional, or commercial property and may be inside or outside. A Garage Sale is an occasional activity,
intended to be of short duration.
School, Elementary and Secondary: shall mean a public or private institution which has its primary purpose to
provide full time academic instruction of language, math, science, history and related areas to children, and is licensed
by the state of North Carolina as a school for children ages four (4) and up, including kindergarten, elementary, middle
or junior high, and high school, generally consisting of grades K through 12, where children receive approval to move
from one grade level to successively higher grade levels.
School, Trade or Vocational: shall mean a post secondary level facility offering instruction in specific occupational
focus areas.
School, University or College: shall mean a public or private educational institution offering full or part time postsecondary
academic coursework which may lead to certificates of completion in technical fields and/or associate or
bachelor degrees or higher.
Seating Capacity: shall mean the measurement of maximum occupancy within an assembly room or area. Seating
Capacity may be determined by: i) The number of fixed seats in the largest assembly room or area; ii) By allowing
ten (10) square feet of floor area per person available for the accommodation of movable seats only in that portion of
the structure that could be reasonably assumed to be part of the largest assembly room or area; or iii) By allowing fifty
(50) square feet of gross floor area per person of the structure as a whole.
Setback, Established: shall mean the distance between a street line and the front
building line of a principal building or structure, as constructed, projected to the side
lines on the lot.
Setback, Required: shall mean the minimum distance required between a street line
and the front building line of a principal building or structure, projected to the side lines
of the lot.
Sheltered Household: shall mean a group of individuals of any age who do not need to be related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, living together in a single housekeeping unit in a structure with up to six (6) bedrooms, for the purpose
of receiving/giving some specialized care, training, or support for their physical, emotional, or social health. A
resident attendant individual or couple (two [2] people maximum) to provide on-site care or training, such as a nurse
or houseparent, may occupy one (1) of the allowed bedrooms in the dwelling, while the remaining bedrooms must be
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 19
occupied by individuals receiving such care or training. A sheltered household does not include household settings
that would meet the definition of group home without regard to the number of permitted residents. (Ord. No. 1126;
passed 6-12-00)
Showroom: shall mean a business establishment primarily for the display and selling of a limited type or line of
products that requires an area to set up and exhibit the products, such as furniture, mattresses, cabinets, home plumbing
or lighting fixtures, rugs and flooring, and similar items or products that are generally not intended to be placed or left
in an outdoor environment. These business establishments are generally characterized as having a relatively low
volume of customers at any one time frame compared to other retail type businesses. A Showroom may include retail
and wholesale sales, but is contained in an entirely enclosed building with no outside storage of any materials,
products, or parts. Any storage of material or products not displayed can occupy no more than forty percent (40%) of
the gross floor area of the building and be contained within the same building as the display area.
Shrub: shall mean a woody plant normally containing multiple stems and a mature height of less than twelve feet
(12’).
Sight Triangle: shall mean the triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting
two points located on intersecting right-of-way lines, or a right-of-way line and the
curb or edge of pavement of a private street or driveway, each point being thirty five
feet (35’) from the intersection, and the two intersecting right-of-way lines (or rightof-
way line and curb cut). A sight triangle may also be created with dimensions as
determined by the State Department of Transportation. (Ord. No. 1532; passed 1-8-07)
Sign: shall mean any object, device, surface, or structure, in full or part, which is sufficiently visible to persons not
located on the lot where such a device is situated in order i) to attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, or ii) to communicate information to them.
Sign, Advertising: shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered: i) when located at a site other than upon the premises where the sign is displayed, such as
a billboard, or ii) as a minor and incidental activity upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
Sign, Airborne: shall mean any sign, including any moored blimp, gas balloon, or other inflatable element, whether
or not intended to move in the wind, which is designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises
on which it is located.
Sign, Attached: shall mean a sign connected or affixed to a principal building or structure or to any architectural
feature of such building or structure, or dependent on such a building or structure for its support, but not including
signs affixed to a fence or accessory structure.
Sign, Awning: shall mean a sign attached to or made part of an awning.
Sign, Banner: shall mean a sign made of nonrigid material, possessing some characters or ornamentation, intended
to be hung either with or without an enclosing framework, but not a flag, feather, or pennant.
Sign, Billboard: shall mean a sign that has a primary purpose of identifying or communicating, by paint, posters,
panels, or lighting, a message related to an activity, service, business, event, or location other than where the sign is
located, or a noncommercial message that may be unrelated to the sign location or to any real property. Such Billboard
signs are generally freestanding permanent structures with their sign face area designed so that the copy or featured
message can be changed frequently and the advertising space is for lease.
Sign, Bulletin Board: shall mean a sign used to announce meetings or programs to be held on the premises of a place
of worship, school, auditorium, library, museum, community recreation center, or similar noncommercial place of
public assembly.
Sign, Business: shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, or industry located upon the
premises where the sign is displayed, to type of products sold, manufactured, or assembled, and/or to services or
entertainment offered on said premises, but not a sign pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and
incidental to the principal use of the premises.
Sign, Canopy: shall mean a sign attached to or made part of a canopy when the sign message
elements are the same or similar material and plane as the canopy and do not extend above or
below the vertical face of the canopy.
Sign, Canopy Top: shall mean a sign placed on the front top edge of a canopy.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 20
Sign, Changeable Copy: shall mean a sign that is designed so that copy on some or all of the sign area can be
periodically altered, either manually in the field or through mechanical or computerized methods, including but not
limited to readerboards and computerized LED or pixel-lit message boards.
Sign, Construction: shall mean a sign placed at a location where land disturbing activity is occurring, or is scheduled
to occur, which identifies or announces the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier, and/or
others involved in the development of the project.
Sign, Directional: shall mean a sign, either on- or off-premise, intended to direct persons to a
business, activity, event, or other location, limited only to identification of the business,
activity, event or location and accompanying directional message in words or symbols.
Sign, Directory: shall mean a sign listing names and/or uses, or locations of more than one
business, activity, or professional office conducted within a building, group of buildings,
or shopping center. Such signs are typically located near entrances or at strategic locations
within the center or complex, and contain no other identifying or advertising messages.
Sign, Feather: shall mean a form of temporary sign composed of durable lightweight fabric
with a sturdy frame enclosing only a portion of the material’s edges so that it can remain upright and still be flexible
in the breeze, generally shaped to be tall and narrow when affixed into the ground or other bottom support.
Sign, Flag: shall mean a piece of durable fabric with a distinctive design, whether or not containing a written message,
that is used as a symbol or decorative feature.
Sign, Flashing: shall mean a sign that uses intermittent, varying intensity, or flashing light source or sources to attract
attention.
Sign, Freestanding: shall mean a sign that is not attached to, suspended from, erected on, or supported by a building
or other structure having a principal function other than the support of such sign, but instead is supported by some
structure in or on the ground or other surface or is unsupported (airborne).
Sign, Government: shall mean any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained for any governmental
purposes.
Sign, Ground or Monument: shall mean a freestanding sign which extends from the ground or is attached directly
to the ground generally for the entire length of its bottom sign face dimension or which has a support which places the
bottom of the sign less than twelve inches (12”) from the ground.
Sign, Identification: shall mean a sign used to display only the name (words and/or symbols, plus address, phone,
website, etc.) of the individual, family, organization or enterprise occupying the premises, or the profession of the
occupant, or the name of the building on which the sign is displayed.
Sign, Incidental: shall mean a sign which is clearly incidental to other signs on-site, and is intended to provide
instruction or information to persons on-site, such as but not limited to “Exit”, “Entrance”, “Parking”, “Bicycle
parking”, “Drive Through”, and menu boards. Simple identification of the on-site enterprise or organization may be
displayed with the informational copy.
Sign, Moving: shall mean a sign that moves as one unit or that has individual parts designed to move by mechanical
means, but not including sign faces that change or move symbols or messages by means of differing light sources.
Sign, Mural: shall mean the sign area on an exterior wall that may include some illustration or design and also a
discernible message, when the message is clearly related by language, logo, or pictorial depiction to the advertisement
of any contemporary product or service or the identification of a contemporary business. Identification or
advertisement of products, services, businesses, or locations of a historical nature and not in operation or available
today may be a Mural but is not a sign.
Sign, Pennant: shall mean any lightweight material, whether or not containing a
message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, string, or pole, usually in a series,
designed to move in the wind.
Sign, Portable: shall mean a sign designed or intended to be regularly relocated, whether or not it is attached to the
ground, a structure, or a building, and may include but not be limited to a sign on wheels, an A-frame sign, a sandwich
board, an airborne sign, or standing (gas price) signs.
Sign, Post: shall mean a freestanding sign with one (1) or two (2) supporting posts,
wires, or rods, or similar small upright structure which extends less than five feet
(5’) in vertical height, anchored in or placed on the ground or other surface so that
the message copy area can be attached directly unto such post or to a generally
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 21
horizontal support element which is attached to the upright post.
Sign, Projecting: shall mean a sign other than a canopy or awning sign which projects from,
and is attached to, the exterior wall of any building, and forming an angle to the supporting
wall.
Sign, Pylon or Pole: shall mean a freestanding sign supported by one (1) or more structures or poles that are placed
on, or anchored in, the ground or other surface and otherwise separated from the ground by more than twelve inches
(12”) by air, generally over five feet (5’) in height, and which is independent from any building or other structure.
Sign, Real Estate: shall mean a sign that is placed on private property to offer real property for sale, lease, rent, or
development.
Sign, Residential Development Message Board: shall mean a sign used to announce meetings or programs and
similar noncommercial messages specifically intended for the residents of the one specific residential subdivision,
development, or complex within which it is located. (Ord. No. 2083; passed 5-11-2015)
Sign, Roof: shall mean a sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon or over the roof of a building, or on a
parapet of a building higher than the top of the roof located directly behind the sign, and where no structural penthouse
extends from the interior side of the parapet to increase the roof height at that location.
Sign, Sponsorship: shall mean an advertising sign employed by civic, fraternal, religious, charitable or similar
organizations which identifies a sponsor of recreational facilities or special events provided on the premises where
such signs are displayed.
Sign, Suspended: shall mean a sign which is suspended or hung from the underside of a horizontal plane surface,
such as an arcade, and is supported by such surface.
Sign, Temporary: shall mean a sign which is not permanently installed in the ground or affixed to any structure or
building, and which is erected for a period of time.
Sign, Vehicular: shall mean a sign on a parked or stationary vehicle visible from the public right-of-way where the
primary purpose of the vehicle and its placement is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property, but does not include business logos, identification or advertising on a vehicle
which is primarily and regularly used for other business purposes.
Sign, Wall: shall mean any sign directly attached to, painted on, or adhered to an exterior wall of a building, with the
exposed display surface of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall and which does not extend above the
roofline immediately behind it or more than twelve inches (12”) from the supporting wall.
Sign, Wayfinding: shall mean a sign, frequently off-premise, specifically designed to provide directional or
destination information, and provided as part of an overall community plan to improve communication to the public.
Sign, Window: shall mean a sign which is applied on, affixed to, painted or stenciled on, or displayed on or through
the exterior of the building glass area, located such that the identifying/advertising message or other material which
communicates information can be read from off-premises.
Sign Area: shall mean i) the smallest square, rectangle, or circle that physically and visually forms the boundary of
the complete message area of a sign, such as a board, frame, painted border, or canister, or ii) the smallest square,
rectangle, or circle that encloses separate elements of the message of a sign composed in whole or in part of
freestanding letters, devices, or sculpted matter not mounted on a measurable surface.
Skilled Care Facility (Nursing Home): shall mean a home for three or more chronic or convalescent patients, who,
on admission, are not as a rule, acutely ill, and who do not usually require special facilities such as an operating room,
X-ray facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home provides care for persons who have
remedial ailments or other ailments for which nursing care is indicated; who, however, are not sick enough to require
general hospital care. Nursing care is their primary need, but they will require continuing medical
supervision. (Ord. No. 1532, passed 1-8-07)
Slick Stick: Shall mean a unipole constructed similar to a flagpole, but without the flag. The intent
is to conceal antennas and equipment within the unipole, not to extend byond the perimeter of the
pole itself.
Small Cell Site (SCS): shall be an umbrella term for operator-controlled, low-powered radio access
nodes, including those that operate in licensed spectrum and in licensed carrier-grade Wi-Fi. Small
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 22
cells typically have a signal range from approximately 32 ft to 650 ft and are fully featured, short range wireless base
stations used to complement service from the larger macro cell towers. Small cell sites are a good way to increase
mobile phone coverage and data speeds for both voice and data. Sizes range from compact residential to a pole in
public right-of-way. SCS are flexible enough to also be deployed indoors in large buildings or venues where large
crowds can overwhelm traditional infrastructure.
Small Wireless Facility: shall mean a wireless facility that meets both of the following: i) each antenna is located
inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, case of an antenna, that has exposed elements, the
antenna and all of its exposed elements, if enclosed could fit within an enclosure ono more than six (6) cubic feet; and
ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than twenty eight (28)
cubic feet in volume. The following types of ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services, or other support structures.
Solar Collector Installation: shall mean a device or structure which transforms solar radiant energy into other forms
of energy, which may take the form of a series of photovoltaic cells or an array of panels aimed to directly collect the
sun’s rays, along with necessary lines, wires, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets, framing, and other related
equipment to support the placement of the solar energy receiving elements and to assist in the delivery or
transformation of the received energy.
Solar Glare: shall mean the effect produced by light reflecting from a solar panel to an individual not within the
confines of the solar collector installation with an intensity sufficient to cause physical discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility.
Spa: shall mean a personal service establishment which employs professional, licensed therapists whose services
include nonsurgical body or facial treatments, such as cleansing facials, electrolysis, exfoliation, waxing, and body
wraps. Steam and sauna facilities, massage and relaxation facilities, hair salons, manicure and pedicure stations and
other similar personal treatment areas may also be provided.
Stealth or Concealed Structure: shall mean the support structure for a communications antenna which is primarily
for another principal use or accessory to the principal use on the lot where it is located, and partially or wholly conceals
the antenna or minimizes its appearance in relation to the principal use of the stealth structure. A stealth or concealed
structure may also be a freestanding structure with no other use connection to the principal use on the site when it is
designed to match features on the site, such as a “tree” structure within natural trees. A stealth structure shall visually
blend in and fit with the overall activities and structures on the site. All appurtenances to the antenna are wholly
concealed by the same structure or other structure in the immediate vicinity, except where a stealth application is not
part of a building, then the equipment and wiring shall not be required to be wholly concealed.
Stealth Application: shall mean a concealed wireless facility, designed and intended to make the wireless facility
difficult to detect in the public view.
Stealth Structure, Existing: shall mean a stealth structure in place as of January 27, 1997, the initial date of adoption
of regulations concerning communications towers and antennas, is considered existing. Essentially equivalent
replacement of such a structure in which its height does not increase more than twenty feet (20’), and compliance to
this height limit can be verified, may also be deemed to be existing.
Story: shall mean that part of a building or structure above ground level between a floor and the
floor or roof next above. A mezzanine shall be considered a story if it exceeds one-third (1/3) of
the area of the floor immediately below. A penthouse shall be considered a story if it exceeds onethird
(1/3) of the area of the roof.
Street, Arterial: shall mean a multi-lane major roadway, designated as a Class I, II, III, III-C, or
IV street, connecting freeways, expressways, or other main roads with lesser streets in the network
and is designed to accommodate large volumes of traffic at moderate speeds. There are several categories of arterial
streets: limited access arterial streets, which have access points only at cross streets rather than individual driveways;
major arterial streets, which may also connect regions, but are not intended to provide primary access to trip generating
uses; commercial arterial streets, whose function, in part, is to provide direct access to nonresidential high trip
generating land uses; and minor arterial streets, which, built on a smaller scale than other types of arterial streets,
usually only handle trips for short to moderate distances.
Street, Close: shall mean a segment or final block of a local street which incorporates a small public green area
surrounded by a public pavement or shared private street serving as vehicular access for a limited number of adjoining
lots, which offers a design alternative to a cul-de-sac end segment.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 23
Street, Collector: shall mean a roadway which assembles traffic from local streets, and distributes it to the nearest
arterial street, provides direct primary access to low/medium density land uses, and is designed to carry low to
moderate traffic volumes at low to moderate speeds.
Street, Cul-de-sac: shall mean a permanently dead-ended street segment, with only one motor vehicular entry and
exit point and the other end in a form that allows at minimum size private passenger vehicles to maneuver within the
improved pavement area to turn one hundred eighty degrees (180o).
Street, Minor Residential Access: shall mean a street used predominantly to provide access to abutting residential
properties and classified as a Class VI Local, or VI-L Local Limited.
Street, Private: shall mean, where allowed, an interior circulation road designed and constructed to carry vehicular
traffic from public streets within or adjoining a site to private residences, business establishments, or parking and
service areas and which is not maintained by the public.
Street, Public: shall mean a public right-of-way not less than thirty feet (30’) in width set aside for public travel and
either which has been accepted for maintenance by the State of North Carolina or by the Town of Matthews, has been
established as a public street prior to the adoption date of this section, or which has been dedicated for public travel
by the recording of a plat of subdivision which has been approved by the Board of Commissioners.
Street, Thoroughfare: shall mean any street designated on an adopted thoroughfare plan or any street which is an
extension of any street on a thoroughfare plan and which extends into the area not covered by a thoroughfare plan.
The terms thoroughfare and arterial are used synonymously and indicate streets which are designated as Class I, II,
III, II-C, or IV.
Street Line, Right-of-Way Line: shall mean a dividing line between a lot and a street right-of-way. In cases where
the right-of-way has not been recorded through the subdivision process or otherwise recorded with specific
dimensions, the right-of way width is the area maintained by the Town or the State.
Streetscape Plan: shall mean a plan that specifies planting strips, tree species, sidewalk locations, and other design
aspects along public and/or private streets within Matthews. Such plans are effective following approval by the Board
of Commissioners.
Structure: shall mean anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the land or attachment
to something having a permanent location on the land, excluding fences, walls used as fences, garden trellises, arbors,
sports backstops, and similar items when such items are less than six feet (6’) in height and twelve inches (12”) in
depth.
Subdivider: shall mean any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a
subdivision.
Subdivision: shall mean all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions
for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land
involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within
this definition: i) the combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the
total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Title; ii) the
division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street right-of-way dedications is involved; iii) the
public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; and iv) the division of a tract
in single ownership whose entire area is not greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Title and
the underlying zoning district.
Subdivision, Limited: shall mean a subdivision that is not otherwise exempt from the provisions of this Title and
where the tract or parcel of land retained by the owner submitting the land for subdivision approval is in excess of ten
(10) acres.
Subdivision, Minor: shall mean any subdivision containing not more than nine (9) lots fronting on an existing street
that does not involve any of the following: i) the creation of any new public streets or street right-of-way, or
improvements to an existing street; ii) the extension of any needed rights-of-way or easements for the water or sewer
system operated by Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department; iii) the installation of drainage improvements through
one or more lots to serve one or more other lots; and iv) the installation of a private waste water treatment plant or a
private water supply system for more than one lot or building site.
SubstantialModification to Wireless Facility: shall mean the mounting of a proposed wireless facility on a wireless
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 24
support structure that substantially changes the physical dimensions of the support structure. A mounting is presumed
to be a substantial modification if it meets any one or more of the criteria: a) Increasing the existing vertical height of
the structure by the greater of i) more than ten percent 10%) or ii) the height of one additional antenna array with
separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet. b) Except where necessary to shelter the antenna
from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable, adding an appurtenance to the body of a
wireless support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure the greater of (i)
more than 20 feet or (ii) more than the width of the wireless support structure at the level of the appurtenance. c)
Increasing the square footage of the existing equipment compound by more than 2,500 square feet.
Tap Room: shall mean a room or defined interior space that is ancillary to the production of beer at a microbrewery,
brewpub, or large brewery where the public can purchase and/or consume only the beer produced on-site.
Telephone Exchange: shall mean an enclosed structure containing electronic components and digital systems which
are necessary to transmit and complete audio elements of telephone calls between callers and receivers.
Thoroughfare Plan: shall mean a map and any attendant documents approved by the Town of Matthews or
Mecklenburg County Board of Commissioners which indicates the system of roads expected to serve major access
and travel needs with regard to auto, truck, and transit transportation. This is a general term used to describe officially
adopted documents explaining intended future road improvements.
Topping: shall mean any pruning practice generally employed on the top of a tree that indiscriminately makes cuts
without regard to the proximity of a side branch, and which practice is very detrimental to tree health.
Town: shall mean the Town of Matthews.
Traffic Calming Device: shall mean speed humps, speed tables, traffic circles, chicanes and other devices designed
to control motor vehicular speeding and high through traffic volumes on streets.
Trailer, Hauling or Utility: shall mean a vehicle or structure designed to be transported and intended for carrying
animals or goods.
Trailer, Overnight Camping: shall mean a vehicle or structure designed to be transported and intended for
occasional recreational use for living and sleeping accommodations, which may include one of the following: i)
Camping Trailer: shall mean a canvas, temporary, folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel,
recreation, and vacation use; ii) Motor Home: shall mean a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation, and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; iii) Pick-Up Coach: shall mean a
structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation;
and, iv) Travel Trailer: shall mean a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling
for travel, recreation, and vacation, having its body width not to exceed eight feet (8’) and its body length not to exceed
thirty two feet (32’).
Trailer Park, Overnight Camping: shall mean a site, tract of land, or lot upon which not less than two (2) overnight
camp sites for use by camping or recreation trailers or vehicles may be located, regardless of whether or not a charge
is made for that service.
Transit Station: shall mean an identified and approved location currently or eventually to be owned or leased by a
local or regional transit providing agency, on which facilities have or will be located to allow public access to regional
mass transit vehicles. A Transit Station may include, but not limited to: station platforms as designated places for
loading and disembarking of passengers; ticket stations (manned or automated); passenger drop-off areas and parking
spaces for use by passengers prior to and following travel by transit vehicle; travel mode transfer facilities such as a
change from bus to rail; and passenger comfort amenities such as benches, covered walkways, waiting rooms, and rest
rooms.
Transit Stop Shelter: shall mean a free standing structure, of less than one hundred (100) square feet, located on any
type of mass transit route which is designed to accommodate embarking and disembarking transit passengers. Mass
transit routes include, but are not limited to, public bus, trolley, rail and light rail transportation systems.
Tree, Large Maturing: shall mean a tree whose height is greater than thirty five feet (35’) at maturity.
Tree, North Carolina Champion: shall mean any tree that is listed in the North Carolina Big Tree List.
Tree, Protected: shall mean an individual tree having special regulatory procedures for removal on public and private
property. Protected Trees include all trees on public property, North Carolina Champion Trees, and Matthews
Specimen Trees as designated by the Matthews Board of Commissioners. Protected Trees can include individual trees
or all trees in a stand on a construction site designated to be preserved on a required landscape plan.
Tree, Small Maturing: shall mean a tree whose height is generally less than thirty five feet (35’) at maturity.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 25
Tree, Specimen: shall mean any tree designated by the Town as having unique value, historical interest, or other
noteworthy characteristics. A tree may be considered a Specimen Tree based on its size, age, rarity, history, or
ecological significance as determined by the Town Landscape Manager and a Certified Arborist
consultant.
Tree, Streetscape: shall mean any tree planted within or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
Tree Canopy: shall mean the combined crown areas of all trees on a tract of land.
Tree Canopy, Existing: shall mean the tree canopy that has existed for at least three (3) years
on a site as verified by aerial photographs.
Tree Evaluation Formula: shall mean a formula for determining the value of trees and shrubs as published by the
International Society of Arboriculture.
Tree Protection Area: shall mean that area or areas designated for the protection of both preserved and planted trees
depicted on tree protection and landscape plans.
Tree Stand: shall mean a group of trees in close spatial proximity that can be treated as a unit for the implementation
of a tree protection area.
Truck Terminal: shall mean a facility used for the receipt, transfer, short-term storage, and dispatching of goods
transported by truck. Included in this use type would be express and other mail and package distribution facilities. A
truck terminal facility does not include permanent or long-term accessory storage for principal land uses at other
locations. (Ord. No. 1524, passed 12-11-06)
Unobstructed Open Space: shall mean land not covered by buildings or structures. Unobstructed Open Space is
further defined in Chapter 8 Post Construction Regulations.
Usable Open Space: shall mean that required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by principal or accessory
buildings and available for all occupants of the building. This space of minimum prescribed dimensions shall not be
devoted to service driveways, off-street parking, or loading berths but shall be usable for greenery, drying yards,
recreation space, and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors.
Utility Pole: shall mean a structure that is designed for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone, cable
television, or electricity, or provide lighting.
Vegetation Survey: shall mean an inventory and assessment of existing vegetation, particularly trees, on a site prior
to any land disturbing activity, and/or any vegetation that existed on the site prior to clear cut activity that occurred
within the previous three years.
Vehicle, Commercial, Mid-Range: shall mean a vehicle that is designed or used for business purposes, is generally
marked with a sign or carries a commercial vehicle license plate, and that has a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
of less than thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds and a cargo area/work platform (including any installed accessories
such as ladder racks, cranes, compressors, hose reels, welders, etc.) that does not exceed eight feet (8’) in height.
Cargo area/work platforms separate from the cab shall not exceed fourteen feet (14’) in fixed length. A camper shell,
toolbox within the bed, and similar accessory equipment or a conversion van that is clearly intended and being used
for regular personal or household use, but not for any business or commercial activity, will not qualify the vehicle as
a commercial vehicle. However, ladder racks, cranes, compressors, hose reels, welders and similar equipment make
the vehicle a commercial vehicle.
Vehicle, Commercial, Large: shall mean a vehicle that is designed or used for business purposes, is generally marked
with a sign or carries a commercial vehicle license plate, and that has a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of thirteen
thousand (13,000) pounds or more. Large commercial vehicle also includes a vehicle with a GVWR of less than
thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds if the height of any portion of the vehicle exceed eight feet (8’) (including any
installed accessories such as ladder racks, cranes, compressors, hose reels, welders, etc.), or the length of the cargo
area/work platform exceeds fourteen feet (14’) in fixed length.
Vehicle, Compact: shall mean a car used for transportation by one or more individuals in their daily routines and
occasional activities, marketed as an economical compact or subcompact vehicle for personal or family use, with a
wheelbase generally not exceeding one hundred seven inches (107”) and overall length not exceeding one hundred
ninety inches (190”).
Vehicle, Standard or Passenger: shall mean a car, pick-up truck, van, sport utility vehicle, and similar sized vehicle
used for transportation by one or more individuals in their daily routines and occasional activities, excluding buses
and trains.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 1 - 26
Vehicle, Recreational: shall mean a vehicle other than a passenger or commercial vehicle for noncommercial
recreational use, either self-propelled or able to be mobile on land when towed by a separate vehicle or when placed
on a separate trailer, including but not limited to a motor home, travel trailer, camper shell, cab-over-camper, fifth
wheel, horse trailer, or a trailer which transports a recreational vehicle such as a boat, water craft, or off-road vehicle.
Veterinary Clinic: shall mean a facility where small animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are
cared for only while they are there for the treatment.
Veterinary Hospital: shall mean an establishment for the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of animal diseases and
injuries which may include medical and surgical services and twenty four (24) hour surveillance of recuperating
animals.
Water Tower: shall mean a water storage tank, a standpipe, or elevated tank situated on a support structure originally
and primarily constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver water.
Wireless Communication Equipment Base Station: shall mean a fixed point of communication for customer digital
device on a carrier network. A specific site authorized to communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of
radio receivers, antenna, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics. Base station elements must
be in close physical location to SCS, DAS and/or tower.
Wireless Facility: shall mean equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network, including i) equipment associated with wireless communications and ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, wires coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term shall not include any of the following: (i) the structure
or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to which the equipment is collocated; (ii) Wireless backhaul facilities;
iii) Coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or town utility poles or that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. This definition does not include
small and micro wireless facilities.
Wireless Infrastructure Provider: shall mean any person or business entity with a certificate to provide
telecommunications service in the State who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, or wireless support structures for small wireless facilities but that does not provide wireless services.
Wireless Services: shall mean any services, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-
Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities.
Wireless Services Provider: shall mean a person or business entity who provides wireless services.
Wireless Support Structure: shall mean a new or existing structure, such as a monopole, lattice tower, or guyed
tower that is designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Utility poles are not wireless support
structures.
Xeriscape: shall mean a landscape site planted with plant materials that have a very low water requirement or are
very drought tolerant as designated by the North Carolina State University Agricultural Extension Service.
Yard, Front, Established: shall mean an open, unoccupied space between a street line and
the front of a building or structure, as constructed, projected to the side lines of the lot.
Yard, Front, Required: shall mean the minimum open, unoccupied space required between
a street line and the front building line of a principal building or structure, projected to the side
lot lines of the lot.
Yard, Rear, Required: shall mean the minimum open space required between the rear lot line
and the rear building line of a principal building or structure, projected to the side lot lines of
the lot, and containing permitted accessory buildings, structures, or uses.
Yard, Side, Required: shall mean the minimum open, unoccupied space including driveways
and parking areas required between the side line and the side building line, extending from the
required setback to the required rear yard. If no setback is required, the side yard shall be
defined as extending from the street line to the required rear yard.
('72 Code, § 24-1100) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 716, passed 2-3-92; Am. Ord. 731, passed 5-4-92; Am.
Ord. 752, passed 8-3-92; Am. Ord. 869, passed 7-14-95; Am. Ord. 871, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord. 872, passed
8-8-94; Am. Ord. 875, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 885, passed 3-18-96; Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord.
2059, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16; Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17; Am. Ord. 2279, passed 2-
12-18; Am. Ord. 2280A, passed 2-12-18; Am. Ord. 2461, passed 12-9-19)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 1
Chapter 2. Decision-Making, Administration
& Enforcement Responsibilities
155.201. General Provisions.
The administration of this Title is vested in the
following:
A. The Town Planning Director;
B. The Town Zoning Administrator;
C. The Town Public Works Director;
D. The Town Engineer;
E. The Town Floodplain Administrator;
F. The Town Storm Water Administrator;
G. The Plan Review Committee;
H. The Town Board of Adjustment;
I. The Town Planning Board;
J. The Town Board of Commissioners
(Town Mayor and Commissioners, or
Town Council).
K. Mecklenburg County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency
(LUESA); and,
L. Mecklenburg County Code
Enforcement Division
Each group or individual identified
here as a Town role means the Town of
Matthews has authorized a specific
position to take on that particular
responsibility, whether or not the position is a direct Town of Matthews employee. When an
individual position is identified, either the person holding that position or an authorized designee
may perform the assigned functions, unless a specific professional qualification is necessary, such
as possession of a PE license.
155.202. The Town Planning Director
A. DESIGNATION. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Title, the Town Planning
Director is assigned the primary responsibility for administering and enforcing this Title. Any of
these responsibilities may be assigned to others, including Town staff members within the
Planning and Development Department (the Planning Office), and Mecklenburg County LUESA
or Code Enforcement Division by interlocal agreement, as determined necessary.
B. DUTIES OF THE TOWN PLANNING DIRECTOR. The Town Planning Director or designees shall have
the following duties and responsibilities with respect to this Title:
1. To consider and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove:
a. Applications for administrative amendments as provided at § 155.401.5.A.1.
b. Landscape plans, exterior illumination plans, and zoning overlay district
compliance plans.
c. Site plans, elevation plans, material or color selections, etc., as required by this
Title or through site-specific conditions for zoning approval.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 2
d. Applications for temporary use permits
e. Applications for zoning compliance for certificates of occupancy.
f. Sign permits (temporary and permanent).
2. To consider and make recommendations to the Town Council to adopt ordinances to
amend the text of this Title and the Official Zoning Map.
3. To establish application requirements and schedules for review of applications for zoning
changes, text amendments to sections within this Title, development plans, master sign
plans, and subdivisions, and provide oversight to review and approval procedures which
involve other Town departments or outside agencies.
4. To serve as Chair of the Plan Review Committee and coordinate all reviews and
communications regarding proposed and pending subdivisions.
5. To review and make recommendations to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
and/or Board of Commissioners on all applications for development considered by those
boards, and take any other actions necessary to administer the provisions of this Title.
6. To provide expertise and technical assistance to the Board of Commissioners, Planning
Board, and Board of Adjustment upon request.
7. Receive and process applications for zoning permits for structures or additions for which
building permits are required.
8. Receive and process applications for zoning permits not accompanied by an application
for a building permit.
9. Receive and process applications for a certificate of occupancy after an on-site inspection
and upon completion of a structure or when there is a change of use to ensure conformity
to the provisions of this Title.
10. Conduct inspections of structures or the use of land to determine whether there is
compliance with this Title, and, in cases of any violation, to notify in writing the person
or person responsible, specifying the nature of the violation and ordering corrective
action.
11. Maintain in current status the Official Zoning Map.
12. Verify that permanent and current records as required by this Title are maintained,
including, but not limited to, zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, inspections, all
official action on appeals, variances, and amendments, and registrations for items
requiring placement on the land such as temporary signs or temporary storage units.
13. Provide on request to the public printed or digital copies of the Zoning Map or Maps, the
compiled text of this Title, and the minutes of the Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment meetings. The Board of Commissioners may establish a fee to be charged to
any person desiring a copy of such text and/or map to defray the cost of publication or
reproduction of such text and/or map.
14. Furnish members of the public with forms for appeals and interpretations, applications
for variances to be heard by the Board of Adjustment, and receive on behalf of the Board
of Adjustment all such forms, when completed and executed by the appellant or
applicant, or his agent or attorney.
15. Refer any violation of this Title to the Town Attorney for prosecution or other
appropriate action when deemed necessary.
155.203. The Town Zoning Administrator
A. DESIGNATION. The Town Zoning Administrator shall mean the person, agent, or his or her
designees, designated by the Town Manager to administer the provision of zoning authority as
provided by state statutes and Chapters 1 thru 6, inclusive, of this Title.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 3
B. DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator or his designated assistant
shall administer and enforce Chapters 1 thru 6, inclusive, of this Title. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator to:
1. To render interpretations of all provisions of the zoning regulations in Chapters 1 thru 6,
inclusive, of this Title, including interpretations of the text; interpretation of the zoning
district boundaries; and determinations of whether an unspecified use falls within a use
classification or use group allowed in a zoning district.
2. To provide written interpretation for all zoning variance applications prior to a hearing
before the Board of Adjustment that a requested action would not be in compliance with
existing zoning provisions without the granting of a zoning variance.
C. CRITERIA TO CONSIDER FOR INTERPRETATIONS. The Zoning Administrator or
designated assistant shall use the following criteria, where applicable, when making a
determination on how to interpret a given land use category:
1. Has the Zoning Administrator received a detailed written description of all the desired
and expected activities to take place within the given use, and do these activities match,
or very closely compare in their land use impacts to another land use category already
defined?
2. Is there a general catch-all land use category that clearly would allow the given use in the
requested zoning district?
3. Is the development intensity of the given use the same as or very similar to another land
use category already stated within this Title?
4. How may newly generated traffic, noise, light, vibration, odor, or other potential impacts
on surrounding parcels and the adjacent neighborhood very closely match any land use
category already stated within this Title?
5. Does the given land use type have the same potential environmental impacts as another
land use category already determined by the Town as inappropriate to be located within
close proximity to residential and institutional land uses?
(Am. Ord. 2188, passed 11-14-16)
155.204. The Town Public Works Director and Town Engineer
A. DESIGNATION OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Town Public Works Director shall mean the
person, agent, or his or her designees, designated by the Town Board of Commissioners to, among
other duties and responsibilities implement and enforce the standards and procedures in Chapter 7
of this Title.
B. DUTIES OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. With regard to this Title the Public Works Director
shall have responsibility for implementing and enforcing the standards and procedures in Chapter
7 of this Title.
C. TOWN ENGINEER. The Town Engineer is a specific employee within the Town Public Works
Department, and as such, shall often serve as the agent or designee of the Public Works Director
on many elements related to any new development or redevelopment activities.
155.205. The Floodplain Administrator
A. DESIGNATION. Through a properly executed, legally binding interlocal agreement, the Town
Manager designates the Mecklenburg County Floodplain Administrator, and his or her designees,
as the person(s) with the authority to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of Chapter
9, Floodplain Regulations, of this Title. [formerly known as § 151.15 and deleted from
Chapter 9 ]
B. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Floodplain
Administrator is authorized to and shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
[formerly known as § 151.17 and deleted from Chapter 9]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 4
1. Reviewing, approving, and issuing all Floodplain Development Permits in a timely
manner to assure that the permit requirements of Chapter 9 of this Title have been
satisfied.
2. Reviewing, approving and issuing all documents applicable to Letters of Map Change.
3. Advising the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required; and if
specific federal or state permits are known, requiring that copies of such permits be
provided and maintained on file with the Floodplain Development Permit.
4. Notifying adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime Control
and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse
and submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
5. Assuring that within available resources, maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of any altered watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained.
6. Not issuing a Floodplain Development Permit for Encroachments within the Community
Encroachment Area and/or the FEMA Floodway unless the certification and flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 155.905 are met.
7. Reviewing and recording the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
Reference Level (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with § 155.905.B.2.c.
8. Reviewing and recording the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been flood-proofed, in
accordance with § 155.905.B.1.c.
9. Obtaining certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance
with § 155.905.B.1.b when flood-proofing is utilized for a particular nonresidential
structure.
10. Making the interpretation of the exact location of boundaries within the FEMA Special
Flood Hazard Area or the Community Special Flood Hazard Area when, for example,
there appears to be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. Procedures for changing flood
hazard area boundaries and lines depicted on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps are
identified in the National Flood Insurance Program regulations (44 CFR Parts 59-78).
11. RECORDS MAINTENANCE. Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of Chapter 9 of this Title and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974,
as amended.
12. MAKING ON-SITE INSPECTIONS OF WORK IN PROGRESS. As the work pursuant to a
Floodplain Development Permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as
many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done
according to the provisions of the local regulations and the terms of the permit.
13. Serving notices of violation, issuing stop work orders, revoking permits and taking
corrective actions.
14. Maintaining a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA in the
Floodplain Development Permit file when a property owner has received a Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA).
15. Determining the required information to be submitted with an application for approval of
an Individual Floodplain Development Permit.
16. Reviewing information provided by a property owner or his designated agent for the
purpose of making a determination of the total cost of repairs as it relates to a substantial
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 5
improvement, including a determination of whether a series of repairs, reconstructions or
improvements constitute one single alteration such that the total cost of the repairs,
reconstructions or improvements will be the cumulative cost from the first alteration.
17. NEW CONSTRUCTION DETERMINATION. Reviewing information provided by a property
owner or his designated agent for the purpose of making a determination of whether the
proposed construction activities constitute new construction for purposes of Chapter 9.
18. Reviewing and approving FEMA Conditional Letters of Map Revision and FEMA Final
Letters of Map Revision if Authorized by FEMA to do so.
19. ISSUING STOP-WORK ORDERS. Whenever a building or part at a building is being
constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation of Chapter 9, the Floodplain
Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall
be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state
the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage and the conditions
under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop work order constitutes a
misdemeanor.
20. REVOKING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS. The Floodplain Administrator may
revoke and require the return of the Floodplain Development Permit by notifying the
permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked
for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans or specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false
statements or misrepresentation made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly
issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. Revoked
permits may be resubmitted for approval using the requirements of the ordinance in effect
at the time of the original submittal unless they were revoked because of the intentional
submission of incorrect information by the permittee or his agent, or under other
circumstances where allowing re-submittal using the requirement of the ordinance in
effect at the time of the original submittal would not be equitable or consistent with
public policy. However, base flood elevations that govern the elevation to which the
structure is built must comply with the regulations and flood elevations in effect at the
time of application for the building permit.
21. MAKING PERIODIC INSPECTIONS. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his
inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to
enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any
reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
22. Providing owners of structures in the floodplain with information concerning their flood
risk, and (for structures with the lowest floor below the Flood Protection Elevation)
inform potential buyers of substantial improvement restrictions through the recordation of
a notice in the property chain of title or other similar notice.
155.206. The Town Storm Water Administrator
A. DESIGNATION. The Town Storm Water Administrator shall mean the person, agent, or his or her
designees, designated by the Town Manager, which may be through a properly executed, legally
binding interlocal agreement, to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of Chapter 8,
Post Construction Regulations, (the “PCO”) of this Title.
B. DUTIES OF THE STORM WATER ADMINISTRATOR. In addition to the powers and duties that may be
conferred by other provisions of the Town Code of Ordinances and other laws, the Storm Water
Administrator shall have the following powers and duties pertaining to the Post Construction
Regulations in Chapter 8 of this Title:
1. To review and approve or disapprove applications submitted pursuant to the PCO.
2. To make determinations and render interpretations of the PCO.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 6
3. To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal and review of
applications and appeals.
4. To enforce the PCO in accordance with its enforcement provisions.
5. To maintain records, maps, and official materials as relate to the adoption, amendment,
enforcement, or administration of the PCO.
6. To provide expertise and technical assistance upon request to the Matthews Board of
Commissioners and the Storm Water Advisory Committee (SWAC).
7. To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the powers and duties of the
Storm Water Administrator.
8. To provide information and recommendations relative to variances and information as
requested by SWAC in response to appeals.
9. To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions of the PCO. [formerly
known as § 154.021 and deleted in Chapter 8]
155.207. The Plan Review Committee
A. MEMBERSHIP. The Plan Review Committee shall consist of one or more staff members from
Town departments, as appropriate, and staff members from Mecklenburg County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency. The Planning Director or the Planning Director’s designee shall
serve as the Chair of the Plan Review Committee.
B. DUTIES OF THE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE. The Plan Review Committee shall review, consider,
and make recommendations to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove sketch plans for
minor and major subdivisions, preliminary plans for major subdivisions, and, final plats for minor
and major subdivisions as needed, and as further explained in Chapter 4. The Plan Review
Committee Chair shall be responsible for coordinating any review sessions and
collecting/distributing any communications between members and to applicants.
155.208. The Town Board of Adjustment
A. ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION. The Town Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The
Board of Adjustment will consist of five (5) full voting members who are citizens and residents of
the Town and appointed by the Town Board of Commissioners. There shall also be three (3)
alternate members who are Town citizens and residents appointed by the Board of
Commissioners. Alternates may sit in on an official meeting of the Board in the absence of one (1)
or more members of the Board at a given meeting. All appointed members serve until they are
replaced by a successor. Board of Adjustment members shall be eligible for reappointment for a
maximum of two (2) consecutive terms, at which point they would not be eligible for
reappointment for at least one (1) year. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board will be for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
B. RULES OF PROCEDURE. The Board of Adjustment will adopt rules and regulations for its own
operation necessary to carry out the provisions of this Title. The Town Planning and Development
Department will maintain copies of the adopted rules for public information.
C. DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following duties:
1. VARIANCE OF CHAPTERS 1 THRU CHAPTER 6, INCLUSIVE.
a. Following a determination by the Zoning Administrator that a requested action
is not in compliance with the zoning provisions of Chapters 1 thru 6, inclusive,
of this Title, the Board of Adjustment will hear and determine variances from
the requirements which relate to the establishment or extension of structures or
uses of land. The Board may not grant a variance which would allow the
establishment of a use which is not otherwise permitted in the district, would
result in the extension of a nonconforming use, or would change the district
boundary or zoning classification of the property in question.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 7
b. In reaching a decision on a variance request, the Board shall make findings
upholding all of the following criteria.
i. Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the
Title. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
ii. The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property,
such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal
circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the
basis for granting a variance.
iii. The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the
property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not
be regarded as a self-created hardship.
iv. The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent
of this Title, public safety is secured, and substantial justice is
achieved.
2. VARIANCE OF FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide petitions for variances from the requirements of Chapter 9 of this Title, as further
explained at § 155.904.
3. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL. The Board of Adjustment will hear and decide appeals on any
determination, order, requirement, or decision made by the Zoning Administrator or code
enforcement official. A request for appeal must be complete, and must be submitted to
the Town within thirty (30) days of the date of notice of violation, order, or decision.
4. APPEAL OF FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals from any order, decision, determination or interpretation made by the Floodplain
Administrator pursuant to or regarding the regulations of Chapter 9 of this Title as further
explained at § 155.904.
5. APPEAL OF MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide appeals from any order, decision, determination, or interpretation made by
Mecklenburg County Code Enforcement (the Building Inspector) pursuant to or
regarding the regulations of Chapter 10 of this Title as further explained at § 155.1005.
6. INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.
The Board of Adjustment is responsible for interpreting the provisions in Chapter 1 thru
Chapter 6, inclusive, of this Title relating to zoning regulations if there is a question
about the meaning or application of a provision. Once the Board has made an
interpretation on an issue, the Zoning Administrator will use that interpretation in the
administration of this Title. The Board may also ask that the Title be amended to clarify
a problem that has come to the Board's attention.
7. The Chair, or vice-chair in the absence of the Chair, may subpoena witnesses and compel
the production of evidence.
D. QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS. The Board of Adjustment will hold a quasi-judicial hearing on any
variance, appeal, or interpretation request which comes before it. All administrative papers and
other information relating to the request shall be transmitted to the Board. Notice of the time,
place and subject of hearings shall be given to the persons making the request and to the owners of
property that adjoins or is directly across a street or alley from the property involved in the
hearing. The Board shall keep minutes of its hearings and records of the votes of each member.
E. ACTIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustment will decide on a zoning
variance, appeal, or interpretation request and on any matter upon which it is required to act under
this Title. The decision of the Board shall be documented in the minutes or transcript of the
meeting which shall record a motion to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove. The
motion shall be supported with findings of fact and conclusions of law placed in the minutes of the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 8
meeting. A majority vote of the members of the Board will be required to override a decision of
the Zoning Administrator or a code enforcement official charged with enforcement of this Title or
to decide in favor of the persons making an appeal. The concurring vote of four fifths (4/5)
majority shall be required to grant a variance request.
F. FILING APPLICATIONS AND FEES. Applications and related documents for zoning variance, appeal,
or interpretation requests to be considered by the Board of Adjustment must be filed with the
Town Planning office as further explained at § 155.403.2, and accompanied by the necessary
application fee as established by the Town Commissioners. The Town Planning office shall
determine the application is complete and ready to be sent to the Board of Adjustment for review.
155.209. The Town Planning Board
A. ESTABLISHMENT. The Town Planning Board is authorized and established under the authority of
G.S. Chapter 160A- 361 to perform the functions and duties prescribed by the General Statutes.
B. APPOINTMENT, TERMS, AND ORGANIZATION. The Town Planning Board will consist of seven (7)
full voting members who are citizens and residents of the Town and appointed by the Town Board
of Commissioners. There shall also be two (2) alternate members who are Town citizens and
residents appointed by the Board of Commissioners. Alternates may sit in on an official meeting
of the Board in the absence of one or more members of the Board at a given meeting. All
appointed members serve until they are replaced by a successor. Planning Board members shall
be eligible for reappointment for a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms, at which point they
would not be eligible for reappointment for at least one (1) year. An appointment to fill a vacancy
on the Board will be for the remainder of the unexpired term. Further, all members shall be
appointed to terms of two (2) years staggered so that terms overlap.
C. COMPENSATION. All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation.
D. REMOVAL AND VACANCIES. Members may, after a public hearing, be removed by the Board of
Commissioners for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall file a
written statement of reasons for the removal. Vacancies occurring other than through the
expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Board of Commissioners.
E. OFFICERS. At the first meeting following appointment of new members each year, the Planning
Board shall elect its Chair and Vice-Chair from among the appointed citizen members and create
and fill any other offices as it may determine. The term of office for the Chair and Vice-Chair
shall be one year.
D. MEETINGS AND RULES. The Planning Board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month
which shall be open to the public. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep
records of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be a
public record.
E. CONFERENCES. Members of the Planning Board may attend city planning conferences or meetings
of city planning institutes or hearings on pending city planning legislation.
F. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES. It shall be the primary function and duty of the Planning Board
to study, review, and make recommendations regarding the physical development of the Town,
including community goals and vision statements, long-range comprehensive plans, small area
plans, strategic plans, zoning regulations, location of zoning district designations, subdivision
regulations, energy efficiency measures, and related activities as allowed by state statute and
authorized by the Board of Commissioners. In the course of completing these duties, the Planning
Board may develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures, and other
means for carrying out plans, and may advise the Board of Commissioners on their rationale for
recommendations. The Planning Board may recommend amendments, extensions or additions to
previously adopted plans. [formerly § 33.15-33.22]
155.210. The Town Board of Commissioners (Mayor and Commissioners, or Town
Council)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 9
Without limiting any authority granted to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners by state law or by other
ordinances of the Town, the Board of Commissioners have all of the powers and duties with respect to this
Title conferred on it by the General Statutes. The Board of Commissioners, or Town Council, includes the
Mayor and six (6) Commissioners.
155.211. Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency (LUESA)
A. DESCRIPTION. Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency (LUESA) is a
department of Mecklenburg County responsible for administering and enforcing regulations
affecting new development and protecting air and water resources in Mecklenburg County.
B. DUTIES OF MECKLENBURG COUNTY LAND USE AND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES AGENCY.
Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency shall have the responsibilities
with regard to this Title conferred upon it by interlocal agreement, including:
Receive and process applications for grading permits, building permits, sign permits,
change of use permits, temporary use permits, and similar requests for land disturbing
activities, including any related plan review.
Receive and process applications for a certificate of occupancy after an on-site inspection
and upon completion of a structure or when there is a change of use as provided to ensure
conformity to the provisions of this Title.
Conduct inspections of structures or the use of land to determine whether there is
compliance with this Title, and, in cases of any violation, to notify in writing the person
or person responsible, specifying the nature of the violation and ordering corrective
action.
155.212. Mecklenburg County Code Enforcement Division
A. DESCRIPTION. Mecklenburg County Code Enforcement Division is a department of Mecklenburg
County responsible through interlocal agreement for providing technical expertise on building
code criteria, conducting plan review, conducting inspections, and administering and enforcing
regulations affecting new development, redevelopment, maintenance and repair, and improvement
of structures, buildings, and real property to obtain compliance with all applicable local, state, and
federal building codes in Mecklenburg County.
B. DUTIES OF MECKLENBURG COUNTY CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION. Mecklenburg County Code
Enforcement Division shall have the responsibilities with regard to this Title conferred upon it by
interlocal agreement, including:
Receive and process applications for a certificate of occupancy after an on-site inspection
and upon completion of a structure or when there is a change of use as provided to ensure
conformity to the provisions of this Title.
Conduct inspections of structures to determine whether there is compliance with this
Title, and, in cases of any violation, to notify in writing the person or person responsible,
specifying the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action.
Conduct inspections and administer minimum housing provisions as enumerated in
Chapter 10 of this Title.
155.213. Compliance Documents
It shall be illegal for any person to begin the construction or reconstruction of any structure or any part of a
structure, or to begin to remove trees, excavate or grade for a structure or land improvement, or any other
land disturbing activity, or to make any structural repairs, alterations, or additions to any structure without
obtaining any and all appropriate compliance documents from the office or agent authorized by the
Matthews Board of Commissioners to issue such permits and documents. The office or agent authorized by
the Matthews Board of Commissioners will not issue such documents unless the plans, specifications, and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 10
intended use of the structure and property conform to the requirements of this Title. The application for
compliance documents shall be accompanied by information sufficient to allow the office or agent to act on
the request.
A. INITIAL SITE PLAN COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTS. One (1) or more site layout documents may apply
to each lot or tract prior to any development activity. These initial site plan documents grant
opportunity to proceed with preconstruction aspects, and may include approved conditional zoning
site plans, elevation plans, landscape plans, lighting plans, and/or zoning overlay compliance
plans, all of which shall be coordinated through the Matthews Planning office (whether staff
approval or Board of Commissioners approval is necessary for each). These approved plans shall
be adhered to and submitted when requested with subsequent data to Mecklenburg County
LUESA and/or Code Enforcement in all following steps in the development review and approval
process.
B. GRADING/INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PERMITS. Any proposed land disturbing activity that
will include any grading, removal of trees and existing vegetative ground cover, removal of
existing structures, buildings, and/or impervious surfaces, or any on-site work that may impact soil
erosion or will take place close to a protected tree, shall not commence until all appropriate
approvals and permits are issued by Mecklenburg County LUESA. When any driveway permit or
right-of-way encroachment permit is necessary, they shall be obtained from Matthews Public
Works and/or North Carolina Department of Transportation, as appropriate.
C. STRUCTURAL/MECHANICAL BUILDING PERMITS. When any structure or building is proposed for a
site, all applicable building permits and inspections shall be successfully obtained from
Mecklenburg County Code Enforcement. Such building permits may be in addition to other
required compliance documents. Approval of building permits shall be consistent with all the
approved initial site plan documents necessary for the property.
D. ZONING PERMITS. A zoning permit shall be required for any new use, change of use, temporary
use, or similar activity on a lot or tract of land whether or not other permits and documents listed
in this section are required. Zoning permits may be necessary for activities including but not
limited to: a permanent sign; start-up of a home-based business; a day care home; a temporary
business; application for an ABC permit; construction of a parking lot; or placement of a small
storage building.
E. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY. It shall be illegal to commence or change the use of any building
or land, except for uses expressly exempted by federal, state or other local laws, until a Certificate
of Occupancy has been issued by Mecklenburg County LUESA and/or Code Enforcement stating
that the use complies with the requirements of this Title.
F. TIME LIMIT ON COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTS. Any building permit or zoning permit issued pursuant
to this Title will lapse and become invalid if the work for which it was issued is not started within
six (6) months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for
one (1) year. [formerly known as § 153.306 and § 153.307]
155.214. Enforcement and Penalties
The provisions of this Title may be enforced by any one or more of the following methods, unless an
alternate procedure is specifically indicated elsewhere in this Title.
A. EQUITABLE REMEDIES AND PROCEDURE. The Town may apply for any appropriate equitable
remedy to enforce the provisions of this Title. It is not a defense to the Town's application for
equitable relief that there are other remedies provided under the general law or this Title.
The provisions of this Title may be enforced by injunction. When a violation of this Title occurs,
the Town may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or
prohibitory injunction commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition or cease the
unlawful use of the property.
If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within
the time allowed by the court, he or she may be cited for contempt. The Town may execute the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 11
order of abatement and will have a lien on the property in the nature of a mechanic's and
materialman's lien for the cost of executing the order. The defendant may secure cancellation of
an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and by posting a bond for compliance
with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court in
an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter was heard and shall be conditioned on
the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within the time fixed by
the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement does not suspend or cancel an injunction issued
in conjunction with the order.
B. CIVIL PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person has failed
to comply with the provisions of this Title, a Town or County code enforcement official may issue
a warning citation to the violator, followed by citations of specific monetary fines as outlined
below. These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties imposed by a court for violation
of the provisions of this Title.
1. LENGTH OF WARNING CITATION. Where violations are clearly of a temporary nature and
could physically be immediately corrected, the violator shall be given a twenty four (24)
hour warning citation. A twenty four (24) hour citation must be hand-delivered to a
responsible representative for the violator, and that individual must sign that he/she has
received such citation. Where the violation can be generally believed to be corrected
within a short time frame, and does not involve multiple persons’ coordinated actions
and/or require mechanical/vehicular tasks, the violator shall be given a three (3) day
warning citation. Any other violation that may reasonably be expected to be corrected
within a limited time period shall be given a ten (10) day warning citation. Delivery of a
three (3) day or ten (10) day warning citation may be by hand-delivery, first class US
mail, certified mail, and/or by conspicuously posting a print copy of the warning citation
on the subject property. Warning citations may be sent to property owners and to
occupants when they are different parties.
2. CITATION AMOUNTS. If the violation is not corrected within the specified time period, a
citation subject to a fifty dollar ($50.00) civil penalty may be issued. If the violation is
not corrected within twenty four (24) hours, a second citation subject to a civil penalty up
to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the same violation may be issued. Subsequent
citations subject to a civil penalty up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be issued for
each day the violation is not corrected. Any citation not paid within fifteen (15) days of
issuance shall have a ten dollar ($10.00) delinquency charge added per citation to the
amount listed on the face of the citation form.
3. APPEAL OF WARNING CITATION. If an individual chooses to appeal a warning citation,
they must do so in writing within seventy two (72) hours of the issuance of the warning
citation to the Matthews Planning and Development Department. A written appeal will
stay any monetary citations from being issued. In the case of a twenty four (24) hour
warning, the written appeal must be submitted to the Matthews Planning and
Development Department within twenty four (24) hours in order to stay any citations
with fines. An initial request for appeal may be by letter; however an appeal to the
Matthews Board of Adjustment must be fully completed and returned to the Matthews
Planning and Development Department within ten (10) days of the warning citation. If a
letter requesting appeal is submitted but the appeal to the Board of Adjustment is not
completed and submitted in the required ten (10) days time, then citations in the amounts
provided above may be issued as though no request for appeal had been initiated.
4. CIVIL PENALTIES FOLLOWING A WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION. When a Notice of
Violation is written by a Town or County enforcement officer, providing a thirty (30) day
period to resolve the violation, and the violation remains at the conclusion of the thirty
(30) days, then the Notice of Violation shall serve as the warning citation, and citations
with monetary fines as provided in subparagraph 2 above may be issued. Because the
written Notice of Violation includes the opportunity for appeal within the initial thirty
(30) day period, there is no provision for further appeal. ('72 Code, § 24-3137.5) (Ord.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 12
477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 591, passed 6-12-89; Ord. 1238, passed 3-11-02)
[formerly known as § 153.308]
C. CRIMINAL PENALTIES. Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of a violation of any provisions
of this Title shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. After notice of a violation is given, the violator will
have thirty (30) days to correct the violation. After that time, each additional day that the violation
remains will be considered a separate violation. ('72 Code, § 24-1203) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88;
Am. Ord.763, passed 11-2-92) [formerly known as § 153.999]
D. CIVIL PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATIONS RELATED TO TEMPORARY USES. Because
temporary business uses may set up and begin operations in a very short time frame and may not
adhere to the requirements as provided in § 155.506.43, the following procedures and penalties are
created for those situations.
1. WARNING OF VIOLATIONS; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE. The Zoning Administrator and the Code
Enforcement Officer are empowered to issue warnings of violations to any person if there
is a reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of § 155.506.43.
These warnings of violation may be delivered in person to the violator, or, if the violator
cannot be readily found, the warning of violation may be mailed to the last known
address of the violator, or mailed or hand delivered to another individual participating
with the violator in the business on the site. Warnings of violations may be issued for the
following:
a. Conducting a temporary use without a temporary use permit. A temporary use
permit must be obtained within five (5) calendar days of warning issue date.
b. Conducting a temporary use on a property that is ineligible for a temporary use
as required by § 155.506.43.B.4. Business activities must cease immediately
upon receipt of written notice of violation and all business-related material must
be removed from the property within three (3) calendar days of warning issue
date. (Ord. 1237, passed 1-14-02)
c. Failure to cease business activities and to remove all business-related material
from the property within the forty five (45) day time limit specified in §
155.506.43.B.2. Business activities must cease immediately upon receipt of
written notice of violation and all business-related material must be removed
from the property within three (3) calendar days of warning issue date. (Ord.
1237, passed 1-14-02)
2. CITATION. Compliance with § 155.506.43 may be enforced in any one or more of the
following ways as prescribed by law.
a. CITATION AND CIVIL PENALTY. A civil citation in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) may be levied against any person who violates any provision
of § 155.506.43 and who has been issued a warning of violation and has not met
the specified compliance. Additional citations in the amount of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) may be issued for the second day of violation and an
additional citation in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) may be
issued for a third day of violation and any subsequent days the violation
continues to exist. Each and every day during which the violation continues
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
b. VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR. If a violator fails to comply with the warning of
violation, the Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer may have a
complaint entered against the violator and have a criminal summons issued.
Upon conviction, the violator shall be subject to criminal penalty up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or up to thirty (30) days in jail as the courts may
allow. [formerly known as § 153.191]
E. REMEDIES FOR DISTURBANCE, DESTRUCTION, OR REMOVAL OF VEGETATION AND REQUIRED
LANDSCAPING. Any person, who violates any of the tree protection or landscaping provisions of §
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 2 - 13
155.606, or any Landscape Plan approved by the Town under prior Landscaping ordinance
provisions, shall be subject to any one or combination of penalties prescribed in this § 155.214.
1. If a person fails to comply with any notice of violation, warning citation, or citation, as
outlined above in § 155.214.A. through C., then the following penalties may be initiated.
Any penalties shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, compliance to all requirements
and payment of any financial penalties.
2. Any act constituting a violation of § 155.606.13 Landscape Maintenance Standards
resulting in the destruction, excessive pruning/topping, or removal of required vegetation
up to twelve inches (12”) DBH without approval from the Town shall be subject to a civil
penalty of two dollars ($2.00) per square foot for area damaged or destroyed, not to
exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
3. Destruction or removal of a tree greater than twelve inches (12”) DBH without prior
Town approval as provided at § 155.606.13.E. may be subject to a civil penalty equal to
the amount of the value of the tree as listed in the most current edition of The Guide for
Plant Appraisal, published by the International Society of Arboriculture in conjunction
with the information provided by the Southern Chapter of the International Society of
Arboriculture.
4. In the event that a Landscape Guarantee bond has not been posted and accepted by the
Town and/or Mecklenburg County, and the developer and/or property owner has failed to
plant the required trees and shrubs as depicted on the most current approved Landscape
Plan, a ten (10) day warning citation as provided for in § 155.214.B. above, may be
issued, indicating a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per tree or shrub not installed
may be issued per day of ongoing violation, due within ten (10) days of day of issuance,
not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) per day of violation. [formerly portions
of § 153.075(P)]
F. Final Plats.
1. After the enactment date of this Title, a plat of a subdivision filed or recorded in the
Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds office without approval of the Town as required
by these regulations shall be null and void. No street shall be maintained by the Town,
nor shall any permit be issued by an administrative agent of the Town for the
construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit, upon any land for
which a plat is required to be approved, unless and until the requirements given in this
Title have been fully met and the final plat has been approved.
2. Any property owner, agent of an owner, or other person, who transfers or sells land
within the jurisdiction of the Town by reference to a plat showing a subdivision of land
before that plat has received final Town approval and is recorded at the Register of
Deeds, shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days,
whether or not the unapproved plat is specifically mentioned in the instrument of transfer
used in the process of selling or transferring that land. The Town through the Town
Attorney or other official designated by the Board of Commissioners, may enjoin the
transfer or sale by action for injunction. These regulations shall not affect the sale or
transfer of any land, a plat of which was recorded prior to November 9, 1998. [formerly
§ 152.07]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 3 - 1
Chapter 3. Nonconformities
155.301. Purpose.
This Title places restrictions on the use and development of
land by establishing minimum standards. In many
instances, land and improvements were developed or
proposals for the use of land were initiated prior to the
adoption of this Title, or one (1) or more of the previous
development ordinances which this Title supercedes.
These uses may not meet the minimum standards contained
in this Title because they were developed under no specific
standards or under standards which were less restrictive.
The Board of Commissioners recognizes that the strict
application of these standards to those uses may create
certain hardships for the property owner. The Board also
recognizes that these nonconformities may be allowed to
continue in use in accordance with the spirit of this Title,
even though not meeting the ordinance standards.
Therefore, the uses or situations described below are
accorded a nonconforming status with all the specific
privileges and limitations set forth to govern their
existence. Many nonconformities may continue, but the
provisions of this Chapter are designed to curtail
substantial investment in nonconformities, and to bring
about their eventual improvement or elimination in order to
preserve the integrity of this Chapter and the character of
the town. It is the intent of this Chapter to allow the
continuation of any nonconformity and the repair and
maintenance of such nonconformities, but to require that
any expansion, improvement, or alteration to such situations obtain a variance to determine whether it will
substantially injure the value, use and enjoyment of neighboring properties according to § 155.208 and § 155.403.
('72 Code, § 1501) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 872, passed 8-8-94). [formerly known as § 153.220]
155.302. General Provisions.
155.302.1. Nonconformities Defined
A nonconformity shall be any use, lot, improvement, or structure that, as a result of adoption of this Title or further
amendments, or a pre-existing condition, does not meet the current standards of this Title.
A. NONCONFORMING USE. A nonconforming use shall be any land use or type of residential use that was
legally established but has become a prohibited use in the district in which it exists.
B. NONCONFORMING LOT. A nonconforming lot shall be any legally established parcel that does not conform
to the current area or dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
C. NONCONFORMING IMPROVEMENT OR STRUCTURE. Except in the HUC District, a nonconforming
improvement or structure shall be any legally established improvement, building or structure that fails to
meet current standards for setback, height, or similar factors.
D. MINOR NONCONFORMITIES DUE TO OUTDATED ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS. Certain parcels of land that were
developed under a zoning designation that is no longer available may have conditions legally established
through an earlier zoning approval process which would be considered nonconformities under this Title.
Those provisions may be eligible for relaxed standards of transition as provided at § 155.401.1.l. which
lists certain exemptions to limit the extent of nonconformities on those specific parcels at the time they
undergo a further zoning action.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 3 - 2
155.302.2. Continuation of Nonconformities
Legal nonconformities may continue subject to the limitations of this Chapter. Continuation, reconstruction,
alteration, and/or expansion of such nonconformities shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
155.302.3. Maintenance and Repair
Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the ordinary maintenance of a nonconformity, including but not limited to
repairs required by the Building Code official, subject to the value limits as further outlined in this Chapter.
Maintenance and repairs shall be subject to issuance of permits as required by the appropriate building codes in
effect at the time of permit issuance.
155.303. Nonconforming Lots.
A nonconforming lot is a lot which does not meet the minimum dimensional requirements for width, area, front, side
or rear yard, height or unobstructed open space, for the district in which it is located, but was recorded by plat or
description in the office of the Register of Deeds of Mecklenburg County prior to the adoption of this Title or any
subsequent amendment. Such a lot can either be vacant or contain a structure. A nonconforming lot may be used for
any of the uses permitted by this Title in the district in which it is located, or any structure on this type of lot may be
improved or expanded in accordance with the following standards.
A. The minimum requirements for front, side and rear yards, heights of structures and unobstructed open space
for the district must be met.
B. The lot in question does not adjoin a lot which could be combined with it to make it conforming as
provided for in § 155.601. ('72 Code, § 1502) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 872, passed 8-8-94)
[formerly known as § 153.221]
155.304. Nonconforming Structures.
A nonconforming structure is any structure that existed prior to the adoption of this Title, or the effective date of any
subsequent amendment, which does not comply with the minimum requirements of this Title in the district in which
it is located. A nonconforming structure devoted to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may
continue only in accordance with the following limitations.
A. Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the nonconforming structures to maintain a safe
and sound condition.
B. Except as provided in §155.304.C. and D. immediately below, a nonconforming structure shall not undergo
a change of use, renovation or expansion.
C. A nonconforming structure may undergo a change of use or renovation without having to bring the
structure into conformity with the requirements of these regulations provided that:
1. The change in use or renovation does not increase the floor area of the structure; and
2. The number of parking spaces provided for the use and the standards for landscaping and
buffering are in conformity with the requirements of these regulations.
D. A nonconforming structure may be expanded, without bringing the nonconforming structure into
conformity with these regulations, only if the part of the structure to be expanded and the area of the lot
into which the expansion is taking place are brought into conformity with the requirements of these
regulations.
E. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless it thereafter conforms to the standards of the zoning
district in which it is located.
F. An existing manufactured home as a principal residential building on an individual lot or located in a
nonconforming manufactured housing park or subdivision in operation at the time of the adoption of these
regulations may be replaced with another manufactured home provided the number of manufactured home
units may not be increased beyond the number available before replacement and the replacing
manufactured home must not create nonconforming yards, separation distances, or increase existing
nonconforming yards or separation distances. Any replacement manufactured home not within the R-MH
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 3 - 3
district shall comply with the lot development and design criteria as outline in 155.605.1.A.4. ('72 Code, §
1503) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 872, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 2083, passed 5-11-15) [formerly
known as §153.222]
155.305. Nonconforming Use of Open Land.
A nonconforming use of open land is an open use on a lot, when the only buildings are incidental and accessory to
the principal open use which was in existence prior to the adoption of this Title and which would not be permitted
by this Title in the district in which it is located. Uses of open land may include, but are not limited to, storage
yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, salvage yards, golf driving ranges, and miniature golf courses. A legally
established nonconforming use of open land may be continued but is subject to the following limitations.
A. When a nonconforming use of open land has been changed to a conforming use, it may not later be used for
any nonconforming use.
B. A nonconforming use of open land may only be changed to a conforming use.
C. A nonconforming use of open land that is discontinued for more than one (1) year may not be reestablished,
and all subsequent uses of the site must be in conformance with the particular district
regulations. Any vacancy or non-use of the land regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant will be
considered discontinuance for the purposes of this requirement.
D. A nonconforming use of open land may not be enlarged to cover more land that it occupied when it became
nonconforming. The cost of any repairs or improvements to a nonconforming use of open land shall not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the then-current County tax assessed value of the land. Before any repairs or
improvement activity commences on the site of a nonconforming use of open land a list of all the repairs or
improvements proposed to be completed, along with cost estimates for each activity, shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator for a written determination that the proposed repairs or improvements comply
with the requirements of this Chapter. ('72 Code, § 1504) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) Penalty, see §153.999
[formerly known as § 153.223]
155.306. Nonconforming Use of Structures.
A nonconforming use of a structure is a use in a structure existing prior to the adoption of this Title which would not
be permitted by this Title in the district in which it is located. This type of use may be continued subject to the
following limitations.
A. A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same
classification or of a higher classification or to a conforming use. The determination of the classification of
the use is based on the district in which the use would be allowed by right under this Title. The change
from one nonconforming use to a different nonconforming use must not generate any more truck or
automobile traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or fumes than the original nonconforming use.
B. Once a nonconforming use of a structure has been changed to a conforming use, it will not be allowed to
return to any nonconforming use.
C. Maintenance and repairs necessary to keep a structure which houses a nonconforming use in safe and sound
condition are permitted. No structural alterations are allowed to any structure containing a nonconforming
use except for those required by an order from the office or agent authorized by the Board of
Commissioners to issue building permits to ensure safety of the structure, and where the cost of such
repairs do not exceed forty percent (40%) of the then-current County tax assessed value of the structure.
Before any construction activity commences or any building permit is issued, a list of all proposed work,
along with cost estimates for each activity, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for written
determination that it complies with the requirements of this Chapter.
D. A nonconforming use of a structure may be enlarged or extended only into portions of the structure which
existed at the time that the use became nonconforming and which were designed or arranged to
accommodate the use. No structural alterations are allowed to any structure containing a nonconforming
use. The cost of such renovations to a nonconforming use of a structure shall not exceed forty percent
(40%) of the then current County tax assessed value of the structure. Before any construction activity
commences or any building permit is issued, a list of all proposed work, along with cost estimates for each
activity, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for written determination that it complies with the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 3 - 4
requirements of this Chapter. Existing nonconforming residential uses in a business or industrial district
may be enlarged or extended if no additional dwelling units result from the enlargement or extension. (Ord.
No. 1418, passed 2-14-05)
E. A nonconforming use of a structure that is discontinued for more than one year may not be re-established,
and all subsequent uses of the structure must be in conformance with the particular district regulations. Any
vacancy or non-use of any portion of the structure housing the nonconforming use regardless of the intent
of the owner or tenant will be discontinuation for the purpose of this Chapter. ('72 Code, § 1505) (Ord.
477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 875, passed 5-9-94) Penalty, see § 153.999 [formerly known as § 153.224]
155.307. Reconstruction of Damaged Structures.
A. When a structure on a nonconforming lot is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, or condemnation
proceedings, the structure may be repaired and restored to its original dimensions and condition as long
as a permit authorizing the reconstruction is issued within one (1) year of the occurrence of the damage,
and the reconstruction work has received a Certification of Completion and/or Occupancy, as appropriate,
within eighteen (18) months of the damage. ('72 Code, § 1506) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly
known as § 153.225]
B. When a structure containing a nonconforming use and not also on a nonconforming lot or being a
nonconforming structure, is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, the structure may be repaired and
restored to its original dimensions and condition as long as a permit authorizing the reconstruction is issued
within one (1) year of the occurrence of the damage, and the reconstruction work has received a Certificate
of Completion and/or Occupancy, as appropriate, within eighteen (18) months of the damage.
C. When a nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, the structure may be
repaired and restored only to current dimensional limits of the zoning district in which it is located as long
as a permit authorizing the reconstruction is issued within one (1) year of the occurrence of the damage,
and the reconstruction work has received a Certificate of Completion and/or Occupancy, as appropriate,
within eighteen (18) months of the damage.
155.308. Nonconforming Signs.
A nonconforming sign is one which existed prior to the adoption of this Title but which does not meet the standards
for signs for the use or the district in which it is located. A nonconforming sign may be allowed to continue subject
to the following limitations.
A. Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable materials or freestanding signs not attached
to a building or to the ground must be removed within six (6) months of the adoption of this Title.
B. A nonconforming sign will not be replaced with another nonconforming sign. However, the replacement of
paper, vinyl, film or similar lightweight material poster panels, painted boards, or other demountable
materials on nonconforming signs is allowed.
C. Minor repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming sign, such as repainting, electrical repairs, and neon
tubing repairs will be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size, shape, height, or
type or intensity of illumination of a sign will be permitted, except to make the sign comply with the
requirements of these regulations.
D. New signs related to legally established nonconforming uses may be erected, provided they comply with
the sign regulations applying to the use in the most restricted district in which the use is permitted. ('72
Code, § 1507) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) Penalty, see §153.999 [formerly known as § 153.226]
155.309. Changes in Zoning.
Any nonconformance created by a change in a zoning classification or district boundary or by a change in the
regulations in this Title will be regulated by the provisions of this Chapter. ('72 Code, § 1508) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-
88) [formerly known as § 153.227]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 1
Chapter 4. Application Requirements and Review Procedures
155.401. Amendments
The purpose of this Section is to provide a
means for amending the Matthews Land Use
Plan, the text of these regulations, and the
classification of any parcel of land identified
on the Official Zoning Map. The purpose is
not to relieve particular hardships, nor to
confer special privileges or rights to any
person, but only to make adjustments
necessary in light of changed conditions or
changes in public policy, or likely to achieve
the purposes of these regulations.
155.401.1 General Requirements for Zoning Map Changes and Amendments
A. APPLICATION AND FEE FOR AMENDMENT REQUIRED. An application for an amendment must be completed
on the forms provided and filed with the Town Planning Office, together with the necessary fee as
established by the Board of Commissioners. [formerly § 153.266]
B. PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED. The regulations imposed and the existing zoning classifications applied by
this Title may be amended from time to time, but no such amendments shall be made until a public hearing
has been held, and a recommendation has been made by the Planning Board. The public hearing may be
continued to a later date in order to provide opportunity for proposed text, conditional notes, site plan
details, or other unresolved issues to be presented and clarified during an open public session. [formerly
part of § 153.268]
C. APPEARANCE AT PUBLIC HEARING. Any person desiring to speak either for or against an application may
be present at the public hearing or arrange for a suitable agent to speak on his behalf. Or, interested parties
may submit written correspondence to the Board of Commissioners at or prior to the public hearing in order
for it to be presented at the public hearing and entered into the record. The Applicant, or his designated
agent, is compelled to appear at the public hearing. Failure to appear at the public hearing may result in the
Board of Commissioners continuing the public hearing to another date. [formerly part of § 153.268.B]
D. NOTIFICATION REQUIRED. A notice of the required public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper
having general circulation in the area by the Town once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks, or
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 2
any other alternative notice as allowed by the NC General Statutes at Article 19, Chapter 160A. When
provided by local newspaper, the notice will appear for the first time no less than ten (10) days and no more
than twenty five (25) days prior to the hearing date. If a public hearing is continued to a later date, no
additional notice is required. [formerly part of § 153.268.A]
E. ACTION BY THE PLANNING BOARD. The Planning Board shall sit in joint session with the Board of
Commissioners for a public hearing on the proposed change. No proposal to amend this Title or to rezone
property will be approved unless it is first submitted to the Planning Board for its recommendation. The
Planning Board shall make a recommendation within thirty (30) days after the application has been referred
to it following the close of the public hearing. If the Planning Board does not complete their review within
the specified period, then it will be considered the same as a favorable recommendation. The Planning
Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the Town’s
adopted Land Use Plan, any applicable small area plans, and other development policy plans. [formerly §
153.269]
F. ACTION BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. After receiving the recommendations and report of the
Planning Board, the Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance approving, modifying, or rejecting
the application or amendment. In accordance with GS 160A-75, a member of the Board of Commissioners
who is present and not excused from participating on a final vote on a requested change in zoning district or
text of this Title, and does not vote, that member’s lack of a vote will not be counted as an affirmative vote.
(Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
G. EFFECT OF DENIAL. After a public hearing, no application for a proposed zoning map change or amendment
of this Title which has been denied wholly or in part by the Board of Commissioners shall be resubmitted
for a period of one (1) year from the date of action on the original request. However, the Commissioners
may choose to allow a re-application, if after a report from the Planning Board, they determine that
there have been substantial changes in circumstances or conditions not discovered or not possible during
the previous zoning action, which may relate to the request. [formerly § 153.270]
H. NO COMMITMENT PRIOR TO PUBLIC HEARING. The Mayor, members of Town Board of Commissioners,
and members (including alternates) of the Planning Board shall make no commitment or agreement or enter
into any understanding of any zoning issues through the application process pertaining to any property
located within the Town limits until the conclusion of the public hearing on the application to amend this
Title or change the zoning map. [formerly § 153.271]
I. RELIEF FOR MINOR NONCONFORMITIES REQUIRING VARIANCE ACTIONS DURING REZONING FROM AN
OUTDATED ZONING CLASSIFICATION.
1. While an application or motion to change a parcel from a classification that is no longer available
in these regulations to a current zoning district designation may be desirable, this action may
create some conditions on a parcel that would become nonconformities. In order to reduce the
necessity of resulting multiple similar zoning variance actions, certain minor nonconforming
elements may be determined to be exempt from strict compliance through the following:
a. Any existing development which meets the setback and rear yard requirements of its
zoning district prior to amendment but will exceed front setback and/or rear yard
minimums in the proposed new zoning district, up to twenty feet (20’), will be considered
to be in conformance to the new zoning district provisions.
b. Any existing development which meets the side yard requirements of its zoning district
prior to amendment but will exceed one or more side yard minimums in the proposed
new zoning district, up to ten feet (10’), will be considered to be in conformance to the
new zoning district provisions.
c. Any existing development which meets the minimum parking requirements of its zoning
district prior to amendment but will be deficient in required parking by up to ten percent
(10%) for parcels up to two (2) acres in size, or will be deficient by up to fifteen percent
(15%) for parcels greater than two (2) acres, will be considered to be in conformance to
the new zoning district provisions.
d. Any existing development which did not have to meet any minimum landscape
regulations prior to amendment but will be deficient in some required landscaping in the
proposed new zoning district will be exempt from installation of new landscaping to meet
current standards.
e. Any existing development which meets the landscaping requirement imposed on it at the
time of the last successful zoning action on the site but would not be in compliance in the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 3
proposed new zoning district, will be considered to be in conformance to the new zoning
district provisions.
f. Any existing development which meets the signage provisions imposed on it at the time
of the last successful zoning action on the site but would not be in compliance in the
proposed new zoning district, will be considered to be in conformance with the new
zoning district provisions if both: any single sign on the site is no more than twenty
percent (20%) greater in sign area than what would be allowed in the proposed zoning
district; and the total signs on the site are not in aggregate more than fifteen percent
(15%) greater in sign area and number than would be allowed under the proposed zoning
district.
2. Any site which has existing development and utilizes one or more of the exemptions listed in §
155.401.1.I.1, above, may continue in active use and may change from one land use to another
under the exemptions listed above. When changes are made to the improvements on the parcel,
the following apply:
a. If structural changes are considered for any structure, then the provisions of § 155.304,
Nonconforming Structures, shall apply. In cases where the application of these standards
creates a significant hardship, a zoning variance may be requested.
b. If any additions or changes are considered for on-site parking, or are required as a result
of a change in use, then the current parking standards must be fully met. Parking lot
landscaping requirements must also be met for any new or revised parking lots. In cases
where the application of these standards creates a significant hardship, a zoning variance
may be requested. Restriping or repaving of existing pavement without removal of the
existing hard surface shall not be considered revision. Removal or disturbance of the
existing parking hard surface pavement (including gravel) shall require compliance to
current standards in that portion of the parking lot which is being impacted. When there is
a clear limit to the disturbance, only that disturbed portion is subject to compliance with
current standards.
c. If any changes are made to a sign on the site that has been exempted under §
155.401.1.I.1.f, then the replacement sign must meet current standards but the overall
exemption may still apply for the remainder of the site.
d. When a developed parcel has utilized one or more of the exemptions at § 155.401.1.I.1
and later is considered for significant or total redevelopment, then all standards in place
at the time of redevelopment will be required. For purposes of this paragraph, significant
redevelopment means any land disturbing activity whose cost exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the County tax market value of the property. [formerly § 153.272]
155.401.2 Additional Standards and Criteria for Amending the Town Land Use Plan
A. THE ROLE OF THE LAND USE PLAN IN ADMINISTRATION OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. The
Matthews Land Use Plan shall serve as the basic policy guide for the administration of this Title. The Land
Use Plan is a statement of goals and policies to guide new development, redevelopment and infrastructure
investment decisions in the Town. It therefore, is the intent of the Town to administer this Title in
accordance with the Land Use Plan. The goals and policies of the Land Use Plan may be amended from
time to time to meet changing community preferences, needs and requirements. Such amendments may at
times be necessary to accommodate proposed development or redevelopment of property that may be
inconsistent with the Land Use Plan. This Section establishes the procedures for amending the Land Use
Plan.
B. INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS. An amendment to the Land Use Plan may be initiated only by the Planning
Board, the Board of Commissioners, or the Owner of property proposing development of such property
under this Title that may be inconsistent with the Land Use Plan.
C. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. The Town Board of Commissioners shall call for a notice of public hearing
on the application and the notice of public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive
calendar weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. or any other alternative notice as
allowed by the NC General Statutes at Article 19, Chapter 160A. When provided by local newspaper, the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 4
notice shall be published the first time not less than ten (10) days and no more than twenty five (25) days
before the date fixed for the public hearing.
D. APPLICATION FOR AMENDING THE LAND USE PLAN.
1. FILING AN APPLICATION. Where an amendment to the Land Use Plan is proposed by someone
other than the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners, an application requesting the
amendment shall be filed with the Planning Director. The application shall be accompanied by a
written statement from the applicant stating the basis for the request.
2. STAFF REVIEW. Upon receiving an application requesting an amendment, or upon an instruction
from the Board of Commissioners, or Planning Board, that it will consider a proposed amendment,
the Planning Director shall review the proposed amendment to evaluate its effect on the integrity
of the Land Use Plan and this Title. The Planning Director may require review by appropriate
Town departments and other government agencies in which case the applicant will pay any review
fees that may be required. Prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Planning Director shall
deliver a written report incorporating or summarizing the comments of the Planning Director,
other Town departments, and other government agencies.
3. ACTION BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
a. The Planning Board shall sit in joint session with the Board of Commissioners for a
public hearing on the proposed amendment.
b. In considering the amendment, the Planning Board shall review the proposed
amendment, the standards set forth in § 155.401.2.D.4 below, the report of the Planning
Director, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing or
otherwise submitted. Based on this information, the Planning Board shall submit, within
a reasonable time and recommendation to the Board of Commissioners on whether or not
the proposed amendment should be adopted.
4. STANDARDS FOR REVIEWING PROPOSED LAND USE PLAN AMENDMENTS. In deciding whether to
recommend adoption of a proposed amendment to the Land Use Plan, the Planning Board shall
consider whether the amendment is necessary based on one or more of the following factors:
a. There has been a change in projections or assumptions (such as demographic trends or
the availability of public facilities) from those on which the Land Use Plan is based;
b. The data used as the basis for formulating the Land Use Plan are in error or out of date;
c. New issues or needs have presented themselves to the Town that are not adequately
addressed in the Land Use Plan; or
d. The amendment will not adversely affect the character of the area in which the proposed
development is to be located.
5. ACTION BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. After receiving the recommendations of the Planning
Board, the Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance approving, modifying, or rejecting
the amendment. The Board of Commissioners may refer the matter back to the Planning Board
for further consideration.
E. SMALL AREA PLANS AS APPENDICES. A small area plan, neighborhood plan, or a similar plan which explains
and illustrates desired development concepts for a sub region of the Town may be adopted as an Appendix
to the Land Use Plan. Such area plan shall follow the same review and approval process as an amendment
to the Land Use Plan, as outlined in § 155.401.2.D above. The provisions within an Appendix shall be
considered as outlining adopted policies and preferred development patterns for that portion of the Town
the same as the main body of the Land Use Plan.
F. TYPOGRAPHICAL OR DRAFTING ERRORS. Notwithstanding any other provisions set forth above,
amendments to correct typographical or drafting errors in the Land Use Plan may be adopted by the Board
of Commissioners at a regular meeting without the posting or personal delivery of prior notice and without
a public hearing.
155.401.3 Additional Standards and Criteria for Amending the Regulations of this Title
In addition to the requirements set forth in § 155.401.1 applications to amend the regulations of this Title shall
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 5
comply with the following:
A. INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS. Amendments to the text of this Title may be initiated by the Board of
Commissioners, by the Planning Board, the Planning Director, by any person having proprietary interest in
property in the Town, or by any interested citizen of the Town.
B. APPLICATION FOR AMENDING THE REGULATIONS OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. Where an
amendment to text of this Title is proposed by someone other than the Planning Director, Planning Board
or Board of Commissioners, an application requesting the amendment shall be filed with the Planning
Director. The application shall be in a form determined by the Planning Director and shall include the
section(s) of this Title to be amended and the proposed text. An application to amend the text initiated by
someone other than the Board of Commissioners or Planning Board shall only be accepted after a preapplication
meeting with Planning Office staff has been held.
C. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. The Town Board of Commissioners shall call for a notice of public hearing
on the application and the notice of public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive
calendar weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area., or any other alternative notice as
allowed by the NC General Statutes at Article 19, Chapter 160A. When provided by local newspaper, the
notice shall be published the first time not less than ten (10) days and no more than twenty five (25) days
before the date fixed for the public hearing.
D. PROCEDURE FOR AMENDING THE REGULATIONS OF THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.
1. STAFF REVIEW. Upon receiving an application requesting an amendment, or upon an instruction
from the Board of Commissioners, or Planning Board, that it will consider a proposed amendment,
the Planning Director shall review the proposed amendment to evaluate its effect on the integrity
of this Title. The Planning Director may deliver copies of the proposed amendment to appropriate
departments and government agencies for review and comment. Prior to the scheduled public
hearing, the Planning Director shall deliver a written report incorporating or summarizing the
comments of the Planning Director, other Town departments, and other agencies.
2. ACTION BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
a. The Planning Board shall sit in joint session with the Board of Commissioners for a
public hearing on the proposed amendment.
b. In considering the amendment, the Planning Board shall review the proposed
amendment, the report of the Planning Director, and any oral and written comments
received before or at the public hearing or otherwise made part of the record. Based on
this information, the Planning Board shall submit, within thirty (30) days of date of
referral, a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners on whether or not the proposed
amendment should be adopted. The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether
the proposed text amendment is consistent with the Town’s adopted Land Use Plan, any
applicable small area plans, and other development policy plans.
3. ACTION BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. After receiving the recommendation from the
Planning Board, the Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance approving, modifying, or
rejecting the amendment.
E. ALTERNATE PROCEDURE ON MOTIONS. When a proposed text change is initiated by motion from the
Board of Commissioners, the Planning Board may review and make recommendation regarding the
suggested change prior to the public hearing. The Planning Board shall sit in joint session with the Board
of Commissioners for the public hearing, and at the close of the hearing the Board of Commissioners may
act on the request or may refer the proposed text amendment back to the Planning Board for further
consideration and recommendation. The Planning Board shall submit a recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners within thirty (30) days of date of referral, if the motion is sent to them after close of public
hearing. The Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance approving, modifying, or rejecting the
amendment.
155.401.4 Additional Standards and Criteria for Amending the Zoning Map
In addition to the requirements set forth in § 155.401.1 applications to amend the zoning map shall comply with the
following:
A. INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS. Amendments to the zoning map for a Traditional district classification may
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 6
be proposed by any person. A Parallel Traditional or Conditional-Only district classification will be
considered only if the application is made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent.
[formerly part of § 153.201(A)]
B. APPLICATION FOR AMENDING THE ZONING MAP. Every application for an amendment to the zoning map
shall be filed with the Planning Director. An application to amend the zoning map or to make revisions to a
previously-approved conditional zoning district shall only be accepted after a pre-application meeting with
Planning office staff has been held with the property owner(s) and/or agents.
C. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. In addition to the requirements for notification in § 155.401.1.D, the
following forms of notice shall be provided:
1. NOTICE BY MAIL. The owner of the subject parcel(s) of land, and the owners of all parcels of land
which abut, are across a public right-of-way, and/or are wholly or partially within one hundred feet
(100’) of any point of the subject property, as shown on the most current county tax listing, shall be
mailed a notice of a public hearing on the proposed zoning map amendment by first class mail. The
applicant shall prepare such notices and shall deliver said notices to the Planning Office at the time
of zoning application submission. If any citizen submits a written statement regarding the proposed
zoning change to the Planning office and Town Clerk at least two (2) business days prior to the
scheduled decision date, the Clerk shall deliver the written statement to the Board of
Commissioners. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)[formerly part of § 153.268.A]
2. EXCEPTION TO NOTICE BY MAIL. The first class mail notice required in § 155.401.4.C.1, above,
shall not be required if the zoning map amendment directly affects more than fifty (50) properties,
owned by a total of at least fifty (50) different property owners, and the Town elects to use the
expanded published notice provided for in this subsection. In this instance, the Town may elect to
either make the mailed notice provided for in § 155.401.4.C.1 or may, as an alternative, elect to
publish notice of the hearing as required by GS 160A-364 but provided that each advertisement
shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be
effective for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the newspaper which
publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area,
according to the address listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected properties,
shall be notified according to the provisions of § 155.401.4.C.1. [verbatimfrom GS 160A-364]
3. NOTICE BY POSTING A SIGN. When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the Town shall
prominently post a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for rezoning or on an adjacent
public street or highway right-of-way. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed
zoning map amendment, posting a sign on each individual parcel is not required, but the Town
shall post sufficient notice signs to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. [verbatim
fromGS 160A-364]
D. PROCESS FOR AMENDING THE ZONINGMAP.
1. STAFF REVIEW. Upon receiving an application requesting a zoning map amendment, or upon an
instruction from the Board of Commissioners, or Planning Board, that it will consider a proposed
amendment, the Planning Director shall review the proposed amendment to evaluate its effect on
the integrity of the Land Use Plan and this Title. The Planning Director may deliver copies of the
proposed zoning map amendment to appropriate departments and government agencies for review
and comment. Prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Planning Director shall deliver a written
report incorporating or summarizing the comments of the Planning Director, other Town
departments, and other agencies.
2. ACTION BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
a. The Planning Board shall sit in joint session with the Board of Commissioners for a
public hearing on the proposed zoning map amendment.
b. In considering the amendment, the Planning Board shall review the proposed
amendment, the report of the Planning Director, and any oral and written comments
received before or at the public hearing or otherwise submitted. Based on this
information, the Planning Board shall submit, within thirty (30) days of date of referral, a
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners on whether or not the proposed zoning
map amendment should be granted.
3. ACTION BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. After receiving the recommendation of the Planning
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 7
Board, the Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance approving, modifying, or rejecting
the amendment. [formerly § 153.265.B]
4. ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ZONINGMAP AMENDMENTS.
a. When considering an application to amend the zoning map to any Traditional
classification, the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners will not evaluate the
application based on any specific proposal for the use or development of the property.
The applicant will refrain from using any graphic materials or descriptions of the proposed
development except for those which would apply to any use permitted by the requested
classification. [formerly § 153.265.C]
b. Following formal acceptance of an application by the Board of Commissioners, the
applicant may propose further adjustment to the application which results in a more
restrictive zoning district, or applicant may amend the proposed conditions in a
conditional zoning district that do not alter the requested underlying proposed district
designation. ('72 Code, § 24-1303) (Ord. No. 477, passed 2-8-88; Ord. No. 1524, passed
12-11-06; (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16) [formerly § 153.267]
E. WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATIONS. Applications for amending the zoning map or amending conditions of a
previously approved conditional zoning district may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time up to and
including fifteen (15) days prior to the initially-scheduled hearing date. It is generally not the intent of the
Board of Commissioners to permit withdrawal of applications within fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing
date. However, after that time, requests to withdraw an application must be filed with the Planning Office.
On the day of the hearing the Commissioners will decide if the withdrawal will be allowed. The Board of
Commissioners may approve a request for withdrawal if it finds that there are substantial circumstances
which warrant favorable consideration and that the withdrawal will not be detrimental to the interests of
citizens affected by the application. Application fees are non-refundable. [formerly § 153.267]
155.401.5 Administrative Amendment Approval, and Site Plan and/or Elevation Plan
Review and Approval
Changes to approved plans and conditions of development in Parallel Traditional Districts and Conditional-Only
Districts will be treated the same as changes to the zoning map and will be processed as an amendment as provided
in §§ 155.401.1 and 155.401.4. However, some minor changes or additional details in response to previously
approved zoning conditions in these conditional districts may be approved through one of the procedures listed here.
Site plan and/or elevation plan review and approval may also be a requirement for certain identified uses allowed in
some zoning districts as a use “under prescribed conditions” in the Tables of Allowed Uses at § 155.505.
A. ADMINISTRATIVE AMENDMENT. Minor changes in the detail of the approved plan which will not alter the
basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property, will not alter the uses permitted or
increase the density or intensity of development, or will not decrease the off-street parking ratio or reduce
the yards provided at the boundary of the site may be approved as an Administrative Amendment.
1. STAFF REVIEW AND APPROVAL. Upon receiving an application for an Administrative Amendment,
the Planning Director shall review the specific proposed changes to previously approved zoning
conditions to verify the level of revision requested. When the proposed changes are limited to no
more than two (2) note or drawing changes as allowed through the Administrative Amendment
process, the Planning Director may approve the changes. The Planning Director may determine
the request be reviewed by the Planning Board for action.
2 PLANNING BOARD ACTION. The Planning Board shall review any request for Administrative
Amendment submitted to the Board from the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall
provide the Planning Board with an explanation of the requested revisions to previously approved
zoning conditions, and a recommendation of action. The Planning Board may approve a request
for an Administrative Amendment, or may refer the request for change to the Board of
Commissioners for decision.
3. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ACTION. When the Planning Board refers a request for Administrative
Amendment, the Board of Commissioners shall determine whether the impact of the proposed
changes, while meeting the standard of minor changes as provide here, would be sufficient to
provide an opportunity for public input prior to action. The Board of Commissioners may schedule
a public input session or require the applicant to hold a community meeting. Notice of the public
input session or community meeting shall be sent by the applicant by first class mail to all persons
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 8
required to be notified for a change of zoning map at § 155.401.4.C.1. When the applicant holds a
community meeting separate from a regular Board of Commissioners meeting, then the applicant
shall provide a written report to the Commissioners on discussion during and results from the
community meeting. The Board of Commissioners may approve, modify and approve, or deny the
AdministrativeAmendment.
B. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS SITE PLAN AND/OR ELEVATION PLAN APPROVAL. Approved zoning map
changes involving conditional districts may include standards for greater details to be provided at a later
time. The Board of Commissioners may review and act on graphics and site plans provided to them
separate from and subsequent to a zoning application which provide details on the specific design of sites
and/or buildings. A request for Site Plan and/or Elevation Plan approval shall not require notification or
public hearing when they are in response to a condition of a previously approved zoning action on a site. In
addition, certain uses that are allowed under prescribed conditions may require site plan and/or elevation
plan review and approval by the Board of Commissioners.
1. STAFF REVIEW. Upon receiving an application for Site Plan or Elevation Plan Approval, the Planning
Director shall review the documents to verify they meet all zoning conditions for the site. The
Planning Director may deliver copies of the drawings to appropriate departments and government
agencies for review and comment. The Planning Director shall determine when sufficient information
has been provided to verify all conditions have been met, and shall deliver a written report
incorporating or summarizing comments from Planning staff, other Town departments, and other
agencies, as appropriate, with the drawings to the Board of Commissioners.
2. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ACTION. The Board of Commissioners shall approve the Site Plan and/or
Elevation Plan as presented or may request further revisions or details from the applicant. The Board
of Commissioners may not take final action until they have sufficient details on the documents to
fully illustrate the intended design, materials, and related information.
C. SITE PLAN AND/OR ELEVATION PLAN APPROVAL FOR CERTAIN USES UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS. Some
uses are identified as allowed “under prescribed conditions” in some zoning districts. Where the specific
standards to be met for these uses include a site plan and/or elevation plan review and approval by the Board of
Commissioners, then the site plan and/or elevation plan review shall follow the same process as given in §
155.401.5.B. immediately above. [formerly § 153.201(E)]
155.401.6 Conditional-Only District and Parallel Traditional District Zoning Provisions
A. PURPOSE. This Title identifies multiple residential, nonresidential, and mixed use zoning districts that may
be assigned to parcels within the Town’s jurisdiction. There are certain uses or site design layouts which
because of their nature or scale have particular impacts on both the immediate area and the community as a
whole. Development of these uses and situations may benefit the community, but their unique aspects and
needs cannot be predetermined within the confines of general district regulations. In addition,
circumstances often arise when a general district designation would not be appropriate for a certain
property, but a specific use or group of uses permitted under the district would be consistent with the
objectives of this Title. To accommodate these specific situations, Parallel Traditional and Conditional-
Only districts (conditional districts) may be employed.
B. PARALLEL TRADITIONAL DISTRICTS. The Parallel Traditional district process is established to address those
situations when a particular use may be acceptable but the Traditional classification which would allow that
use would not be acceptable. It allows the Board of Commissioners to approve a proposal for a specific use
or group of uses with reasonable conditions to assure the compatibility of the use(s) with surrounding
properties. Any use permitted under this process must also conform to the development regulations for the
corresponding Traditional zoning district. This is a voluntary procedure which is intended for firm
development proposals. It is not intended or suited for securing early zoning for tentative proposals which
may not be undertaken for some time, unless a condition is included to have all development go through a
subsequent site plan and/or elevation plan review and approval by the Board of Commissioners.
1. Potential uses which may be considered for a Parallel Traditional district are restricted to those
uses permitted in the corresponding Traditional zoning district. Uses permitted in Parallel
Traditional districts are subject to all applicable development standards and requirements for that
use listed in the corresponding Traditional zoning district.
2. The application for a Parallel Traditional district must contain information and/or site plans which
will indicate all of the principal and accessory uses which are proposed to be developed on the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 9
site. Subsequent to the approval of a Parallel Traditional district, only those principal and accessory
uses indicated on the approved plan may be constructed on the site. Any modifications to an
approved plan or any changes in the permitted principal or accessory uses must comply with the
provisions of § 155.401. [formerly § 153.202]
C. CONDITIONAL-ONLY DISTRICTS. The Conditional-Only district process allows certain uses to be
established in accordance with specific development standards for each use. The categories listed at §
155.501.3.B may be utilized only through the Conditional-Only district process. The standards for these
districts are provided in Chapter 5.
D. APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS. The following process applies to both the Parallel Traditional and
Conditional-Only districts. For simplicity the term conditional district shall be used in this section to refer
to both types of districts unless otherwise noted.
1. APPLICATION. Applications to establish a conditional district shall be processed in accordance
with the provisions of § 155.401.1, § 155.401.4, and § 155.401.5 as appropriate, as well as this
section. A conditional district classification shall be considered only if the application is made by
the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent. All applications must include a schematic
plan drawn to scale and supporting text which will become part of the ordinance amendment. The
applicant should include at least the items listed below:
a. A boundary survey showing the total acreage, present zoning classifications, date, and
north arrow.
b. The owners’ names, addresses, and the tax parcel numbers of all adjoining properties.
c. All existing easements, reservations, and rights-of-way, and all yards required for the
zoning district(s) requested.
d. Proposed use of land and structures. A site plan drawing, to scale, shall be submitted
showing the outline of each building, related parking and vehicular circulation, pedestrian
facilities, storage, service and loading facilities, vehicular queuing plans where
appropriate for the use, storm water improvements, recreational facilities, required
landscape screening and buffers, and all other planned improvements to the site. When
this level of detail design has not yet been prepared, the applicant may choose to submit a
generalized site plan document showing overall proposed land use by location, vehicular
and non-vehicular circulation patterns, preserved natural or historic features, and required
landscape screening and buffers. This generalized site plan must include a written
condition that all development on the site will go through a subsequent site plan and/or
elevation plan review and approval by the Board of Commissioners. In addition, general
information on the intended density and intensity of development at build-out must be
included on the site plan. For residential uses this should include the number of units and
an outline of the area where the structures will be located. For nonresidential uses this
should include the approximate square footage of all structures and an outline of the area
where such structures will be located. For applications for Early Designation to an
applicable Condition-Only district, a lesser level of detail is necessary. A site map
showing land area in the requested zoning action is minimally required, along with
additional written and/or graphic conditions matching the adopted small area plan or
general development plan for the geographic area, and conditions indicating any
proposed refinement of design standards of the proposed Conditional-Only district.
e. Traffic, parking, and circulation plans, showing the proposed locations and arrangement
of parking spaces and access points to adjacent streets, all sidewalks, bicycle facilities,
and multi-modal pathways for non-motorized transportation. For Early Designation
applications, general motor vehicle and pedestrian/bicycle circulation plans, in written
and/or graphic format, shall be submitted, sufficient to show compliance with any small
area plan or general development plan for the geographic area.
2. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.When dealing with the conditional district process, it may be desirable
to request additional information in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the
surrounding area. Therefore the Planning Director, Planning Board and/or the Board of
Commissioners may request additional information as they deem necessary. This information
may include but is not limited to the items listed below.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 10
a. Proposed screening, including walls, fences, or planting areas as well as treatment of any
existing natural features.
b. Delineation of areas within the regulatory floodplain as shown on official Flood Hazard
BoundaryMaps forMecklenburg County.
c. Existing and proposed topography at four foot (4’) contour intervals or less.
d. Generalized information on the number, height, size, or location of structures.
e. Proposed number and location of signs.
f. Approximate completion time of the project and proposed phasing, if any.
3. REVIEWAND APPROVAL.
a. In considering an application for the establishment of a conditional district, the Board of
Commissioners may attach reasonable and appropriate conditions to the location, nature,
and extent of the proposed use. Any conditions should exhibit the relationship of the
proposed use to surrounding property, proposed support areas, the timing of development,
and other matters that the Board may find appropriate or the applicant may propose. The
applicant will have a reasonable opportunity to consider and respond to any such
requirements prior to final action by the Board of Commissioners. All conditions
included in any conditional zoning approval require agreement of the property owner,
which may be accomplished by the owner’s authorized agent.
b. In evaluating an application for the establishment of a conditional district, it is
appropriate for the Commissioners to consider the following.
i. The policies and objectives of the Matthews Land Use Plan and any relevant
small area plan, particularly in relation to the proposed site and surrounding
area.
ii. The potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regard but
not limited to traffic, storm drainage, land values, and compatibility of land use
activities.
c. In the review and approval of a Parallel Traditional district, emphasis will be given to an
evaluation of the characteristics of the specific use(s) proposed in relationship to
surrounding properties.
4. EFFECT OF APPROVAL. If an application is approved, the conditional district established and all
conditions attached to the approval are binding on the property. All subsequent development and
use of the property must be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. The intent of
this type of zoning is to provide an alternative procedure for specific development proposals. It is
intended that all property be zoned only in accordance with firm plans to develop. Therefore,
three years from approval, the Planning Board will examine the progress made to develop in
accordance with approved plans to determine if active efforts are proceeding. If it is determined
by the Planning Board that active efforts to comply with the approved plan are not proceeding, a
report will be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners which may recommend that action be
initiated to remove the conditional district in accordance with the amendment procedures outlined
in § 155.401.1 and § 155.401.4.
5. ZONINGMAP DESIGNATION. Following Board of Commissioners approval of a conditional district,
the property in question will be identified on the zoning map by the appropriate Parallel Traditional
or Conditional-Only district designation. [formerly § 153.201]
155.401.7 Use of Flexible Design Standards
A. OPPORTUNITY TO APPLY. Certain conditional zoning districts are intended to allow flexibility in overall
design through the use of Flexible Design Provisions. Because it is not always possible to anticipate
variations or improvements in the development types or to accommodate changes with broad, allencompassing
regulations which could create good quality of life opportunities, these provisions allow the
Board of Commissioners to consider and evaluate new and flexible design concepts in a specially designated
and controlled setting.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 11
1. The R-VS SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT Conditional-Only districts provide such a setting.
Therefore, the opportunity for flexible design standards may be included as an integral part of
proposals for these districts.
2. The Cottage Cluster Housing alternative in the residential districts provide such a setting.
Therefore, the opportunity for flexible design standards may be included as an integral part of
proposals for Cottage Cluster Housing within any of the single-family zoning districts when
requested through a Parallel Traditional district process.
3. Various permitted uses within the CrC district may apply flexible design standards.
B. PURPOSE. It is the objective of these flexible design standards to encourage development proposals that
exhibit such special qualities or concepts that they may deviate from standard ordinance requirements.
These regulations are established in order that a flexible design proposal will be evaluated on its own
merits. It is recognized that some proposals or concepts will be more successful than others, and the
approval of a specific proposal in one situation does not mean that a similar proposal would be acceptable
in other circumstances. These provisions are purely optional and are a voluntary means by which land may
be developed outside of the standard ordinance requirements. These provisions are designed to evaluate
only those flexible design concepts that propose to meet a community need that would not otherwise be
met. Finally, it should be emphasized that these provisions should not be confused with or take the place of
the normal zoning and subdivision variance procedures established either in § 155.403 or § 155.712.
C. CERTAIN ZONING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS MAY BE MODIFIED. The quantitative dimensions and
locational zoning standards listed here which would normally apply to development may be modified
through the flexible design process.
1. Lot area.
2. Lot width.
3. Public street frontage.
4. Setbacks and yards.
5. Building separation.
6. Height of fences and walls.
7. Block length.
8. Maximum build-to line only when a lot has multiple street frontages (public or private street
frontages).
9. Location of off-street parking (distance from site and/or on-site or off-site provisions; partially
within a sight triangle; partially within perimeter planting or required screening; distance of
parking area and access drives from lot lines in the ENT District).
10. Specific standards set within the Conditional Only zoning districts for “Building and Structure
Design Principles” (within subsection G of each district’s section at 155.503) when they would
result in new development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances, or public/private
ventures.
11. Minimum tree canopy as called for at 155.606.7 for the ENT district only. (Am. Ord. 2269, passed
11-13-17)
D. CERTAIN INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARDS MAY BE MODIFIED. The infrastructure standards of Chapter 7
which would normally apply to development may be modified either through the subdivision variance
process or flexible design process, each as identified below.
1. Street right-of-way.
a. Street right-of-way must be at least thirty feet (30’) for a private street or alley in
accordance with the Land Development Standards Manual or other adopted street cross
sections.
b. Street right-of-way must be at least forty four feet (44’) for a two-way public street in
accordance with the Land Development Standards Manual or other adopted street cross
sections.
c. The Board of Commissioners may modify the above minimum standards as they deem
necessary or justifiable through the subdivision variance procedure as established at §
155.712.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 12
2. Street type – public or private.
a. Where a public street is used, it must be constructed in accordance with the Land
Development StandardsManual or other adopted street cross sections.
b. Where a private street is used, it must be constructed in accordance with the Land
Development Standards Manual or other adopted street cross sections. Private streets
generally will not be allowed although private alleys may be used. Private streets must be
identified on any record maps as “private street not eligible for State or Town
maintenance”.
c. The Board of Commissioners may modify the above requirements as they deem
necessary or justifiable through the subdivision variance procedure as established at §
155.712.
3. Sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, and multi-use trails (all non-motorized use paths). Where required
or used, sidewalks and other pedestrian bike facilities shall conform to the minimum width and
construction standards of Chapter 7, and to the standards as may be adopted separately for any
type of non-motorized use pathways. They may, however, deviate from the usual placement
within the road right-of-way, and may meander on both public and privately-owned land with
appropriate easements. The Board of Commissioners may consider deviations regarding location
and construction standards for non-motorized vehicular use pathways through the flexible design
procedures of this § 155.401.7.
4. Curbs and gutters. Where required or used, curbs and gutters must conform to the Land
Development Standards Manual or other adopted street cross sections, or provide sufficient
documentation to illustrate alternative construction design that will provide necessary storm water
control and adequate traffic and parking safety. The Board of Commissioners may consider
deviations regarding location and construction standards for non-motorized vehicular use
pathways through the flexible design procedures of this § 155.401.7.
E. LIMITATIONS ON PROJECT SIZE. Due to the special nature of these provisions, it may be desirable to limit
the size of the area proposed for flexible design standards. This will ensure the appropriateness of the land
use relationships with adjoining property, and/or within the development site itself, while providing needed
flexibility essential to the success of these provisions.
1. In any R-VS district, the cumulative project area which may incorporate flexible design provisions
shall not exceed ten (10) acres.
2. In any MUD district, the cumulative project area which may incorporate flexible design provisions
shall not exceed thirty (30) acres.
3. In any residential district employing the Cottage Cluster Housing option, the total project area,
when incorporating flexible design provisions, shall not exceed ten (10) acres.
F. APPLICATION PROCESS.
1. In applying for approval of a flexible design standards project, the applicant shall include a letter
to the Planning Director with a statement of intent outlining the purposes and objectives of the
proposed development; the particular development standards being modified; the special design
features or amenities being incorporated into the plan which makes the proposed development
significant and worthy of approval; identification of the individual separate locations where
flexible design provisions are proposed to be used, and the cumulative total acreage; and any other
applicable information that the applicant may feel is appropriate. The applicant must submit a site
development plan drawn to scale showing the information listed below.
a. Proposed lot configurations.
b. Proposed vehicular and non-vehicular circulation systems, off-street parking
arrangements, on-street parking locations, pedestrian and bicycle facilities and pathways.
c. Open space system, specifying what improvements, amenities, or facilities will be located
within the open space, and phasing of implementation, if phasing is proposed.
d. Proposed screening, including fences, walls, or planting areas.
e. Proposed treatment of any significant natural features.
2. The Board of Commissioners, the Planning Board, or the Planning Director or designee may
require additional information that may be necessary for an adequate review of the proposed
development. This information may include individual building concepts, intended use and design
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 13
of green or environmentally sustainable elements, proposed recreational amenities, and similar
information.
G. REVIEW AND APPROVAL. Any application for flexible design will be considered at the same time as the
related conditional district application or through a separate site plan and/or elevation plan review, as
appropriate. In evaluating an application for flexible design, the Planning Board and Board of
Commissioners will consider whether the development plan meets the following objectives.
1. Accomplishes objectives as specified in the written statement of intent.
2. Exhibits special, atypical design features or environmentally sustainable elements and creates a
thoughtful, imaginative use of land.
3. Provides for reasonable and appropriate land use relationships, both within the development itself
and with surrounding areas adjacent to the development, specifically improving neighborhood
access to employment or services opportunities.
4. Exhibits design criteria that will protect and preserve substantial natural or historic features of the
site prior to any land disturbing activity
5. Provides the community with a beneficial, alternative design concept which is potentially
applicable in other community situations. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14) [formerly § 153.207]
155.402. Vested Rights
155.402.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of GS Chapter 160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory
zoning vested right is established upon the approval of a site specific development plan. ('72 Code, § 24-1800) (Ord.
477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.240]
155.402.2 Definitions
For the purpose of this § 155.402, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
Approval Authority: shall mean the Town Board of Commissioners is authorized to grant the specific zoning
approval that constitutes a site specific development plan.
Multi-phased development: shall mean a development containing one hundred (100) acres or more that: i) is
submitted for site plan approval for construction to occur in more than one phase; and ii) is subject to a master
development plan with committed elements, including a requirement to offer land for public use as a condition of its
master development plan approval, all as provided by NCGS 160A-385.1(b). (Am. Ord. 2188, passed 11-14-16)
Property Owner: shall mean any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including the devisees,
heirs, successors, assigns, and personal representative of that owner. The property owner may allow a person
holding a valid option to purchase to act as his agent for purposes of submitting a proposed site specific development
plan.
Site Specific Development Plan: shall mean a plan of land development submitted to the Town for purposes of
obtaining a certificate of vested right which plan shall include the following items: i) a boundary survey showing
the total acreage, present zoning classifications, date, and north arrow; ii) the owners' names, addresses, and the tax
parcel numbers of all adjoining properties; iii) all existing easements, reservations, and rights-of-way and all yards
required for the zoning district requested; iv) proposed use of structures and land (for residential uses, this should
include the number of units and an outline of the area where the structures will be located; for nonresidential uses,
this should include the approximate square footage of all structures and an outline of the area where the structures
will be located); and, v) traffic, parking, and circulation plans, showing proposed locations and arrangement of
parking spaces and access points to adjacent streets. Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a variance, a Sketch
Plan, or any other document which fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a
specified parcel or parcels of property shall constitute a site specific development plan.
Vested Right: shall mean a right pursuant to GS 160A-385.1 to undertake and complete the development and use of
property under the conditions and terms of an approved site specific development plan, upon receipt of a certificate
of vested right. ('72 Code, § 24-1801) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly §
153.241]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 14
155.402.3 Obtaining a Certificate of Vested Right
A. CERTIFICATE OF VESTED RIGHT CONCURRENT WITH SUBMITTAL OF A PARALLEL
TRADITIONAL OR CONDITIONAL-ONLY DISTRICT ZONING APPLICATION.
1. If the property owner so chooses, an application for vested right and fee (in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by the Town Board of Commissioners) may be submitted concurrent with a
zoning application for a conditional district rezoning. Upon the successful completion of a
conditional district zoning request, which includes a public hearing, Planning Board review, and
Town Board of Commissioners final approval, then a certificate of vested right shall be issued. ('72
Code, § 24-1802) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.242]
2. A multi-phased development request for vested right (over one hundred acres) shall be submitted
concurrent with a zoning application for a conditional district rezoning. This request will require
additional time for staff review, and will not be scheduled for public hearing on the zoning request
until the Planning office has verified all necessary information, including what is listed in
155.402.3.C. below and any data unique to the proposed development location, has been
satisfactorily submitted. The zoning public hearing will be scheduled no earlier than three (3)
months following initial submission. If the proposed development location has been previously
zoned to a conditional district through an early designation process, then the request for vested
right will be processed as though it is a change of zoning conditions for that zoning district and
therefore will follow the same review and approval steps as a zoning action. (Am. Ord. 2188,
passed 11-14-16)
B. OBTAINING A CERTIFICATE OF VESTED RIGHT INDEPENDENT OF ZONING APPLICATION. To apply for a
certificate of vested right, a property owner or his agent shall submit a site specific development plan, a fee
(in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Town Board of Commissioners) and an application for
vested right on a form supplied by the Town. The application and plan shall be accepted by the Town
Board of Commissioners and a hearing date shall be set. Following the hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may submit the application to the Planning Board for its recommendation. The Board of
Commissioners shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site specific development plan.
Conditions shall be reasonable and appropriate and relate to the relationship of the proposed use to
surrounding property, proposed support facilities, such as parking areas and driveways, pedestrian and
vehicular circulation systems, buffer and screening areas, the timing of development, and other matters the
Board of Commissioners may deem necessary for public health or safety. ('72 Code, § 24-1803) (Ord. 477,
passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord.694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.243]
C. CERTIFICATE OF VESTED RIGHT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. The Town Board of Commissioners may
request additional information as they deem necessary in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship
to the surrounding area. This information may include but is not limited to the items listed below.
A. Proposed screening, including walls, fences, or planting areas, as well as treatment of any existing
natural features;
B. Delineation of areas within the regulatory floodplain as shown on the official Flood Hazard
BoundaryMaps;
C. Existing and proposed topography at two foot (2’) contour intervals or less;
D. Generalized information on the number, height, size, or location of structures;
E. Location and size of storm water quality ponds or facilities;
F. Driveway access and off-street parking areas;
G. Proposed number, size, and location of signs; and,
H. Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate completion time of the project. ('72 Code, § 24-
1804)(Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.244]
D. PUBLIC HEARING. A public hearing date shall be set by the Town Board of Commissioners at the next
regularly scheduled meeting which includes zoning matters, subject to sufficient time for advertisement.
Notice shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town area once a week, for two
(2) successive weeks, the first notice to be published not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty five
(25) days prior to the date established for the public hearing. In addition, a notice of the public hearing
shall be sent by first class mail to the owners of all parcels of land which are wholly or partially within one
hundred feet (100’) of any point of the subject property, when calculated to exclude any public right-ofway
one hundred feet (100’) wide or less, as shown on the most current county tax listing. The applicant
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 15
shall prepare such notices to all property owners required to receive mailed notification, and shall deliver
said notices to the Planning Office at the time of application submittal for a Certificate of Vested Right.
('72 Code, § 24-1805) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.245]
155.402.4 Approval of a Site Specific Development Plan
A. CONSIDERATIONS FOR APPROVAL. The burden of proof of producing evidence to support these findings
and to overcome challenges to them shall rest entirely with the property owner. In evaluating a site specific
development plan for approval, the Board of Commissioners shall find the following:
1. The policies and objectives of the Land Use Plan, particularly in relation to the proposed site and
surrounding area shall be met.
2. The potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regard but not limited to
traffic, storm drainage, land values, and compatibility of land use activities shall be minimized to
the greatest extent possible.
3. The plan meets all specifications required by this Title.
4. The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety and will not substantially injure
the value of adjoining property if located where proposed. [formerly § 153.246]
B. APPROVAL OF SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Upon approval of a site specific development plan, a
statement shall be placed on the plan reading:
“A vested right under GS 160A-385.1 has been established for this
property as shown on this site Specific Development Plan, approved on
(date) . Unless terminated at an earlier date, the vested right shall
remain valid until (date) .”
('72 Code, § 24-1807)(Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.247]
C. OTHER REVIEWS. Following approval of a site specific development plan, nothing in this chapter shall
exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original approval, provided that those reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the
original approval. The establishment of a vested right on a property shall not preclude the Town from
creating and approving one or more overlay districts which may impose additional restrictions on the
property, provided that those restrictions do not affect the allowable type or intensity of use. The Town
may also enforce on the property any regulations adopted during the effective time period of the vested
right, which are general in nature and applicable to all property subject to the regulations of 155.402. ('72
Code, § 24-1808) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.248]
D. DURATION. A vested right shall be approved for a period of two (2) years, except a vested right for a multiphase
development (100 acres or larger) shall be approved for a period of seven (7) years. It shall be effective
immediately upon approval. Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of GS 160A-
418 and the revocation provisions of GS 160A-422 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not
expire or be revoked due to the running of time while an established vested right is outstanding. A multiphased
development shall be vested for the entire development to utilize the provisions of this Title in place
at the time of zoning and site plan approval for the initial phase of the multi-phased development. (Am. Ord.
2188, passed 11-14-16) ('72 Code, § 24-1809) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91)
[formerly § 153.249]
155.402.5 Termination of a Zoning Vested Right
A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this § 155.402 shall terminate:
A. At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings or uses for which no valid building
permit applications have been filed;
B. With the written consent of the affected property owner;
C. Upon findings by the Town Board of Commissioners, by ordinance after notice and public hearing, that
natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a
serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the
site specific development plan;
D. Upon payment to the affected property owner of compensation for all costs, expenses, and other losses
incurred by the property owner, including fees paid in consideration of financing and all architectural,
planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees incurred after approval of vested right, and interest at
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 16
the legal rate until paid;
E. Upon findings by the Town Board of Commissioners, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, that the
property owner or his representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material
misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the approval authority of the site specific
development plan; or
F. Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes development as
contemplated in the site specific development plan, in which case the Board of Commissioners may modify
the affected provisions, upon a finding, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, that the change in state or
federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan. ('72 Code, § 24-1810) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord.
694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.250]
155.402.6 Voluntary Annexation
A petition for voluntary annexation for contiguous or satellite boundaries shall contain a signed statement declaring
whether or not any vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition has been established. A
statement declaring that no vested right has been established, or the failure to sign a statement declaring an
established vested right, shall be binding on the property owner and any undeclared vested right shall be terminated.
('72 Code, § 24-1811) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly § 153.251]
155.402.7 Repealer
In the event that GS 160A-385.1 is repealed, § 155.402 shall be deemed repealed and the provisions within no
longer effective. ('72 Code, § 24-1812) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 694, passed 10-7-91) [formerly §
153.252]
155.403. Process for Deciding Interpretations, Appeals, and Variances
In fulfilling the duties listed at § 155.208, the Town Board of Adjustment shall receive and act on applications
presented for their review and action.
155.403.1 Interpretation and Variance Limitations
No request for interpretation or variance to zoning provisions of Chapters 1 through 6 inclusive, or to the Floodplain
and Flood Damage Protection Standards of Chapter 9, shall be granted that would have the effect of allowing a use
not permitted in the district in which the property in question is located.
155.403.2 Application Process
A. APPLICATION REQUIRED.
1. All interpretation or variance applications shall be filed with the Planning Office. An application
shall be considered filed with the Planning Office when delivered to the Planning Office and the
date and time of filing shall be entered on the application by the Planning Office staff.
2. An appeal of any determination, order, requirement or decision by an administrative official must
be taken within thirty (30) days after the date of decision or order which is being appealed. An
appeal shall be concurrently filed with the Town Clerk, the Planning Office and any administrative
official charged with enforcement of this Title, which shall serve as the notice of appeal finding as
required at NCGS 160A-388(b1)(1). An application shall be considered filed when delivered to
both the Town Clerk and the Planning Office and the date and time of filing shall be entered on
the application by the Planning Office staff.
B. DETERMINATION OF COMPLETE APPLICATIONS. An application for interpretation, appeal, or variance will
not be deemed properly filed unless it is complete. The Planning Office shall determine the completeness of
an application. Upon determination that the application is complete, the Board of Adjustment shall
schedule a hearing in accordance with the application schedule on file in the Planning Office.
C. NOTICE TO OFFICIAL. When an appeal is filed, the Planning Office shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment
and to any administrative official charged with enforcement of a pertinent section of this Title all documents
constituting the record relating to the action which is being appealed. An administrative or enforcement
official may include, but is not limited to, the Town Planning Director or designee, the Town Code
Enforcement Officer, the Town Zoning Administrator, the Town Public Works Director or designee, the
Town Engineer, the Town Storm Water Administrator, the Town Floodplain Administrator, and an
employee of the Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency or Mecklenburg
County Code Enforcement Division when applying Town adopted regulations.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 17
D. EFFECT OF APPEAL APPLICATION. An appeal stays all actions by the enforcement official seeking enforcement
of or compliance with the order or decision being appealed unless the enforcement official certifies to the
Board of Adjustment in an affidavit that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, or
because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with the enforcement of this
Title. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order. If enforcement
is not stayed, the appellant may request an expedited hearing, as allowed at NCGS 160A-388(b1)(6).
155.403.3 Findings of Fact for Zoning Variances
In granting any zoning variance to provisions within Chapters 1 through 6, the Board of Adjustment shall make
findings listed at § 155.208.C.1.b.i through iv that an unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application
of this Title, that the hardship is peculiar to the subject property, that the hardship is not self-created, and that the
variance is consistent with the spirit of this Title and public safety is secured. To reach these findings, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider the following standards:
A. That special or unique circumstances or conditions exist which apply to the land, buildings or uses involved
which are not generally applicable to other land, buildings, structures, or uses in the same zoning districts;
B. That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the property owner or
applicant, their agent, employee, or contractor. Errors made by such persons in the development,
construction, siting or marketing process shall not be grounds for a variance except in cases where a
foundation survey submitted to the Planning Director, or designee, before a contractor proceeds beyond the
foundation stage has not revealed an error which is discovered later;
C. That the unique hardship situations cited by the applicant are not hardships resulting from personal or
household members’ circumstances which would no longer be applicable to the location if the applicant or
household was no longer present at the property;
D. That the strict enforcement of this Title would deprive the owner or applicant of reasonable use of the
property that is substantially consistent with the intent of this Title;
E. That the granting of a variance will not result in advantages or special privileges to the applicant or
property owner that this Title denies to other land, structures, or uses in the same district, and it is the
minimum variance necessary to provide relief;
F. That the proposed use and the appearance of any proposed addition or alteration will be compatible with,
and not negatively impact, nearby properties; and
G. That the variance shall not be materially detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood. Consideration of the effects of the variance shall include but not be limited to,
increases in activity, noise, or traffic resulting from any expansion of uses allowed by the variance.
155.403.4 Conditions of Approval for Zoning Variances
In granting variances, the Board of Adjustment may impose such reasonable conditions as will ensure that the use of
the property to which the variance applies will be as compatible as practical with surrounding properties.
155.403.5 Burden of Proof
A. ZONING VARIANCES. The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the Board of Adjustment to
make its findings as set forth in § 155.403.3, as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues remains
with the applicant seeking the variance.
B. APPEALS. When an appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with § 155.403.2, the
enforcement official shall have the initial burden of presenting to the Board sufficient evidence and
argument to justify the order or decision which is being appealed. The burden of presenting evidence and
argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of persuasion.
155.403.6 Action by Board of Adjustment
A. VARIANCE APPROVAL. Before a variance action is determined to be granted, the Board of Adjustment shall
vote affirmatively by a four-fifths majority on the request and on the required findings of fact in §
155.208.C.1. A statement on each of the seven standards in § 155.403.3, or any other contested facts and
their application to the case under review, may be included to give a specific reason in support of the
motion.
B. VARIANCE DENIAL. A motion to deny a variance may be made on the basis that any one or more of the
standards and therefore required findings of fact are not satisfied or that the application is incomplete. The
motion shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support such motion. The
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 18
motion is adopted as the Board’s decision if supported by more than one-fifth of the Board’s membership
(excluding vacant seats). [Expands upon § 153.289]
C. APPEAL. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or
determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the case before it. To this end, the Board shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. A motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination which is being appealed shall include a statement of the specific
reasons or findings of fact that support the motion. If a motion to reverse or modify is not made or fails to
receive a majority vote necessary for adoption, then a motion to uphold the decision appealed from shall be
in order.
D. INTERPRETATION. The Board of Adjustment shall interpret the meaning or application of text within
this Title, zoning maps, district boundary lines and similar questions by a concurring vote of a majority.
E. WRITTEN DECISION. Each quasi-judicial decision by the Board of Adjustment shall be in writing and
signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. The decision shall become effective
when the signed decision is filed with the clerk to the board. A copy of the signed decision shall be given to
the applicant, property owner, and any person who requested in writing to receive a copy by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or first-class mail. The person delivering this notice shall certify that proper
notice has been made. [Expands upon § 153.289]
155.403.7 Other Appeal or Variance Actions
A. VARIANCE FROM SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. The procedures, standards, and requirements as
given in § 155.712 shall be followed for any request for variance from Chapter 7 Public Improvement
Standards.
B. APPEAL OR VARIANCE FROM POST CONSTRUCTION ORDINANCE REGULATIONS. The
procedures given in § 155.802.E. for actions taken by the Storm Water Advisory Committee (SWAC) shall
be followed for any request for variance or appeal to enforcement of and regulations in Chapter 8 Post
Construction StormWater Regulations.
C. APPEAL OR VARIANCE FROM FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. The Board of Adjustment shall
follow the procedures, standards, and requirements as given in § 155.904 for any request for variance or
appeal from Chapter 9 Floodplain Regulations.
D. APPEAL FROM MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS. The Board of Adjustment shall follow the
procedures given in § 155.1005.D. for any appeals of enforcement decisions or actions taken to implement
Chapter 10 Housing Code.
155.403.8 Effect of Board’s Decision
A. After the Board of Adjustment approves an interpretation or a variance, the applicant shall be required to
follow the applicable procedures of this Chapter 4 for the approval of a building permit or Certificate of
Occupancy in order to proceed with the use and development of the subject property. Where a variance is
granted, unless otherwise specified by the Board, the variance shall automatically expire if a building
permit is required and is not obtained within six (6) months from the date of the meeting at which the
Board of Adjustment rendered its decision. In addition, if six (6) months has expired, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to authorize the permit to be issued if the Zoning Administrator
determines that, based upon the Board’s decision the circumstances for granting of the variance have not
changed and would allow the issuance of the permit.
B. After the Board of Adjustment reverses or modifies an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Zoning Administrator, the appellant shall be required to follow the applicable procedures of this Chapter 4
for the approval of a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy in order to proceed with the use and
development of the subject property.
C. After the Board of Adjustment issues an interpretation on how a specific provision of this Title is to be
understood and applied, then that interpretation will be used on future situations with matching criteria.
Future amendments to clarify or further revise written provisions or zoning maps shall follow the procedures
outlined in this Chapter 4.
D. Decisions on interpretations, appeals, and variances by the Board of Adjustment may be appealed when
such appeal is to superior court in the nature of certiorari as provided by law. A petition for review shall be
filed with the clerk of superior court by the later of thirty (30) days after the decision is effective or thirty
(30) days after a written copy is given to the applicant or property owner.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 19
155.405. Subdivisions
155.405.1 General Requirements
A. PURPOSE. The provisions of these regulations are designed and enacted for the following purposes: to
promote the orderly development of the Town and its environs; to promote the coordination of streets
within subdivisions with existing or planned streets or with public facilities; to secure adequate rights-ofway
or easements for street or utility purposes; to secure adequate spaces for recreation, open space, and
school sites; to provide for the distribution of population and traffic in a manner which will avoid
congestion and overcrowding; to protect and enhance environmental quality; and to create conditions
essential to health, safety, convenience and the general welfare. [formerly § 152.01]
B. JURISDICTION. The provisions of these regulations apply to all subdivision activities for which approval
under these regulations is required in the Town ofMatthews. [formerly § 152.02]
C. APPLICABILITY. A subdivision shall include all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate
or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets; but, the following shall not be considered a subdivision nor be subject to the requirements
of the regulations of this § 155.405:
1. The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where
the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards
of these regulations;
2. The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street right-of-way dedication
is involved;
3. The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; and
4. The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is not greater than two acres into not
more than three lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of these regulations and the underlying zoning district.
[formerly the definition of "subdivision" from § 152.10]
D. COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL PLANS. When a proposed subdivision embraces any part of a proposed
thoroughfare, school, park, or recreation site, or other public facility which has been designated in the
officially adopted plan of the Town or CRTPO, that planned facility shall be platted and designated by the
subdivider in the location shown on the plan in accordance with § 155.405.4.L, § 155.405.4.M, §
155.405.4.N, and § 155.405.4.O. ( Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17) [formerly § 152.04]
155.405.2 Subdivision Plat Required
After the effective date of this Title and pursuant to GS 160A-372, a Final Plat shall be prepared, approved and
recorded pursuant to the provisions of this Title whenever any subdivision of land occurs. [formerly § 152.20]
155.405.3 Approval Prerequisite to Plat Recording
Pursuant to GS 160A-373, no Final Plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the Town shall be recorded by the
Register of Deeds of Mecklenburg County until it has been approved as provided by this Title. To obtain approval
of a Final Plat the subdivider shall follow the procedures established in this Chapter.
155.405.4 General Subdivision Design Criteria
The following statements provide general requirements and policies to be used in the design, review, and approval
of any subdivision under the jurisdiction of these regulations. As stated at § 155.701.C, these provisions also apply
to any proposed rezoning, expansion of an existing development (40% or more increase in building square footage
or outdoor use area), any new development, or any redevelopment of land where they logically can apply (i.e., not §
155.405.4.Q since subdivision names would not apply to a development site not involving a formal subdivision final
plat). (Am. Ord 2059, passed 12-8-14)
A. CONSISTENCY WITH ADOPTED PUBLIC PLANS AND POLICIES. All subdivisions of land approved under these
regulations shall be consistent with the most recently adopted plans and policies for the area in which they
are located and conform to the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning. This includes general
policy regarding development objectives for the area as well as specific policy or plans for public facilities
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 20
such as streets, parks and open space, schools, and other similar facilities.
B. CONFORMITY. All proposed subdivisions shall be planned so as to facilitate the most advantageous
development of the entire neighboring area. In areas where nearby development has occurred, new
subdivisions should be planned to protect and enhance the stability, environment, health and character of
the neighboring area.
C. EXTENSION OF EXISTING STREETS. The proposed street system shall extend streets on their proper projections
at the same or greater width than the minimum required by these regulations. Emphasis will be placed on
the adopted Comprehensive Transportation Plan or thoroughfare plan and any adopted small area plans in
the determination of street extensions and connections. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
D. ACCESS TO ADJOINING UNSUBDIVIDED PROPERTY. The proposed street system shall be designed to provide
for desirable access to and not to impose undue hardship upon unsubdivided property adjoining the
subdivision and to provide interconnection to similar adjacent uses when such connection would facilitate
traffic movement in the area. Reserve strips adjoining street rights-of-way for the purpose of preventing
access to adjacent property are not permitted.
E. RELATIONSHIP TO TOPOGRAPHY. In sloping terrain, streets should parallel the contours of the land insofar
as practicable, to avoid steep grades and the undue concentration of storm water surface runoff.
F. MATURE TREES AND NATURAL VEGETATION. Streets and development sites shall be designed to protect
and preserve, to the greatest extent practicable, stands of mature trees and other areas of significant natural
vegetation. Streetscape trees shall be incorporated along all new public or private streets, and should utilize
existing trees to the greatest extent possible. Streetscape trees shall follow the Town’s adopted plans along
existing roads. Interior landscaping within newly platted lots should be designed to incorporate and
preserve existing trees. (Ord. No. 1618, passed 4-14-08)
G. ACCESS TO PARKS, SCHOOLS, GREENWAYS, ETC. Streets shall be designed or walkways dedicated to assure
convenient access to parks, greenways, playgrounds, schools and other places of public assembly. Dedicated
walkways or easements shall not be less than fifteen feet (15’) in width and may be required to be large
enough and structurally capable of providing vehicular access for maintenance vehicles.
H. NEIGHBORHOOD CONNECTIVITY. Subdivisions shall be designed to connect to adjacent neighborhoods by
street to the greatest extent practicable for improved access for emergency services without encouraging a
significant increase in volume of traffic or speed of motor vehicles. Subdivisions shall also be designed to
incorporate bicycle and pedestrian facilities in such a manner as to allow for access within and between
neighborhoods.
I. RELATIONSHIP TO RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY. When a subdivision adjoins a railroad right-of-way the
subdivider may be required to arrange the street pattern to provide for the future grade separation of street
and railroad crossings.
J. HALF STREETS. Whenever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract of land to be subdivided the other
half of the street shall be platted within such tract. New half streets are prohibited.
K. PARALLEL STREETS ALONG THOROUGHFARES. Where a tract of land to be subdivided adjoins a federal or
state highway or a major arterial street, the subdivider may be required by the Town or the North Carolina
Department of Transportation (NCDOT) to provide a street parallel to the highway or to utilize reverse
frontage on an interior street for the lots to be developed adjacent to the highway. Where reverse frontage is
established, deed restrictions or other means shall be provided to prevent private driveways from having
direct access to the highway or street.
L. PUBLIC PARK, GREENWAY, RECREATION, AND OPEN SPACE SITES. The subdivider of each subdivision
which includes residential lots shall dedicate a portion of such land or pay a fee in lieu of land dedication,
in accordance with Chapter 7, for public park, greenway, recreation, and open space sites to serve the
recreational needs of the residents of the subdivision.
M. PUBLIC SCHOOL SITES. When a tract of land that appears in an adopted plan or policy document as a future
public school site falls within an area proposed to be subdivided, the Planning Director shall notify the
Charlotte- Mecklenburg Board of Education of the proposed subdivision and its effect on the future public
site. The Board of Education must decide within thirty (30) days if it wishes to reserve the site for future
acquisition. If the site is not to be reserved, then the subdivision shall be processed in the normal fashion.
If the Board of Education does wish to reserve the site, then the subdivision shall not be approved without
such reservation. The Board of Education shall have eighteen (18) months from the date of Preliminary
Plan approval to acquire the site by purchase, receipt of a dedication or by initiating condemnation
proceedings. The Board of Education may also choose to release the site from reservation at any time prior
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 21
to the end of the eighteen (18) month period. If at the end of the eighteen (18) month period none of the
actions listed above have commenced, the subdivider may consider the land free of any reservation.
N. PUBLIC FACILITIES. When a tract of land that appears in an adopted plan or policy document as a future site
for any community service facility, including but not limited to police and fire stations, libraries, public
housing, or other public use, falls within the area proposed to be subdivided, the Town staff shall notify the
appropriate agency of the proposed subdivision and its effect on the future public site. The appropriate
agency must decide within thirty (30) days if it wishes to reserve the site for future acquisition. If the site is
not to be reserved, then the subdivision shall proceed in the normal fashion. If the agency does wish to
reserve the site, then the subdivision shall not be approved without such reservation. The appropriate
agency shall have eighteen (18) months from the date of Preliminary Plan approval to acquire the site by
purchase, receipt of a dedication or by initiating condemnation proceedings. The appropriate agency may
also choose to release the site from reservation at any time prior to the end of the eighteen (18) month
period. If, at the end of the eighteen (18) month period, none of the actions listed above have commenced,
the subdivider may consider the land free of any reservation.
O. THOROUGHFARE RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided includes any part of any
arterial street shown on the adopted Comprehensive Transportation Plan, the right-of- way for the arterial
street shall be platted and dedicated or reserved in accordance with Chapter 7. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-
17)
P. STREET NAMES. All proposed street names must be reviewed by Matthews Planning Department, Public
Works, Police Department, and Fire & EMS Department before being submitted to Mecklenburg County
for final approval. A proper street name shall include one (1) to three (3) words as the main name and a
street type suffix. A proper street name may include a directional prefix, and/or “extension” following the
street type suffix. Proposed street names shall adhere to the following guidelines: do not duplicate nor too
closely approximate phonetically the name of any street within the Town or county; do not use business
names; do not include punctuation; do not use possibly offensive names; and do not include directional
suffixes. Where proposed streets are extensions of existing streets, or align with an existing street, the
existing names should be used, except where a new name can reasonably be used to facilitate the proper
street address numbering or to avoid further street name duplication. Words shall not be used as the first
word of a street name if used in two other locations within the county. The only exception allowed is use
of a generic label naming a topographic feature or a color, which can be part of multiple street names.
(Am. Ord 2176, passed 9-12-16)
Q. SUBDIVISION NAMES. Proposed subdivision names shall not duplicate nor too closely approximate
phonetically the name of any subdivision within the Town, unless applicant presents compelling reasons to
support proposed name. Compelling reasons include known and documented historical reference names specific
to the history of the Town of Matthews. Subdivision names should minimize the use of words used two (2) or
more times as part of names of streets (except streets internal to the subdivision), residential subdivisions,
commercial subdivisions or apartment complexes within the county except where the new subdivision is
an extension of or adjacent to an existing subdivision with the same name. Applicants may present requests
to deviate from this ordinance prior to the completion of any new subdivision. Approval of requested names
shall be reviewed on an individual basis and solely at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners. (Am.
Ord. 2091, passed 6-8-15)
R. EASEMENTS. Easements for public and private utilities and drainage shall be provided on all lots when
requested by an appropriate utility agency or as determined to be necessary by the Town Public Works
Director. Easements shall be established to the width and in the locations required by the County Land Use
and Environmental Services Agency, the Town Public Works Director and the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Utility Department as appropriate, but in no case shall be less than a minimum of ten feet (10’) in width
and shall be centered on rear and side lot lines. A utility easement not less than five feet (5’) in width shall
be provided along the front lot line. More than one easement may be required on a lot to accommodate the
various utilities and drainage facilities.
S. PROPOSED WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The preliminary subdivision plan shall be accompanied by
satisfactory evidence as to the proposed method of providing potable water and a system of sanitary sewage
collection and disposal.
1. Where these systems are to be a part of the Charlotte-Mecklenburg public water and sanitary
sewerage system, the acceptability of the proposed system should be attested by the approval of
the preliminary subdivision plan by the utility department or a letter from the utility department
stating the availability of water and/or sewer service and that the subdivision shall be allowed to
connect to the system upon completion and dedication of the systems in the development.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 22
2. When the proposed systems to serve more than one structure do not contemplate the use of
facilities owned and operated by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department, the proposed
systems must meet the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department Standards and shall be
reviewed and approved by the agency or agencies with jurisdiction over the approval. Evidence
must be provided by the developer prior to the Preliminary Plan approval of the required soil and
site evaluation. Prior to the approval of the Final Plat evidence must be provided that both the
sewer and water system designs meet Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department Standards and
have been approved for construction. Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any
structure, evidence must be provided that both the water and sewer systems have been approved
and are operational for the structures in question. Where local standards exceed those of State or
Federal agencies and where those standards may be enforced over those of State or Federal
agencies, then the State Department of Environment and Natural Resources shall coordinate all
reviews for such standards. However, the approval of the proposed systems remains with the
responsible agency or agencies, which may include the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.
T. STORM WATER. When a tract of land to be subdivided is required to comply with the Matthews Post
Construction Ordinance, Chapter 8 of this Title, and/or the storm water management standards at §
155.704, then all requirements and procedures of these provisions shall be followed. (Ord. 1585, passed 8-
13-07)
U. RESTRICTIONS ON THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING. Lots that are subject to flooding shall
not be established in subdivisions except as provided in Chapter 9. [formerly § 152.21]
V. BURIED UTILITIES. Except for overland drainage and detention, meters, and control boxes/equipment, all
public and private utilities in the subdivision shall be buried.
W. CENTRALIZED BOX UNITS (CBUs) FOR USPS MAIL DELIVERY. Where the US Postal Service
determines there is a need to utilize one or more Centralized Box Units (CBUs) in place of individual curbside
mailboxes, then the following dimensional and design criteria shall be followed:
1. Any CBU placement shall meet the requirements of the US Postal Service for unobstructed
pavement and individual CBU unit(s), and shall be situated to meet ADA requirements. CBUs shall
be placed where there is a logical, safe and direct walking path between the CBU location and the
homes, offices, or other establishments being provided with mail delivery service.
2. Any CBU structure shall not extend over the required minimum width of the public sidewalk, over
the street curb and gutter, or over any bike facility.
3. Any CBU shall not open directly toward travel lanes (bicycle or motor vehicle) within the street
without adequate space for the carrier and users to open individual unit boxes to insert or retrieve
mail.
4. A CBU shall be accessible from the adjacent sidewalk when one is provided.
5. A CBU shall be set back from the edge of pavement or back of curb at least five feet (5’) when no
sidewalk or pedestrian path is either immediately adjacent or connected by a minimum 5’ wide
solid surface path.
6. A CBU shall not be placed any closer to an intersection of two Class V, VI, or VI-L streets than
forty feet (40’).
7. A minimum of two (2) on- or off-street parking spaces shall be provided within eighty feet (80’) of
any CBU which is located on a Class IV or higher street. These parking spaces shall be placed such
that the carrier or individual visiting the CBU does not need to cross a Class IV or higher street after
exiting the vehicle. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
155.405.5 Major and Minor Subdivision Classifications
For the purposes of this § 155.405, two (2) classes of subdivisions are established, minor subdivisions and major
subdivisions, and are described as follows:
A. MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. Minor subdivisions require only approval of a Sketch Plan and a Final Plat in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 155.405.6 and 155.405.8, respectively, of this Chapter 4. A minor
subdivision has all of the following characteristics: [formerly § 152.22]
1. The subdivision has no more than nine (9) lots;
2. There is no installation of a private wastewater treatment plant or a private water supply system
for more than one lot or building site;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 23
3. There are no new proposed public or private streets, roads, or alley rights-of-way to serve the lots
being created, or improvements to an existing street;
4. There is no new installation of drainage improvements through one or more lots to serve one or
more other lots; and,
5. There are no new extensions of any needed rights-of-way or easements for the water and sewer
systemoperated by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department.
B. MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS. Major subdivisions require the approval of a Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and a
Final Plat as required by §§ 155.405.6, 155.405.7, and 155.405.8, respectively, of this Chapter. A major
subdivision is one that fails to satisfy the requirements for a minor subdivision.
155.405.6 Sketch Plan Requirements and Procedures
A. SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED. As a prerequisite for application for Preliminary Plan or Final Plat, and in order
to discuss the general purpose of the subdivision or development in the context of the Town’s established
community development policies and practices, and to ensure that required data is properly prepared and
presented before expending the time and money in preparation and review of a Preliminary Plan (for Major
Subdivisions) and a Final Plat (for Minor Subdivisions), any person desiring to subdivide land subject to
this § 155.405 before filing a Preliminary Plan or Final Plat shall file a Sketch Plan of the subdivision with
the Planning Office.
B. REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR SKETCH PLAN. When submitted, the Sketch Plan shall be on a topographical
survey and shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in
relation to existing conditions. It shall include the information identified in § 155.405.9.
C. SKETCH PLAN REVIEWPROCESS.
1. A Sketch Plan of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the specifications and
requirements set forth in § 155.405.6.B and § 155.405.9 shall be submitted to the Planning Office.
Digital and/or print copies are to be submitted to the Planning Office and Mecklenburg County
Land Use and Environmental Services Agency Department along with any applicable fees as may
be required by each agency.
2. Within thirty (30) days for a Minor Subdivision, or forty five (45) days for a Major Subdivision,
from the date of receipt of the Sketch Plan by the Planning Office the Plan Review Committee
shall review, comment and approve the Sketch Plan only if all requirements of this Title are met.
The proposed subdivision name shall be sent to Mecklenburg County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency and local emergency agencies for comments. All proposed street
names shall be reviewed by Matthews Planning, Public Works, Police, and Fire & EMS
Departments before being submitted to Mecklenburg County for final approval. If necessary, the
subdivider shall submit additional information and/or a revised Sketch Plan, as required, to the
Planning Office. Within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the revised Sketch Plan or such
additional information by the Planning Office the Plan Review Committee shall review the revised
Sketch Plan or such additional information and, if all issues have been satisfactorily resolved, the
Plan Review Committee shall approve the Sketch Plan with or without conditions. (Am. Ord. 2264,
passed 10-9-17
3. EXPIRATION. Sketch Plan approval shall be effective for no more than one (1) year from the date
of approval by the Plan Review Committee to submission of Preliminary Plan for a Major
Subdivision or Final Plat for a Minor Subdivison. The time frame for expiration does not change
with successive owners.
D. SKETCH PLAN IS NOT A COMMITMENT TO APPROVE. Approval of the Sketch Plan by the Plan Review
Committee shall in no way be construed as constituting an official act of approval for recording the
subdivision plat and does not vest the owner or developer with any developmental rights. [formerly §
152.23]
155.405.7 Preliminary Plan Requirements and Procedures
A. PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIRED. Prior to filing an application for approval of the Final Plat for Major
Subdivisions, a Preliminary Plan must be prepared and submitted as outlined here.
B. PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEWPROCESS.
1. PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE ACTION. A Preliminary Plan of the proposed subdivision prepared in
accordance with the specifications set forth in § 155.405.9 shall be submitted to the Town
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 24
Planning Office and Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency. Digital
and/or print copies are to be submitted to the Planning Office and Mecklenburg County Land Use
and Environmental Services Agency along with any applicable fees as may be required by each
agency.
2. The Plan Review Committee shall have sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the Preliminary
Plan by the Planning Office in which to review, comment and approve the Preliminary Plan if all
requirements of this Title are met. All proposed street names and the proposed subdivision name
shall be sent to local emergency agencies for comments and to Mecklenburg County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency for approval. If necessary, the applicant shall submit a revised
Preliminary Plan to the Planning Office and to the County Land Use and Environmental Services
Agency. The Plan Review Committee shall review the revised Preliminary Plan and, if all issues
have been resolved, the Preliminary Plan will then be signed by County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency as meeting all required standards.
3. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ACTION. The Preliminary Plan shall be transmitted to the Board of
Commissioners within thirty (30) days following the Plan Review Committee’s determination that
all required standards have been met. The Board of Commissioners shall approve or approve with
conditions the Preliminary Plan. If the Preliminary Plan is conditionally approved, the minutes of
the Board of Commissioners meeting shall state the measures necessary for the Final Plat to be
approved.
4. EXPIRATION. Such Preliminary Plan approval shall be effective for no more than one (1) year
from the date of approval unless, upon written request by the Applicant, the Board of
Commissioners grants an extension of time for not more than one (1) additional year. The time
frame for expiration does not change with successive owners.
C. RELEASE OF GRADING PERMIT. Preliminary Plan approval is required for the issuance of a grading permit
for any grading work on the site for the installation of any improvements in furtherance of the development.
The release of the grading permit may be authorized by the Mecklenburg County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency prior to the approval of the Preliminary Plan if the Plan Review
Committee has signed it as meeting all required standards and the matter(s) staying the approval of the
Preliminary Plan are not related to nor will have any effect on the need for grading on the site. Once the
Preliminary Plan is approved, further approvals under this provision are not required for grading permits
for individual sites within the subdivision.
155.405.8 Final Plat Requirements and Procedures
A. FINAL PLAT REQUIRED. Prior to recording a Final Plat, a Final Plat must be prepared and submitted to the
Town Planning Office for review and approval by the Planning Director or designee.
B. REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR FINAL PLAT. The Final Plat shall include the information identified in §
155.405.9.
C. FINAL PLAT REVIEWPROCESS.
1. PREREQUISITES FOR FINAL PLAT SUBMITTAL. No Final Plat will be accepted for review unless the
subdivider shall have:
a. Obtained approval of the Sketch Plan for Minor Subdivisions, or the Preliminary Plan by
the Board of Commissioners for Major Subdivisions in accordance with this Title; and,
b. Completed the installation of required improvements in accordance with the approved
Preliminary Plan and the requirements of this Title, including all required improvements
to any existing street shown on the Preliminary Plan, and which improvements have been
reviewed and inspected and approved by the Town Engineer and Mecklenburg County
Land Use and Environmental Services Agency; or,
c. Filed any required financial guarantees in a form acceptable to the Town and in an
amount determined by the Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services
Agency and/or Town Public Works Director as appropriate, with said guarantees
sufficient to assure the completion of the required subdivision improvements and any
required improvements to any existing street shown on the Preliminary Plan. These
financial guarantees include but are not limited to: transportation infrastructure, storm
water improvements, landscaping, open space, street lighting, and recreational lands.
The Final Plat may include all or only a portion of the subdivision as proposed and approved in
the Preliminary Plan provided that all required improvements to any existing street shown on the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 25
Preliminary Plan have been completed or a guarantee in an amount and in such form as approved
by the Town for such improvements prior to such Final Plat approval.
2. PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE ACTION. Within one (1) year of approval of the Sketch Plan (for Minor
Subdivisions) the subdivider shall submit the Final Plat. For Major Subdivisons, a Final Plat may
be submitted for the full development or for a portion of the subdivision as proposed and approved
on the Preliminary Plan, provided that all required improvements to any existing street shown on
the Preliminary Plan are provided for prior to any Final Plat approval. The Final Plat shall be
prepared in accordance with the specifications of § 155.405.9.
3. MECKLENBURG COUNTY LAND USE AND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES AGENCY ACTION. The
official plat(s) for recording, together with required copies and "as built" drawings and electronic
copies as required, shall be presented to the Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental
Services Agency, who shall sign the Final Plat(s) within thirty (30) days after submission as being
in compliance with this Title.
4. EFFECT OF APPROVAL. The approval of a Final Plat shall not be deemed to constitute or cause the
acceptance by the Town of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line or other
public facility shown on the plat. However, the Town may by resolution accept any dedication
made to the public of lands or facilities for streets, parks, public utility lines or other public
purposes
within the corporate limits. Acceptance or dedication of lands or facilities shall not place on the
Town any duty to open, operate, repair or maintain any street, utility line or other land or
facility, and the Town shall in no event be held to answer in any civil action or proceeding
for failure to open, operate, repair or maintain any street. The Town has no obligation to open
any street even after acceptance of dedication.
5. TOWN ACTION. Upon Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency
determination that all requirements for Final Plat approval have been met, the Town Public Works
Director/Town Engineer shall determine any required financial guarantees for streets, storm water
improvements or landscaping and receive such guarantees from the subdivider. The Town
Planning Director shall determine and receive any fees due for open space. When all financial
requirements to the Town have been completed, the Planning Director or designee shall sign
the Final Plat as approved by the Town, and shall certify the Final Plat as meeting requirements
for recordation.
6. RECORDING THE FINAL PLAT. The subdivider shall file the approved Final Plat with the Register
of Deeds for Mecklenburg County for recording within thirty (30) days after the date of approval;
otherwise, the approval shall be null and void. The subdivider shall provide copies of the recorded
plat to the Town in such number and form as determined by the Planning Director within five
(5) business days following recording of the Final Plat.
155.405.9 Contents of the Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and Final Plat
A. REQUIRED INFORMATION. Any person proposing to subdivide any parcel of land in the Town shall file with
the Planning Director and Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency a Sketch
Plan, Preliminary Plan and a Final Plat as required and described in this § 155.405 in a quantity and form
as required by the Planning Director. The Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and a Final Plat shall include
the following information:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 26
GENERAL INFORMATION:
SKETCH PLAN
PRELIMINARY PLAT
FINAL PLAT
Title Block containing the following information:
? Name of proposed subdivision [formerly § 152.25.H] ? ? ?
? Owner’s name [formerly § 152.25.H] ? ? ?
? Location (including Town, county, state) [former 152.26.A.4] ? ? ?
? Date or dates the survey was conducted and the plat prepared ? ?
? A scale of drawing expressed in feet per inch listed in words and graphics and which scale shall
not be smaller than one hundred feet (100’) to the inch [formerly § 152.25.I] ? ? ?
? Name, address, registration number, and seal of the Registered Land Surveyor [formerly §
152.25.H] ? ?
? The name of the subdivider ? ? ?
A vicinity map showing the location and relationship between the proposed subdivision and
surrounding area [formerly § 152.25.L] ? ?
Corporate limits, county lines if on the proposed subdivision ? ? ?
The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners, mortgagees, registered land surveyors,
land planners, architects, landscape architects, and professional engineers responsible for the
subdivision [formerly § 152.25.H]
?
The registration numbers and seals of the professional engineers ? ?
Date of preparation of the drawing [formerly § 152.25.I] ? ? ?
North arrow and orientation [formerly § 152.25.I] ? ? ?
The boundaries of the tract or portion to be subdivided, distinctly and accurately represented with all
dimensions shown [formerly § 152.25.A] ?
The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and
the location of existing boundary lines of adjoining lands [formerly § 152.26.A.1] ?
The names of owners of adjoining property ? ?
The names of any adjoining subdivisions of record or proposed and under review ? ?
Traffic impact analysis ?
Site calculations, including:
? Total acreage of the tract to be subdivided ? ? ?
? Acreage in parks, recreation and open space areas, and non-residential areas ? ? ?
? Total number of parcels created ? ? ?
? Acreage/square footage of the smallest lot in the proposed subdivision ? ? ?
? All applicable certificates as required at § 155.405.9.B ?
? All mapping shall comply with GS 47-30 ? ?
? A digital copy of the plat in a file format acceptable to the Town ? ? ?
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 27
A declaration of understanding, on form provided at §155.405.11, that zoning variances associated
with the building envelope on any lots within the proposed subdivision are not anticipated (Am. Ord.
2025A, passed 6-9-14)
?
Maximum sheet or page size for all maps or drawings submitted shall be twenty four inches (24”)
by thirty six inches (36”) ? ? ?
A signed declaration of intent to provide land dedication for public recreation and/or fees-in-lieu for
each new single-family lot
?
EXISTINGCONDITIONS:
SKETCH PLAN
PRELIMINARY PLAT
FINAL PLAT
The zoning classification of the tract to be subdivided and on each adjoining property ? ?
Existing property lines on the tract to be subdivided and within one hundred fifty feet (150’) on all
adjoining property
?
Existing buildings or other structures, water courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on
the land to be subdivided and within one hundred fifty feet (150’) on all adjoining property [formerly
§ 152.25.A]
? ?
The location of any archeological features ? ?
Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcroppings, ponds, lakes, streams or streambeds, wetlands,
and any other natural features affecting the site ? ?
Original contours at intervals not greater than two feet (2’) for the entire area to be subdivided and
extending into adjoining property for a distance of three hundred feet (300’) at all points where street
rights-of-way connect to the adjoining property. These contours shall be referenced to mean sea level
datum when a benchmark is located within two thousand feet (2,000’) of the proposed subdivision
[formerly § 152.25.C]
? ?
The exact location of the flood hazard, floodway, and floodway fringe from the Flood Insurance Map
or surveys of the property in question [formerly § 152.25.E] ? ? ?
Tree survey and vegetation survey ? ?
The location, sizes, inverts, dimension and material type of all existing sanitary sewer, water main and
storm sewer utilities within the proposed subdivision and immediately adjacent to the
proposed subdivision [formerly § 152.25.B]
? ?
SWIM buffers, as required ? ? ?
PROPOSED CONDITIONS:
SKETCH PLAN
PRELIMINARY PLAT
FINAL PLAT
Building lines (setbacks) for each lot [formerly § 152.25.E] ? ?
Proposed lot lines, with approximate dimensions [formerly § 152.25.E] ? ?
The lots numbered consecutively throughout the proposed subdivision ? ?
The following information and data concerning proposed streets:
? Existing and platted streets on and within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of adjoining properties
and in the proposed subdivision ? ?
? Rights-of-way, location, and dimensions, in accordance with § 155.701 [formerly § 152.25.E] ? ? ?
? Pavement widths [formerly § 152.25.E] ?
? Approximate grades
?
? Design engineering for all corners and curves
?
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 28
? Typical street cross-sections showing width and construction [formerly § 152.25.J]
?
? Existing and proposed street names [formerly § 152.25.H] ? ? ?
PROPOSED CONDITIONS (Continued)::
SKETCH PLAN
PRELIMINARY PLAT
FINAL PLAT
? Type of street dedication; all streets shall be designated either public or private ? ? ?
Proposed profiles of roadways. Where a proposed street is an extension of an existing street, the
profile shall be extended to include three hundred feet (300’) of the existing roadway and a cross
section of the existing street shall be shown. Where a proposed street within the subdivision abuts a
tract of land that adjoins the subdivision and where that street may be expected to extend into the
adjoining tract of land, the profile shall be extended to include three hundred feet (300’) of the
adjoining tract [formerly § 152.25.K]
?
Proposed Grading Plan showing proposed contours for the full-width of all street rights-of-way, along
drainage channels, and in all other portions of the subdivision where extensive grading is planned.
These requirements shall not apply where the size of the subdivision and the topography make such
information unnecessary. [formerly § 152.25.D]
?
The location and dimension of all of the following, if proposed:
? Utility and other easements ? ?
? Riding trails ?
? Natural buffers ?
? Pedestrian or bicycle paths
?
? Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated [formerly § 152.25.E]
? ?
? Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use [formerly § 152.25.E]
? ?
? Areas to be used for purposes other than residential with the zoning classification of each
stated
?
? The future ownership of recreation and open space lands in the proposed subdivision ? ?
The location of all proposed storm water retention and water quality facilities, best management
practices, and rain gardens ? ?
The location of all proposed storm drains and retention facilities, best management practices, rain
gardens, swales and appurtenances with grades, inverts and sizes indicated, together with a map of the
drainage area(s) above or below the proposed storm drains, and a copy of the data used in determining
the sizes of drainage pipes and structures. These drawings shall be coordinated with the Streetscape
Trees to clearly indicate the proposed placement of any storm water feature does not conflict with any
existing or proposed new streetscape tree. [formerly § 152.25.G]
?
The location, type, and design of proposed traffic calming devices, which shall be coordinated with
and approved by the Town Public Works Director [formerly § 152.25.F] ?
Street lighting plan, as outlined in § 155.609 ?
The proposed method of water supply and sewer disposal. Where public water or public sewer is not
available for extension to each lot in the subdivision, a written statement from the Mecklenburg
County Department of Environmental Health shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plan indicating
that each lot has adequate land area and soil conditions to accommodate the proposed methods of
water supply and sewage disposal. [formerly § 152.25.M]
?
Profiles based upon mean sea level datum for sanitary sewers and storm sewers ?
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 29
The accurate location of monuments which must be established at or near the corners of all blocks
including coordinates computed from the North Carolina Plane Rectangular Coordinate System,
provided a control monument is within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500’) of the subdivision.
These monuments shall be concrete posts not less than thirty inches (30”) long, four inches (4”) at
the top and six inches (6”) at the bottom with a copper pin in the top to mark the location of the
designated point. The monuments shall be placed flush with the level of the ground. The corners of
all lots and parcels shall be marked with iron posts driven flush with the ground. Iron posts shall be
placed where lot boundaries intersect railroad and State Department of Transportation rights-ofway.
[formerly § 152.26.A.5]
?
PROPOSED CONDITIONS (Continued):
SKETCH PLAN
PRELIMINARY PLAT
FINAL PLAT Sufficient surveying data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground every straight or curved
line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, boundary lines of reserved
or dedicated areas, including dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles, radii, central angles, and
tangent distance for the center line of curved property lines that are not the boundary line of curved
streets required or of record in Mecklenburg County. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest
one-tenth foot and all angles to the nearest minute. The maximum allowable error of linear closure shall
not be in excess of 1:10,000. In closed traverses, the sum of the measured angles shall vary with the
theoretical sum by a difference not greater than an average of 7.5 seconds per angle, or the sum total
shall not differ from the theoretical sum by more than 90 seconds, whichever is smaller [formerly
§ 152.26.A.3]
?
A copy of the proposed conditions, covenants and restrictions or similar deed restrictions (such
restrictions are mandatory when private recreation areas or open space are established in the proposed
subdivision).
? ?
Where land disturbing activity is one acre or more in size, a copy of the erosion control plan submitted
to the appropriate office of the North Carolina Department of the Environment and Natural Resources,
which complies with GS 113A, Article 4, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act of 1973. Evidence
of approval shall be provided prior to submittal of the Final Plat for approval
?
Topographic maps with contour intervals no greater than two feet (2’) at a scale no less than one inch
(1”) equals fifty feet (50’) (Am. Ord 2141, passed 4-11-16) ?
404 Wetlands areas as determined by the US Army Corps of Engineers ?
A timetable for estimated phasing, if intended, and completion of grading, infrastructure
improvements, and landscaping and exterior lighting within public rights-of-way and land to be
dedicated to the public in the area covered by the Preliminary Plan [formerly § 152.25.O]
?
When any portion of the property included in a plat must adhere to the requirements of Chapter 8, Post
Construction Ordinance and/or § 155.704, then the specific notations or management plan as called for
in that regulation must be included on the Final Plat drawing, and a copy of the operation and
maintenance agreement and BMP Maintenance Plan stamped by Mecklenburg County Register of
Deeds Office with deed book and page numbers must be provided with the plat. (Ord. 1585, passed 8-
13-07) [formerly § 152.26.A.6]
?
Construction traffic bond submitted ?
Construction traffic routing plan ?
Subdivision improvement guarantee, in accordance with § 155.405.10
[formerly § 152.26.A.8, relocated to § 155.405.10] ?
Tree maintenance and /or replacement guarantee, in accordance with § 155.405.10 and § 155.606.13.H
[formerly § 152.26.A.10, relocated to § 155.405.10; Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6—12-17] ?
Recreation Land fees-in-lieu when new single-family units are created ?
Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the Planning Director or designee to be
pertinent to the review of the Final Plat. [formerly § 152.26.A.7] ?
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 30
B. REQUIRED CERTIFICATIONS FOR FINAL PLAT. In addition to the information and data required in §
155.405.9.A, the Final Plat shall include the following certifications:
1. OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION CERTIFICATE.
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property
shown and described hereon, and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of
subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish building setback lines,
and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites and
easements to public or private use as noted. Furthermore, I (we) dedicate
all sewer lines and all water lines to the Charlotte-MecklenburgUtility
Department, if applicable.
Date Owner(s)
2. CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYORS RESPONSIBILITIES AND ACCURACY.
I, ______________________________, certify that this plat was
drawn under my supervision from an actual survey made under my
supervision (deed description recorded in Book ______, Page _____,
and/or other description); that the boundaries not surveyed are clearly
indicated as drawn from information found in Book ______, Page
_____; that the ratio of precision as calculated is 1:_____; that this
plat was prepared in accordance with NCGS § 47-30 as amended
Witness my original signature, registration number and seal this ______
day of___________, 20____.
______________________________ ______________________
Surveyors Signature Registration Number
(Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
3. TOWN APPROVAL CERTIFICATE.
I hereby certify that this subdivision plat has been found to comply
with the subdivision requirements of the Town of Matthews Unified
Development Ordinance and is approved for recording in the office of
the Register of Deeds for Mecklenburg County. Streets, utilities, and
other public improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner
and according to Town specifications as shown on this plat, or a financial
guarantee has been posted to ensure installation and completion of such
improvements. The Town accepts the dedication of streets, easements,
public parks, and open space as indicated, but the Town assumes no
responsibility to open or maintain any streets, easements, rights-of-way,
or other lands shown for public purposes until in the opinion of the
Board of Commissioners of the Town of Matthews it is in the public
interest to do so. Said approval expires if not recorded on or before
(date) and must be
resubmitted for approval by the Town.
Date Planning Director or designee, Town of Matthews
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 31
4. BMPMAINTENANCE CERTIFICATE.
The property in this subdivision plat contains water quality features that
must be maintained according to the Operations and Maintenance
Agreement and Plan recorded in Deed Book and Page .
5. ENGINEERINGREQUIREMENTS CERTIFICATE.
The streets, storm drainage and other required improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and in accordance with Town
specifications and standards or a guarantee in an acceptable amount and
form has been received.
Date Mecklenburg County LUESA
6. REVIEWOFFICER’S CERTIFICATE.
State of North Carolina )
County ofMecklenburg )
I, , Review Officer of Mecklenburg County,
certify that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets
all statutory requirements for recording.
Date Review Officer
7. SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS CERTIFICATE. (This Certificate is required when the proposed
sewage disposal system is not to be provided by the Charlotte Mecklenburg Utility Department)
I hereby certify that the sewage disposal system installed, or proposed
for installation, in subdivision fully meets
plans and specifications approved by the North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources.
Date Professional Engineer
8. DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS DISTRICT ENGINEER CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the right-of-way dedication along the existing statemaintained
roadway(s) shown on this plat is approved and accepted as
public right-of-way by the North Carolina Department of Transportation
Division of Highways.
______________________________ __________________
District Engineer Date
Only North Carolina Department of Transportation approved structures are to be constructed on
public right-of-way.
(Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
C. GUARANTEES. In the event the Final Plat involves the installation and construction of public improvements
required by this Title, the subdivider shall provide in a form acceptable to the Town and Mecklenburg
County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency a subdivision improvement guarantee in the manner
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 32
prescribed in § 155.405.10.
D. AS-BUILT DRAWINGS REQUIRED. AutoCAD compatible digital as-built drawings and plans of all water
system, sewer system, and storm drainage system facilities shall be prepared by the subdivider and
submitted to the Town Engineer and Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency
at the time of request for Final Plat. Where financial guarantees are provided in lieu of completed
improvements at the time of Final Plat approval, then the as-built drawings shall be required at time of the
release of any surety for required improvements. These as-built plans must show all easements and/or
rights-of-way to demonstrate that the facilities are properly placed. [formerly § 152.26.A.9]
155.405.10 Subdivision Improvement Guarantees
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT. Final approval of a Final Plat is subject to i) installation of or provision for all
improvements required by this Title, or ii) the subdivider filing a financial guarantee in lieu of completing,
installing and dedication of all improvements prior to Final Plat approval, and iii) the performance of all
other obligations required by this Title and in accordance with this § 155.405.10.
B. TYPES OF GUARANTEES. For the purpose of this Section, there shall be the following types of subdivision
improvement guarantees (the “Guarantee”):
1. Type 1 Guarantee, shall refer to a subdivision improvement guarantee required for the approval of
a Final Plat following construction, installation and provision of improvements required by this
Title, except the final one inch (1”) surface course when paving according to Chapter 7, and before
issuance of any building permits in the subdivision.
2. Type 2 Guarantee, shall refer to a subdivision improvement guarantee required for the approval of
a Final Plat prior to construction, installation and provision of improvements required by this
Title.
3. Type 3 Guarantee, shall refer to all other guarantees required by this Title.
C. GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS.
1. TYPE 1 GUARANTEE. Prior to release of the final plat for recordation and before issuance of any
building permits, a surety bond, letter of credit, or other form of guarantee that provides equivalent
security to a surety bond or letter of credit, in an amount determined byMecklenburg County Land
Use and Environmental Services Agency shall be filed with the County. This performance
guarantee will assure that the final one-inch surface course will be applied to each street once the
street has met the conditions outlined in Chapter 7 for acceptance for maintenance. The
delayed application of the surface course shall be considered as a testing period for the streets
installed in order that any defects or deficiencies will have had at least one full cycle of seasons
in which to appear, except as provided for in Chapter 7 where the Board of Commissioners waives
the one (1) year waiting period. In the event that defects or deficiencies do appear, the developer
shall repair those defects in a manner approved by the Town Public Works Director, Town
Engineer, and Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency prior to
applying the final one-inch surface course. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16) [formerly § 152.24.G]
2. TYPE 2 GUARANTEE. Where the improvements required by this Title have not been completed
prior to the submission of the Final Plat for approval, the approval of the Final Plat shall be subject
to the subdivider filing a surety bond, letter of credit, or other form of guarantee that provides
equivalent security with Mecklenburg County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency
and/or the Town Public Works Director, in an amount to be determined by the appropriate
agency, with sureties satisfactory to the Town guaranteeing the installation and construction of
the required improvements. Upon completion of the improvements as required by this Title,
written notice shall be given by the subdivider to Mecklenburg County Land Use and
Environmental Services Agency and the Town Engineer. Upon receipt of this notice, Mecklenburg
County Land Use and Environmental Services Agency and the Town Engineer shall cause an
inspection of the improvements to be made and, if all outstanding items have been satisfactorily
resolved, shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of notice, authorize in writing the release of the
surety given. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16) [formerly § 152.26.A.8]
3. TYPE 3 GUARANTEE. The amount of Type 3 Guarantees shall be determined as follows:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 33
A. TREEMAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT GUARANTEE. Where the impr o vement s
required by this Title include a future guarantee for tree maintenance and/or replacement,
the approval of the Final Plat shall be subject to the subdivider filing a surety bond, cash
bond, or irrevocable letter of credit with the Town in an amount to be determined by the
Town to guarantee tree life and health for three (3) years. Upon conclusion of the three
(3) year period, written notice shall be given to the Town by the subdivider, at which time
the Town Public Works Director shall cause an inspection of the trees within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice, and upon satisfactory completion, shall authorize in writing
the release of the surety given. See also Section 155.606.13.H (Ord. No. 1618, passed 4-
14-08; Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17 ) [formerly § 152.26.A.10]
B. (RESERVED)
D. AS-BUILT DRAWINGS REQUIRED. As a condition of release of any Guarantee, AutoCAD compatible digital
as-built drawings and plans of all water system, sewer system, and storm drainage system facilities shall be
prepared by the subdivider and submitted to the Town Public Works Director and Mecklenburg County
Land Use and Environmental Services Agency at the time of request for release of any surety for required
improvements. These plans shall show all easements and/or rights-of-way to demonstrate that the required
improvements and facilities are properly placed.
(Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 4 - 34
155.405.11
Date
DECLARATION OFUNDERSTANDING THAT
ZONING VARIANCES ARE NOT ANTICIPATED IN THIS SUBDIVISION
FOR THE PURPOSE OF INADEQUATE BUILDABLE AREA
Name of Developer ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Subdivision
Location of Subdivision
The above-named subdivision is being developed within the zoning and subdivision jurisdiction of the
Town ofMatthews.
The above-named developer, by signing this statement, agrees that he/she is aware of the zoning
dimensional requirements for potential structures likely to be constructed within the above-named
development, and does not anticipate any zoning variances to be requested on individual lots due to
insufficient buildable area.
1. This declaration is intended to verify that the lots being designed in the above-named subdivision
will have adequate building envelopes, after applying all required limiting factors that can
reasonably be expected to be known prior to construction of dwelling unit or other structures,
including but not limited to: setbacks, yards, easements, floodplain lines, septic drain fields and
reserve fields, demolition disposal sites, on-site parking, etc.
The zoning on this property is:
The dimensional requirements of this/these zoning district(s) are:
Min. lot size
Min. lot width
Min./Max front setback
Min. side yard
Min. rear yard
Min./Max. height
Other (specify)
(Attach additional pages if multiple zoning districts are involved)
2. It is understood that the developer of the subdivision may or may not be involved in any
subsequent design or siting of buildings and structures, and is not guaranteeing all possible
structural configurations will fit each lot.
3. Where the developer of the land will not be the ultimate user, the developer, by signing this
declaration, agrees to inform buyers of lots, dwellings, or other interests, that this subdivision was
designed to meet zoning dimensional requirements, and that variances to zoning dimensional
requirements were not anticipated based on the physical layout design of the property.
Signature of Developer Title Date
Development Company
(Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 1
.41
Chapter 5. Use Districts
155.501. Zoning Districts Established
[formerly known as § 153.050]
In order to carry out the
recommendations of the Matthews
Land Use Plan and the purposes and
provisions of this Title, the Town of
Matthews is divided into the
following zoning and use districts.
Districts are grouped as
Traditional/Parallel Traditional,
Conditional-Only, or Overlay
districts.
155.501.1 Traditional Districts
A. Traditional zoning districts are those which have generally been in use in the Town of Matthews for many
years and are being brought forward with limited revisions. They are generally listed from most restrictive
to least restrictive. Traditional districts generally allow a group of uses matching their descriptive title, as
well as many less intensive uses. Each Traditional district has an individual set of dimensional requirements,
and will automatically refer to other chapters within this Title for minimum requirements of parking, lighting,
landscaping, and other development criteria. Traditional districts may also have an individual set of
development standards.
B. Traditional zoning districts are:
Residential Single-Family Residential Multi-Family Nonresidential
R-20 R-15MF R/I
R-15 R-12MF O
R-12 HUC
R-9 B-1
R-MH B-3
B-D
B-H
I-1
I-2
C. Each Traditional zoning district has its individual purpose and intent statement at § 155.502. Whenever
appropriate, each Traditional zoning district shall follow the development criteria at §§ 155.604.1 and
155.604.2 Table of Dimensional Standards, § 155.606 for landscaping, § 155.607 for parking, § 155.608 for
signs, and § 155.609 for exterior lighting. When a use is identified as allowed under prescribed conditions
for a Traditional district, then the prescribed conditions explained at §155.506 shall also apply to that use in
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 2
the Traditional zoning district. [formerly portions of § 153.054 through § 153.062]
155.501.2 Parallel Traditional Districts
A. The provision for Parallel Traditional zoning districts is established to address those situations where an
allowed use within a particular Traditional district may be acceptable at a specific location when additional
voluntary conditions are offered. The process of designating a Parallel Traditional district allows the Board
of Commissioners to approve a proposal for a specific use or list of uses with reasonable conditions to assure
compatibility with surrounding properties. Any use permitted under this process must also conform to the
development regulations for the corresponding Traditional zoning district. [formerly § 153.200(C)]
B. Potential uses which may be considered for a Parallel Traditional zoning district are restricted to those uses
permitted in the corresponding Traditional zoning district. Uses permitted in Parallel Traditional zoning
districts are subject to all applicable development standards and requirements for that use listed in the
corresponding Traditional district.
C. The application for a Parallel Traditional zoning district must contain information and/or site plans which
indicate all the principal and accessory uses which are or may be proposed to be developed on the site.
Subsequent to the approval of a Parallel Traditional zoning district, only those principal and accessory uses
indicated on the approved plan may be constructed and operated on the site.
D. This is a voluntary procedure which is intended for firm development proposals. It is not intended or suited
for securing early zoning for tentative proposals which may not be undertaken for some time. Where a
limited selection of uses is offered but a definite physical layout and/or related details of development design
have not yet been determined, voluntary conditions for subsequent site plan and elevation plan approval may
be incorporated into the conditions for approval.[formerly § 153.200(C)]
E. Applications for Parallel Traditional zoning district designation shall be considered only if the application is
made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent. All applications must include a schematic
plan drawn to scale and supporting text which will become a part of the ordinance amendment. The
application should include at least the items listed below.
1. A boundary survey showing the total acreage, present zoning classifications, date, and north arrow.
2. The owners’ names, addresses, and the tax parcel identification numbers of all adjoining properties,
those properties across a public street from and all properties which have any portion less than one
hundred foot (100’) distant from any portion of the tax parcels being requested for rezoning.
3. All existing easements, reservations, and rights-of-way, and all yards required for the zoning district
requested.
4. Delineation of areas within the regulatory floodplain as shown on official FEMA flood maps for
Mecklenburg County.
5. Proposed uses of land and structures. An application may either be a concept plan which includes
a commitment to subsequent site plan and elevation plan approval, or a site specific site plan
showing defined footprints for physical improvements to the site.
a. Conceptual plan with later site plan and elevation approvals: For residential uses this
should include the number of units and an outline of the area where the structures will be
located. For nonresidential and mixed uses, this should include the approximate square
footage of all structures and an outline of the area where the structures will be located. An
estimated schedule for build-out, and proposed phasing shall be included.
b. Site specific plans: The allowed use(s); location; approximate square footage; and
approximate dimensions of each proposed structure shall be placed on a scale drawing of
the site, along with required and provided parking; pedestrian amenities; storm water
facilities; loading facilities; solid waste and recycling facilities; required and provided
landscaping and screening which will include walls, fences or planting areas as well as
treatment of any existing natural features; recreational amenities and open space; proposed
number, type, and location of signs; and any other physical improvements proposed for the
site.
6. Traffic, parking, and circulation plans for motorized vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians, showing the
proposed locations and arrangement of parking spaces, sidewalks and pathways, loading area and
dumpster maneuvering space, fire truck access and turn-around locations, and access points to
adjacent streets. For conceptual plans, a commitment to submittal of the full circulation plan with
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 3
any required site plan and elevation plan.
7. A traffic impact analysis is required at time of a request for a Parallel Traditional zoning district or
revision to an existing Parallel Traditional zoning district if the subject site is for, or could
accommodate, fifty (50) or more dwelling units, or for any nonresidential or mixed use development
that meets one or more of the following: covers more than two (2) acres; includes more than three
(3) building pads; provides an assembly area for more than four hundred (400) persons; involves
office or sales floor area greater than twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet; is within one
hundred fifty (150) lineal feet of any intersection of two (2) designated thoroughfares; within five
hundred (500) lineal feet of any public road intersection currently operating as a Level of Service
D, E, or F; and/or involves service or delivery vehicles in excess of one (1) ton.[formerly §
153.201(A) & (B) & Zoning Application Instructions]
F. Following Board of Commissioners approval of a Parallel Traditional zoning district, the property shall be
identified on the zoning maps by the appropriate Parallel Traditional district designation. This designation
is the underlying Traditional district designation plus the letters “(CD)”. [formerly § 153.203]
G. If an application for a Parallel Traditional zoning district is approved, all conditions attached to the approval
are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property must be in accordance with
the approved plan and conditions. [formerly § 153.201(D)]
H. Any modifications to an approved plan, any revisions to commitments or conditions of development, or any
changes in the permitted principal or accessory uses shall be treated the same as changes to the zoning map
and shall be processed as an amendment as provided in § 155.401.1 and § 155.401.4. Minor changes in the
detail of an approved plan which will not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent
property, will not alter the uses permitted or increase the density or intensity of development, or will not
increase the off-street parking ratio or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site may be approved
as an Administrative Amendment as provided in § 155.401.5.A. Approved Parallel Traditional districts
which choose to incorporate requirements for subsequent site plan and/or elevation plan approval by the
Board of Commissioners shall follow the process as given in § 155.401.5.B. [formerly § 153.201(E)]
155.501.3 Conditional-Only Districts
A. Conditional-Only zoning districts have been created to accommodate specific development goals in strategic
locations throughout the Town of Matthews boundaries as explained in the Matthews Land Use Plan. These
Conditional-Only districts are eligible for designation on parcels of land only when the property owner
initiates a request for the designation along with a specific plan for development. Development within a
Conditional-Only zoning district shall be in conformance with the voluntary conditions imposed at time of
zoning approval.
B. Conditional-Only zoning districts are:
R-VS Residential - Varied Styles
CrC Crestdale Conservation
SRN Small Residential Neighborhood
C-MF Concentrated Multi-Family
MUD Mixed Use Development
TS Transit Supportive
B-1SCD Shopping Center
ENT Family Entertainment
AU Adult Uses
C. Each Conditional-Only zoning district has its individual purpose and intent statement at § 155.503. Unless
specifically exempted elsewhere in this Title, each Conditional-Only district shall follow the development
criteria at § 155.604.3, 4, and/or 5 Table of Dimensional Standards, § 155.606 for landscaping, § 155.607 for
parking, § 155.608 for signs, and § 155.609 for exterior lighting. When a use is allowed under prescribed
conditions for a Conditional-Only district, then the prescribed conditions explained at § 155.506 shall also
apply to the use in the Conditional-Only zoning districts.
D. Applications for Conditional-Only zoning district designation shall be considered only if the application is
made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent. All applications must include a schematic
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 4
plan drawn to scale and supporting text which will become a part of the zoning conditions applied to the site.
The application should include at least the items listed below.
1. A boundary survey showing the total acreage, present zoning classifications, date, and north arrow.
2. The owners’ names, addresses, and the tax parcel identification numbers of all adjoining properties,
those properties across a public street from and all properties which have any portion less than one
hundred foot (100’) distant from any portion of the tax parcels being requested for rezoning.
3. All existing easements, reservations, and rights-of-way, and all yards required for the zoning district
requested.
4. Delineation of areas within the regulatory floodplain as shown on official FEMA flood maps for
Mecklenburg County.
5. Proposed uses of land and structures. An application may either be a concept plan which includes
a commitment to subsequent site plan and elevation plan approval, or a site specific site plan
showing defined footprints for physical improvements to the site.
a. Conceptual plan with later site plan and elevation approvals: For residential uses this
should include the number of units and an outline of the area where the structures will be
located. For nonresidential and mixed uses, this should include the approximate square
footage of all structures and an outline of the area where the structures will be located. An
estimated schedule for build-out, and proposed phasing shall be included.
b. Site specific plans: The allowed use(s); location; approximate square footage; and
approximate dimensions of each proposed structure shall be placed on a scale drawing of
the site;, along with required and provided parking; pedestrian amenities; storm water
facilities; loading facilities; solid waste and recycling facilities; required and provided
landscaping and screening which will include walls, fences or planting areas as well as
treatment of any existing natural features; recreational amenities and open space; proposed
number, type, and location of signs; and any other physical improvements proposed for the
site.
6. Traffic, parking, and circulation plans for motorized vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians, showing the
proposed locations and arrangement of parking spaces, sidewalks and pathways, loading area and
dumpster maneuvering space, fire truck access and turn-around locations, and access points to
adjacent streets. For conceptual plans, a commitment to submittal of the full circulation plan with
any required site plan and elevation plan.
7. A traffic impact analysis is required at time of a request for a Conditional-Only zoning district or
revision to an existing Conditional-Only zoning district if the subject site is for, or could
accommodate, fifty (50) or more dwelling units, or for any nonresidential or mixed use development
that meets one (1) or more of the following: covers more than two (2) acres; includes more than
three (3) building pads; provides an assembly area for more than four hundred (400) persons;
involves office or sales floor area greater than twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet; is within
one hundred fifty (150) lineal feet of any intersection of two (2) designated thoroughfares; within
five hundred (500) lineal feet of any public road intersection currently operating as a Level of
Service D, E, or F; and/or involves service or delivery vehicles in excess of one (1) ton.[formerly
§ 153.201(A) & (B) & Zoning Application Instructions]
E. In considering an application for a Conditional-Only zoning district, the Board of Commissioners may attach
reasonable and appropriate conditions to the location, nature, and extent of each use, as mutually agreed upon
by the property owner or his/her authorized agent. In evaluating an application, the Board of Commissioners
may consider: whether the request is reasonable and consistent with the policies and objectives of the
Matthews Land Use Plan and other adopted plans or studies covering the subject site; what potential adverse
impacts could be created on the surrounding area; what land use, transportation, economic, employment,
social, and environmental amenities and benefits may result from completion of the proposed development
plans. [formerly 153.201(C)(1) & (2)]
F. Following Board of Commissioners approval of a Conditional-Only zoning district, the property shall be
identified on the zoning maps by the appropriate Conditional-Only district designation. [formerly § 153.203]
G. If an application for a Conditional-Only zoning district is approved, all conditions attached to the approval
are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property must be in accordance with
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 5
the approved plan and conditions. [formerly § 153.201(D)]
H. Any modifications to an approved plan, any revisions to commitments or conditions of development, or any
changes in the permitted principal or accessory uses shall be treated the same as changes to the zoning map
and shall be processed as an amendment as provided in § 155.401.1 and § 155.401.4. Minor changes in the
detail of an approved plan which will not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent
property, will not alter the uses permitted or increase the density or intensity of development, or will not
increase the off-street parking ratio or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site may be approved
as an Administrative Amendment as provided in § 155.401.5.A. Approved Conditional-Only zoning districts
which choose to incorporate requirements for subsequent site plan and/or elevation plan approval by the
Board of Commissioners shall follow the process as given in § 155.401.5.B. [formerly § 153.201(E)]
I. EARLY DESIGNATION. Applications for zoning designation to the CrC, SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, or ENT
Conditional-Only districts may be submitted for consideration prior to design for specific development
activity under the following standards:
1. This option may be used to designate parcels to the TS Transit Supportive District when a parcel for
a transit station location has been identified by the appropriate transit agency, and any parcel
requesting such early designation is within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500’) of the transit
station parcel.
2. This option may be used to designate parcels to the ENT Family Entertainment District when they
are identified in an adopted small area plan as being within the geographic boundary of the proposed
entertainment focused mixed use neighborhood or within the county Sportsplex.
3. This option may be used to designate parcels to the CrC Crestdale Conservation District when the
parcels are within or adjacent to the land area traditionally considered to be part of the Crestdale
community.
4. This option may be used to designate parcels to the MUD Mixed Use Development, SRN Small
Residential Neighborhood, or C-MF Concentrated Multi-Family Districts when the Matthews Land
Use Plan or an adopted small area plan identifies the affected parcels as being located where a mixed
use, urban-scale neighborhood would be appropriate.
5. Any application for early designation to one of the listed Conditional-Only districts shall include
conditions in written and illustrative formats which may include but are not limited to: a list of
expected land uses; styles/types of structures; architectural themes; proposed streetscaping
treatment; proposed pedestrian and bicycle facilities; public amenities to be provided; minimum
and/or maximum build-out; building envelopes; and a statement that a site plan and/or elevation
plan will be reviewed and approved by the Board of Commissioners prior to any land disturbing
activity on the site.
6. At the time any property owner or agent for an owner of a parcel or parcels with early designation
desires to begin any land-disturbing activity, they shall submit all plans and documents as detailed
in this § 155.501.3 above plus § 155.401.6 and shall meet standards at § 155.503.2 for the CrC
district, § 155.503.3 for the SRN district, § 155.503.4 for the C-MF district, § 155.503.5 for the
MUD district, § 155.503.6 for the TS district, or § 155.503.8 for the ENT district, along with their
request for a site plan and/or elevation plan review and approval by the Board of Commissioners.
The site plan and/or elevation plan documents shall include a listing of all the conditions adopted as
a part of the early designation (as listed in § 155.501.3.I.5 immediately above), and indicate how
each one is being met. This complete submission package shall be reviewed by Town staff in the
same way as is done for a full rezoning application, with a report and recommendations provided
by Town staff to the Board of Commissioners. The site plan and/or elevation plan approval shall
follow the process outlined at § 155.401.5.B. No permits shall be issued and no land-disturbing
activity on-site may take place until the site plan and/or elevation plan has received approval from
the Board of Commissioners.
155.501.4 Overlay Districts
A. Overlay zoning districts are created to provide a unique and consistent set of standards for physical
development of set geographic areas. These contained areas have special features which need to be preserved
and protected in order to allow these locations to fulfill their potential as special economic or environmental
assets of the Town. Generally the development criteria provided for each Overlay district shall be applied in
addition to, or on top of, the underlying zoning designation. When standards of an Overlay district conflict
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 6
with the underlying zoning district’s standard, such as yard requirements, then the provisions in this Title
will indicate which standard supersedes the other.
B. Overlay zoning districts are:
DO Downtown Overlay
HO Highway 51 Overlay
C. Each Overlay zoning district has its individual purpose and intent statement at § 155.504, followed by the
unique and unifying standards for that Overlay district.
155.502. Traditional Districts and Parallel Districts Created
155.502.1. Single-Family Residential District (R-20)
A. The R-20 Single-Family Residential District is established to provide an environment exclusively for singlefamily
housing at a very low density of population and structures. Specified nonresidential uses of public or
semi-public nature are permitted in this district. The regulations for this district are designed to maintain a
suitable environment for family living. The map symbol and short name for this Single-Family Residential
District shall be “R-20”. [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.054]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.1,
apply to the R-20 District. Uses allowed within the R-20 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at
§ 155.505.1. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-20 district are
listed at § 155.506.
155.502.2. Single-Family Residential District (R-15)
A. The R-15 Single-Family Residential District is established to provide an environment exclusively for singlefamily
housing at a low density of population and structures. Specified nonresidential uses of public or semipublic
nature are permitted in this district. The regulations for this district are designed to maintain a suitable
environment for family living. The map symbol and short name for this Single-Family Residential District
shall be “R-15”. [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.054]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in 155.605 and dimensional standards of § 155.604.1,
apply to the R-15 District. Uses allowed within the R-15 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at
§ 155.505.1. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-15 district are
listed at §155.506.
155.502.3. Single-Family Residential District (R-12)
A. The R-12 Single-Family Residential District is established to provide an environment for single-family
housing at a low density of population and certain nonresidential uses of public or semi-public nature. The
regulations for these districts are designed to maintain a suitable environment for family living. The map
symbol and short name for this Single-Family Residential District shall be “R-12”. [formerly part of
regulation known as § 153.054]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in §155.605 and dimensional standards of § 155.604.1,
apply to the R-12 District. Uses allowed within the R-12 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at
§ 155.505.1. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-12 district are
listed at §155.506.
155.502.4. Single-Family Residential District (R-9)
A. The R-9 Single-Family Residential District is established to provide an environment for single-family
housing at various densities of population and certain nonresidential uses of public or semi-public nature.
The regulations for this district are designed to maintain a suitable environment for family living. The map
symbol and short name for this Single-Family Residential District shall be "R-9". [formerly part of
regulation known as § 153.054]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605 and dimensional standards of § 155.604.1,
apply to the R-9 District. Uses allowed within the R-9 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.1. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-9 district are listed
at § 155.506.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 7
155.502.5. Manufactured Home District (R-MH)
A. The Manufactured Home District is established to provide areas for the orderly development and growth of
new and existing manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions. Appearance, dimensional,
and housing quality standards are so designed that uses within this District may be soundly and permanently
developed and maintained in such a way as not to be harmful to adjacent properties. The map symbol and
short name for the Manufactured Home District shall be "R-MH". [formerly known as § 153.057]
B. Uses allowed within the R-MH district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at § 155.505.1. Supplementary
standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-MH district are listed at § 155.506.
C. Manufactured home subdivisions shall follow the lot development and design criteria as outlined in §
155.605.1.A.4. Dimensional standards at § 155.604.1 apply to manufactured home subdivisions. (Ord. No.
2083, passed 5-11-15)
D. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS shall comply with the following requirements:
1. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
a. MINIMUM SIZE. Manufactured Home Park tract size shall be five (5) acres.
b. MINIMUM FRONTAGE. Minimum Manufactured Home Park tract lot frontage shall be one
hundred feet (100’) along a public road.
c. PERIMETER SETBACK. Manufactured home sites and park structures shall be set back at
least fifty feet (50’) from any abutting public street right-of-way line, and at least thirty feet
(30’) from any abutting property line.
d. REQUIRED RECREATION AREA. At least ten percent (10%) of the total area of a
manufactured home park shall be devoted to recreational use by the residents of the park,
including space for community recreation buildings, gardens, outdoor play areas,
swimming pools, ball courts, and the like. Space for required landscaping shall not be
included for purposes of meeting this requirement.
e. There must be at least six (6) manufactured home spaces available at first occupancy.
f. ROADS. Private, hard-surfaced roads are required within a manufactured home park. Each
manufactured home space shall be directly accessible from an internal private road, with
no direct access to public streets. Internal private roads must have a minimum pavement
width of twenty feet (20’).
g. UTILITIES. Each manufactured home park created under this section shall be provided with
approved water supply systems and sewerage disposal systems.
h. PARKING. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with two (2) off-street parking
spaces, and there shall be one visitor space provided for every three (3) manufactured home
spaces, located within two hundred feet (200’) of the manufactured home space they are
intended to serve. In addition, each laundry facility shall be provided with one parking
space for every five (5) manufactured home spaces in the manufactured home park
i. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. Manufactured home parks shall comply with the
landscaping requirements in § 155.606.
j. SIGNS. Signs are permitted in a manufactured home park in accordance with § 155.608.
2. STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIVIDUAL MANUFACTURED HOME SPACES.
a. LOT AREA. Each manufactured home space shall have an area of at least four thousand
five hundred (4,500) square feet.
b. LOT FRONTAGE. Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum of forty five (45)
lineal feet of lot frontage along an internal park road.
c. BUILDING SEPARATION. Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other by not
less than twenty feet (20’) at any point. Any addition to manufactured homes shall be
considered integral parts of the structure and shall comply with these spacing requirements.
d. DWELLING UNIT CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. Manufactured homes must meet or exceed
the construction standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction. In addition, each
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 8
manufactured home shall meet the following criteria:
i. All manufactured homes shall be set up in accordance with the standards set by
the North Carolina Department of Insurance;
ii. The towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights shall be removed;
iii. Each manufactured home shall have a continuous masonry, metal, or plastic
curtain around its entire base which is unpierced except for required ventilation
and access.
e. OUTDOOR STORAGE. No storage shall be allowed on or around a manufactured home space
other than in a completely enclosed storage facility. This requirement does not include the
storage of operable grills, bicycles, and other similar items that are clearly incidental to the
dwelling unit. (Ord. 946, passed 12-8-97) [formerly § 153.057]
155.502.6. Multi-Family Residential District (R-15MF)
A. The R-15 Multi-Family Residential District is established to provide an environment for a variety of
residential uses, including single-family houses, duplexes, individual multi-family buildings, and apartment
building complexes. Densities of development are controlled by minimum lot area requirements for initial
and all subsequent dwelling units. Dedication of public and private recreational space is based on the number
of dwelling units created. Certain nonresidential uses of a public or semi-public nature are also permitted.
The map symbol and short name for the Multi-Family Residential District shall be "R-15MF". [formerly
part of regulation known as § 153.055]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.1,
apply to the R-15MF District. Uses allowed within the R-15MF district are given in the Table of Allowed
Uses at § 155.505.1. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-15MF
district are listed at § 155.506.
155.502.7. Multi-Family Residential District (R-12MF)
A. The R-12 Multi-Family Residential District is established to provide an environment for a variety of
residential uses, including single-family houses, duplexes, individual multi-family buildings, and apartment
building complexes. Densities of development are controlled by minimum lot area requirements for initial
and all subsequent dwelling units. Dedication of public and private recreational space is based on number of
dwelling units created. Certain nonresidential uses of a public or semi-public nature are also permitted. The
map symbol and short name for the Multi-Family Residential District shall be "R-12MF". [formerly part of
regulation known as § 153.055]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.1,
apply to the R-12MF District. Uses allowed within the R-12MF district are given in the Table of Allowed
Uses at § 155.505.1. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-12MF
district are listed at § 155.506.
155.502.8. Residential/Institutional District (R/I)
A. The Residential/Institutional District is established to allow complementary development of certain
institutional or public uses in predominantly residential areas. Uses in this District are generally considered
compatible with residential growth but are of a significant size or scale which requires extra conditions in
order to lessen their impact on neighboring residences. It is intended that uses permitted in this District be
scattered within single-family or multi-family zoning districts. The map symbol and short name for the
Residential/Institutional District shall be "R/I". [formerly known as § 153.056]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the R/I District. Uses allowed within the R/I district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R/I district are
listed at § 155.506., such as but not limited to §155.506.6 Child Care Homes and Child Day Care Facilities,
§155.506.7 Institutional Uses In Residential Settings, §155.506.8 Recreational Uses In or Adjacent to
Residential Settings, §155.506.13 Cemeteries, Mausoleums, Columbarium, and Crematorium, §155.506.15
Commercial Indoor and /or Outdoor Tennis and Racket Clubs and Associated Swimming Pools,
§155.506.16 Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRC), §155.506.17 Skilled Care (Nursing
Home) Facility, and §155.506.18 Motorcycle Safety Training Course. (Am. Ord 2188, passed 11-14-16)
155.502.9. Office District (O)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 9
A. The Office District is established to provide areas which are conducive to the establishment and continuance
of offices, institutions, and commercial activities not involving the sale of merchandise and, generally, of
small scale and intensity. Standards are so designed that this district, in some instances, may be established
as a buffer between residential districts and any other use districts. The map symbol and short name for the
Office District shall be "O". [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.058]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the O District. Uses allowed within the O district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the O district are listed
at § 155.506.
155.502.10. Historic Urban Core District (HUC)
A. The Historic Urban Core District is established for a defined downtown commercial core area only. The
boundaries of this area were determined through a study and development of a master plan for the downtown
and its future growth. This area includes the properties that have historically provided the concentration of
business uses for a small community - primarily retail, office, and civic, including an existing designated
Historic District, and minimal expansion land that is likely to exhibit the same intensity of development. In
addition to being the heart of the larger community, this district’s purpose is to allow and encourage a mix
of uses and buildings at a greater density of lot coverage than other nonresidential districts in outlying
portions of the Town while preserving and complementing the existing small town downtown character. This
district is intended to create and enhance cross connection between properties, especially for pedestrians.
The map symbol and short name for the Historic Urban Core District shall be "HUC." [formerly part of
regulation known as § 153.061]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the HUC District. Uses allowed within the HUC district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at
§ 155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the HUC district are
listed at § 155.506.
C. Due to the unique character of the downtown center core, and the desire to protect and encourage its continued
aesthetic attraction as a historic yet economically viable commercial concentration of uses, the following
standards and criteria given in the Downtown Design Standards and Streetscape Improvements apply within
the HUC district.
1. Build-to lines for Type I streets shall be 0’ from the right-of-way to not more than twenty feet (20’)
from back of curb/edge of pavement.
2. Build-to lines for Type II, III, or IV streets shall be thirty feet (30’) to forty five feet (45’) from back
of curb/edge of pavement.
3. Minimum setback on other properties shall be twenty feet (20’) from back of curb/edge of pavement.
4. Maximum setback on other properties shall be forty feet (40’) from back of curb/edge of pavement.
5. For street frontages with existing curb lines or edge of pavement that is being revised with
development of the site, then the above setback dimensions shall be measured from the revised street
edge.
6. Maximum floor area shall be as provided:
Retail/Business/Office Uses Mixed Use Building
1 story (if over 50% 1 story) 25,000 sqft 25,000 sq ft1
2 story (if over 50% 2 story) 28,000 sqft 28,000 sq ft1
3 story (if over 50% 3 story) 32,000 sqft 32,000 sq ft1
1 Residential uses may cover up to fifty percent (50%) of total floor area in a mixed use building, or up to fifty percent (50%)
of total floor area of all habitable structures on a single lot, whichever is applicable; however the first floor “retail” provision
in 7 below also applies.
7. First floor uses: In order to stimulate pedestrian activity at the street level in the heart of the
downtown core, the first floor (street level) must devote fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area
to “retail” activities. The term “retail”, for this paragraph only, includes not only the sales of
merchandise at retail but may also be construed to mean personal services such as beauty salons and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 10
barber shops, shoe repair, restaurants, galleries, and similar uses that rely on consistent walk-in
traffic, but not drive-through financial services.
8. Streetscape trees shall be required as given in the Streetscape Improvements, when a specific
schematic is applicable to a development site, or shall follow the standards of §155.606.3.
9. Landscape perimeter planting and site perimeter screening as generally required at §155.606.4 and
§155.606.6.A are not required for nonresidential and mixed use buildings in the HUC district.
Screening requirements for loading or service areas, as given in §155.606.6.B shall apply within the
HUC district.
10. Parking lot landscaping requirements in §155.606.5.A shall apply in the HUC district.
11. Development of any use or combination of uses in the HUC district must conform to the parking
and loading standards in § 155.607, except as listed here:
a. For retail, financial institutions, and restaurants: one (1) parking space per each four
hundred (400) square feet of floor area or fractional portion devoted to those uses.
b. For nonresidential uses fronting on a Type I street and located at or less than the maximum
build-to line as established in C.1 or C.2 above and as prescribed in the Downtown Design
Guidelines: no off-street parking is required.
c. For office uses: one (1) parking space per each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area
or fractional portion devoted to that use.
d. Parking of motor vehicles is not permitted in the area between the front property line (rightof-
way line) and the front of a building, although driveways providing access to a parking
area may be installed across this space perpendicular to the street and front of building.
(Ord. 945, passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14)[formerly know as
§153.061(E), (F), (H), and (I).]
155.502.11. Neighborhood Business District (B-1)
A. The Neighborhood Business District is established to create and protect business centers for the retailing of
merchandise such as groceries, prescription medicine, and household items and for the provision of
professional services for the convenience of dwellers of nearby residential areas. Standards are so designed
that uses within this district may be soundly and permanently developed and maintained in such a way as not
to be harmful to adjacent residential properties. The map symbol and short name for the Neighborhood
Business District shall be "B-1". [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.060]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the B-1 District. Uses allowed within the B-1 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the B-1 district are listed
at § 155.506.
155.502.12. High Rise Business District (B-3)
A. The High Rise Business District is established to provide areas in which a variety of retail uses, professional
and business services, office and limited wholesaling/warehousing concerns, plus other complementary uses,
may be established. The development standards for this district are designed to create concentrations of uses
with similar needs for increased building height located generally adjacent to major highways, higher density
residential, or mixed use development. The map symbol and short name for the High Rise Business District
shall be "B-3." [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.060]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the B-3 District. Uses allowed within the B-3 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the B-3 district are listed
at § 155.506.
155.502.13. Distributive Business District (B-D)
A. The Distributive Business District is established to provide areas in which distributive uses, such as
warehouses, office and wholesaling concerns, plus other complementary uses may be established and may
be given assurances of wholesome surroundings in the future. The development standards for this district
are designed also to aid in preventing the creation of traffic congestion and traffic hazards on highways and
to aid in protecting nearby residential areas from detrimental aspects of uses permitted within this district.
The map symbol and short name for the Distributive Business District shall be "B-D." [formerly part of
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 11
regulation known as § 153.060]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the B-D District. Uses allowed within the B-D district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the B-D district are listed
at § 155.506.
155.502.14. Highway Business District (B-H)
A. The Highway Business District is established to create and protect business areas for the retailing of
merchandise, which may include establishments generating high volume or frequent customer traffic, and for
carrying on professional and business services, often serving a large population. This type of district will be
located generally adjacent to major thoroughfares. The map symbol and short name for the Highway
Business District shall be "B-H." [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.060]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the B-H District. Uses allowed within the B-H district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the B-H district are
listed at § 155.506.
155.502.15. Light Industrial District (I-1)
A. The Light Industrial District is established to create and protect industrial areas for the provision of light
manufacturing and the distribution of products at wholesale. The standards established for this district are
designed to promote sound, permanent light industrial development and also to protect nearby residential
areas from the undesirable aspects of industrial development. Whenever possible, areas of this zoning
category are separated from residential areas by natural or structural boundaries, such as drainage channels,
sharp breaks in topography, strips of vegetation, traffic arteries, and similar features. The map symbol and
short name for the Light Industrial District shall be "I-1 District." [formerly part of regulation known as
§ 153.062]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the I-1 District. Uses allowed within the I-1 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the I-1 district are listed
at § 155.506.
C. The minimum setback for uses in the I-1 district may be reduced by 50% when the following requirements
are met:
1. No parking is proposed or allowed between the primary use building and the street.
2. The site is part of a larger unified development.
3. The buildings fronting the street are designed with four-sided architecture to address the street.Foursided
architecture is defined as having the following characteristics:
a. No expanses of blank walls greater than 25’ in length allowed. A blank wall is a façade
that does not add to the character of the streetscape and does not contain windows or doors
or sufficient ornamentations, decoration, or articulation (such as alternating materials,
brick patterns, or similar architectural features).
b. Provide an operable doorway entrance from the street side along with a pedestrian walkway
to that door.
c. All mechanical and HVAC equipment must be screened from view from the street, whether
located on the roof or ground. Such equipment may not be located between the building
and the street. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14)
155.502.16. General Industrial District (I-2)
A. The General Industrial District is established to create and protect wholesaling and industrial areas for
manufacturing, processing and assembling of parts and products, distribution of products at wholesale,
transportation terminals, outside storage of large equipment, supplies, or product, and a broad variety of
specialized commercial and industrial operations. Whenever possible, areas of this zoning category are
separated from residential areas by natural or structural boundaries, such as drainage channels, sharp breaks
in topography, strips of vegetation, traffic arteries and similar features. The map symbol and short name for
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 12
the General Industrial District shall be "I-2 District." [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.062]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.2,
apply to the I-2 District. Uses allowed within the I-2 district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.2. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the I-2 district are listed
at § 155.506.
155.503. Conditional-Only Districts Created
155. 503.1. Residential Varied Style District (R-VS)
A. The Residential Varied Style District is established to create beneficial contemporary single-family housing
opportunities at higher densities, configurations and styles not traditionally found in Matthews, such as zerolot
line homes, single-family attached including townhouses, patio homes, duplexes, pinwheel design, and
similar styles. This district is primarily intended to be utilized in three situations: i) near the downtown as
detailed in the Downtown Master Plan; ii) at specific sites identified by the Land Use Plan as exhibiting
unique criteria offering an opportunity for an alternative to traditional detached single-family development;
and iii) upon request when the proposed site can be demonstrated to accommodate the increased density,
exhibits a thoughtful, imaginative use of the land, and demonstrates reasonable and appropriate land use
relationships, both within the development itself and with surrounding areas adjacent to the development.
All development of land within the Residential – Varied Style – district shall comply with a site plan approved
at the time of R-VS designation. The map symbol and short name for the Residential Varied Style District
shall be "R-VS". [formerly known as § 153.205]
B. Lot development and design standards as outlined in § 155.605 apply to the R-VS District. Dimensional
standards may vary depending on the type of housing and the size of the overall tract, as given at § 155.604.3
and § 155.604.4. Uses allowed within the R-VS district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at § 155.505.3.
Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the R-VS district are listed at §
155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.1 specifically for the R-VS
district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the R-VS district.
C. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE R-VS DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of other sections
of this Title, development and improvements in the Residential – Varied Styles district shall comply with the
following requirements. Where the provisions in this § 155.503.1 conflict with the provisions of other
Sections of this Title, except for Overlay district requirements, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. An R-VS District may be located anywhere within the Town in
conformance with one or more of the qualifications listed in § 155.503.1.A. above.
2. MINIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA: An R-VS designation shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre,
and able to accommodate a minimum of six (6) dwelling units when utilizing the dimensional
requirements given in § 155.605.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION. The R-VS district is not eligible for early designation. Each request for R-VS
designation shall include a site plan showing, at a minimum, proposed lot lines and building envelopes, new
streets and alleys, improvements to existing streets, and type or style of dwelling or nonresidential use on
each proposed lot. Written details of number of units, other relevant housing criteria, and proposed conditions
are required with the site plan drawing.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. In evaluating applications for R-VS designation, the Board of Commissioners shall
consider the following:
1. Access to public streets and the adequacy of those streets to carry anticipated traffic.
2. On-site circulation for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
3. Adequacy of existing community facilities such as water, sewer, police, and fire protection.
4. Relationship to and impacts upon adjoining and nearby properties and the adequacy of proposed
measures to minimize any adverse impacts.
5. The appropriateness of the proposal in relationship to the policies and objectives of the Matthews
Land Use Plan and to a more detailed small area plan, if available.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 13
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the R-VS district.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. When part of the development of an R-VS site, the interconnected network of streets must
extend into adjoining areas except where the general goal of integration and connectivity
with surrounding uses is deemed inappropriate or impractical due to sensitive natural
resources, or unusual topography provide no practical connection alternatives. Street stubs
must be provided to adjoining undeveloped areas to accommodate future street
connectivity.
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets.
e. Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted except where physical conditions such as
limited access highways, sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Each dead end must be detailed as a circular turn-around,
a close, a hammerhead, or a “Y” turn-around and should provide pedestrian connectivity
to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Private streets and gated streets are prohibited. All streets must be dedicated to the public,
although alleys may be private.
g. Alleys. Alleys are encouraged to provide vehicular access to off-street parking for
individual lots in the R-VS District. Alley entrances should generally align. Variations in
alley alignment is encouraged to prevent long stretches of alleys. All alleys shall be
identified as either public or private, and any public alley shall be dedicated to the public
as provided for in Chapter 7.
h. A streetscape and lighting plan shall incorporate street trees to provide both form (canopy)
and comfort (shade) to the street and night-time illumination under the tree canopy for
safety and ambiance for pedestrians, with adequate illumination for vehicular traffic.
3. BLOCKS. When new street intersections are created with an R-VS designation, the block lengths
shall meet the standards provided in Chapter 7.
4. PARKING. No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in the required setback for single-family
attached groups of more than six (6) units or for any nonresidential uses. On corner lots, parking
will not be permitted in the street side yard closer than six feet (6’) to the public right-of-way.
Additional parking for guests within the R-VS development is encouraged, either on-street or in
small lots of no more than eight (8) spaces in any lot.
G. BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES. All buildings in an R-VS district shall be architecturally compatible in
appearance and quality through the use of similar building materials, colors, architectural features and styles.
An identified set of architectural styles or specific architectural elements may be utilized to create an overall
design theme.
1. Every nonresidential building must be separated from any other building by a distance of twenty
five feet (25’).
2. A single-family attached dwelling group must be separated by sixteen feet (16’) from any other
single-family attached dwelling group.
3. A single-family attached dwelling group must be separated by twenty feet (20’) from any other style
of housing.
H. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The R-VS district establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however might not always be appropriate to the particular development. Accordingly, new
development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures may require the
use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development requirements specified
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 14
here for the R-VS district in § 155.503.1 may be modified through the Flexible Design provisions of §
155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.2. Crestdale Conservation District (CrC)
A. The Crestdale Conservation District (CrC) is established to protect and preserve the character and atmosphere
of the Crestdale neighborhood, a neighborhood of significant historical and cultural value. The Crestdale
Conservation District accommodates single-family housing, small scale multi-family housing, and certain
nonresidential uses which fit with the character of the Crestdale neighborhood. The Crestdale neighborhood
possesses unique land use, design, and other distinctive characteristics but these regulations are intended to
maintain an environment suitable for single-family living. The ongoing maintenance of the Crestdale
Conservation District is intended to: i) protect and stabilize property values; ii) preserve desirable and unique
physical features; iii) prevent blighting caused by intense or undesirable land uses; iv) promote compatible
new development; v) protect natural open space; vi) preserve existing tree cover; and vii) preserve local
history. The map symbol and short name for the Crestdale Conservation District shall be "CrC". [formerly
known as § 153.067.A]
CrC district designation may result from the creation and adoption of a general concept plan or small area
plan which becomes an appendix in the Matthews Land Use Plan. Such a small area plan may include the
area traditionally considered to be the historic Crestdale community, or may also include land that could form
an expanded neighborhood. Any small area plan which is used to encourage the designation of parcels into
the CrC district shall identify how those parcels can share the character and goals of the Crestdale
neighborhood, and how they have or will have pedestrian and vehicular connectivity to the historic Crestdale
core community. The small area plan may include required elements such as minimum required street and
pedestrian networks to assure interconnectivity.
As a Conditional-Only District, parcels of land may be zoned to this category following the procedures
explained at § 155.501.3.C. and D., at the time a specific development project is submitted for consideration,
or parcels may receive early designation as outlined in § 155.501.3.I., prior to any specific plan due to their
location within the geographic area identified for this zoning designation, with the condition that prior to any
land disturbing activity other than single-family detached homes on individual lots, a site specific plan for
development shall be approved through the site plan approval process as described at § 155.401.5.B.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the CrC District. Uses allowed within the CrC district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the CrC district are
listed at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.2 specifically for the
CrC district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the CrC district.
C. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE CRC DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of other sections
of this Title, development and improvements in the Crestdale Conservation District shall comply with the
following requirements. Where the provisions of this Section conflict with the provisions of other Sections
of this Title, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION. The CrC district shall only be applied within and near the geographic area historically
and generally considered to be Crestdale. This area is intersected by East Charles Street/Tank Town
Road, Matthews School Road, and Crestdale Road, or a future road connection to East John Street
or the Sportsplex/proposed family entertainment neighborhood, and sites within the area must use
one or more of these streets to gain access in and out of the neighborhood.
2. LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS. Landscaping in the Crestdale Conservation District should maintain
a natural appearance and as such should not appear to have an artificially-created or planned layout.
The area historically has had a very open feeling with little delineation of property boundaries which
might be found in more traditional developments, therefore requiring vegetation buffers along
property lines would not fit with Crestdale’s atmosphere. The preferred approach towards
landscaping in Crestdale would be the protection of existing trees. The landscaping required on
nonresidential properties and suggested for residential sites are listed below.
a. STREETSCAPE PLANTING. Streetscape trees shall be encouraged on all residential properties
and are required on all nonresidential properties in the Crestdale area. Large maturing trees
should be placed no greater than fifty feet (50’) apart and small maturing trees shall be
placed no further than forty feet (40’) apart. Trees may be of a variety listed in § 155.606.10
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 15
and flowering trees are preferred. Any property of at least forty feet (40’) in width shall
have at least one (1) streetscape tree planted. To maintain vehicular safety no tree shall be
planted within fifteen feet (15’) of a driveway or in a sight triangle at street intersections.
b. PERIMETER LANDSCAPING. The intent in the CrC district is to encourage an environment
without physical property boundaries. Perimeter landscaping is not required or desirable.
c. FENCING PROHIBITED. Fencing at property boundaries shall not be permitted on
nonresidential properties unless required by local, state, or federal law.
d. PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING. Landscaping as required in § 155.606.4 shall be required for
parking lots for the purpose of reducing aesthetic impacts of paving or removing the natural
vegetation from large areas; to reduce the noise, heat, glare, and dust associated with
parking lots; and to control the direction and velocity of surface water runoff.
e. Screening on properties used for nonresidential purposes shall be required to prevent the
view of storage, trash receptacles, and loading areas from adjoining properties and public
streets. Parking lots shall be screened to prevent their unobstructed view from adjacent
residential properties. The preferred location of screening is close to the object being
screened. Fencing may be used to screen trash receptacles and loading areas. Fencing
alone cannot be used as screening but a combination of fencing and vegetation is
acceptable. Vegetation must be on the side opposite the new development.
f. PRESERVATION OF EXISTING SITE VEGETATION. It is the intent of the town to retain existing
trees and natural vegetation areas on the site. Any living deciduous trees at least eight
inches (8”) DBH, coniferous trees at least twelve inches (12”) DBH, and dogwoods,
redbuds, and American hollies larger than two inches (2”) DBH anywhere outside of the
building envelope shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. These existing trees
can be used to meet any landscaping requirements set forth in this Title.
i. Existing trees outside of the building envelope shall be marked as protected trees
and shall be staked, fenced, or otherwise clearly marked and protected from
vehicular movement and material storage during construction or land-disturbing
activity.
ii. A minimum of fifteen (15) small or large maturing trees shall be retained or
planted on the parcel for each acre or proportional area disturbed by development.
Required planting or screening should be included in calculating this overall
requirement.
3. FENCING AND WALLS. Fencing and walls are not encouraged in the CrC District. On residential
properties, no wall or fence may exceed six feet (6’) in height within any required yard, and shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) opacity. This wall and fence height/opacity limitation does
not apply to walls and fences not in any required yard or setback, or those constructed around electric
and gas substations, sewage treatment plants, pressure regulator stations, buildings to house pumps
and lift stations, and similar structures; or municipal reservoirs and water storage tanks. Walls and
fences related to these uses may be subject to landscape screening provisions elsewhere in this Title.
(Ord. 1241, passed 8-12-02)
4. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS FOR PROPERTIES GREATER THAN FIVE (5) ACRES.
a. OPTION 1: LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. The following standards apply to single
family dwelling units, and homes with home based businesses.
i. Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 square feet
ii. Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
iii. Minimum Set Back: 25 feet
iv. Minimum Rear Yard: 25 feet
v. Minimum Side Yard: 5 feet, or 0 feet. Use of a zero lot line is permissible only if
a ten foot (10’) separation can be maintained between the lot line and the adjacent
home, so this option would require a ten foot (10’) side yard for the opposite side
yard on the lot. In addition, a five foot (5’) maintenance easement shall be
provided to maintain the wall abutting the adjacent property. No windows,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 16
heating or cooling equipment are permitted along the zero lot line side of the
dwelling and the property.
vi. Maximum Height: 35 feet
b. OPTION 2: LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. The following standards apply to singlefamily
dwelling units, accessory apartments within a single-family home, accessory
apartments separate from, but on the same lot as a single-family house, and homes with
home based businesses.
i. Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 square feet
ii. Minimum Lot Width: 70 feet
iii. Minimum Set Back: 30 feet
iv. Minimum Rear Yard: 50 feet
v. Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet
vi. Maximum Height: 35 feet
c. OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS. Lots developed under Option 1 must preserve thirty percent
(30%) and lots developed under Option 2 must preserve ten percent (10%) of the total land
area as public open space. This open space can be left in a natural state or can be used for
active and passive recreational purposes. For the purpose of this § 155.503.2, areas
designated as open space shall meet these qualifications:
i. Is not encumbered with any substantial structure, except those that are accessory
to the recreational use of the open space, and such structures shall not cover more
than five percent (5%) of the total open space.
ii. Is not contained in any street right-of-way, easements, parking areas, sidewalk, or
public facilities area.
iii. The open space shall be defined on a subdivision plat. If confined to rear lots, it
shall be legally and logically accessible to the public.
iv. The open space must be free from litter and noxious weeds.
v. The open space shall be set aside in one of two ways:
• Dedicated to the Town if requested by the Town to be used as public
open space for parks, greenway, or other public use.
• Shall be protected by legal arrangements, satisfactory to the Town,
sufficient to assure its maintenance and preservation for the purpose
intended. Covenants or other acceptable legal arrangements shall
specify: ownership of the open space; method of maintenance;
responsibility of maintenance; membership and assessment provision;
guarantees that any association formed to own and or maintain the open
space could not be dissolved without the consent of the Town; and other
provisions determined necessary by the Town.
vi. At least one-half (50%) of the open space required to be set aside under this
section shall be useable, meaning an area that is capable of being used and enjoyed
for passive or active recreation. For any wooded area, the only cutting of trees
permitted shall be for walking/jogging trails, and where an arborist has
determined in a written report that a tree is diseased and dying, dead, or in a
declining state that would render it unsafe in a public use area. Additional
landscaping and tree planting is allowed.
vii. The open space area that is for active recreation may contain such improvements
as athletic courts, and/or fields, picnic facilities, and playground equipment or tot
lots. Athletic fields shall be planted in grass with the exception of the infield area
of a baseball or softball field which may be left exposed.
5. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PROPERTIES LESS THAN FIVE (5) ACRES. The
following standards apply to single-family dwelling units, accessory apartments within a singlefamily
home, accessory apartments separate from, but on the same lot as a single-family house, and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 17
homes with home based businesses.
a. Minimum Lot Area: 7,500 square feet
b. Minimum Lot Width: 65 feet
c. Minimum Set Back: 25 feet
d. Minimum Rear Yard: 30 feet
e. Minimum Side Yard: 8 feet
f. Maximum Height: 35 feet
6. CRESTDALE SITE PLAN AND/OR ELEVATION PLAN APPROVAL FOR USES OTHER THAN SINGLE
FAMILY DWELLINGS. A property owner may submit a site plan and/or elevation plan application to
the Town Planning office for review and recommendation at any time. Unless specifically allowed
to submit only a site plan or only an elevation plan, both are typically required at the same time.
Upon completion of review, Town staff and applicants shall meet to review staff findings.
Applicants shall provide additional or revised documents as determined necessary to show
compliance to all standards. The site plan and/or elevation plan shall then be forwarded to the
Matthews Board of Commissioners with staff report and recommendations for final approval, as
explained at § 155.401.5.B.
In approving a site plan and/or elevation plan, the Board of Commissioners may attach such
reasonable conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping,
screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Section and the general
purpose of the CrC District, in addition to those specified in this Title.
7. Site Plan and/or Elevation Plan Application Submission Documents:
a. DWELLINGS: SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS, TWO-FAMILY; ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT, AND ACCESSORY APARTMENT: (Ord. No. 1145, passed 1/8/01)
i. Completed application.
ii. Sketched site plan drawn to scale of no less than one inch (1”) equals one hundred
feet (100’).
iii. Statement of purpose describing the intended use.
iv. A sketch of the structure with a description of materials to be used on the exterior,
including siding and roofing material.
v. A boundary survey showing total acreage of the property.
vi. The owner’s name(s) and addresses and existing land use(s) of all adjoining
properties.
b. ALL OTHER APPLICATIONS: In addition to the foregoing, all other applications shall also
include the following minimum information:
i. A landscape, screening, and lighting plan.
ii. If the intended use is to be licensed by a state or federal agency, a copy of the
license requirements and explanation of how they will be met.
iii. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing driveway location(s), sidewalk, edge of
public street pavement, required parking, interior parking and vehicular
circulation, pedestrian connections between street and buildings and/or to
adjacent properties with complementary planned or existing uses, and driveways
or street intersections within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of the site.
iv. A statement of hours of operation and number of employees.
8. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES. In addition to the lot development standards in
this Title, the following uses shall comply with the following standards. Where the requirements of
this § 155.503.2 are in conflict with any other provision of this Title, this Section shall prevail.
a. CHURCHES OR PLACES OF WORSHIP.
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
• Minimum Lot Size: 1 acre for churches with seating in largest assembly
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 18
room for up to 299 persons, or four (4) acres for churches with 300 or
more seating capacity in largest assembly room
• Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
• Minimum Setback: 40 feet
• Minimum Rear Yard: 30 feet
• Minimum Side Yard: 20 feet
• Maximum Height: 50 feet
ii. Protection of existing site vegetation is encouraged.
iii. OFF-STREET PARKING. Parking shall be to the side or rear of the primary structure
and shall comply with the requirements of § 155.607. A pick-up and drop-off
area at or near the front entrance shall be permitted.
iv. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
• Siding materials used alone or in combination shall be wood, masonry,
architectural metal panels or other such similar aesthetically pleasing
materials.
• Roofing materials shall be asphalt shingles or architectural metal panels.
v. The development’s main entrance must not be on a minor residential street.
vi. LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED. The landscaping plan is in conformance with the
regulations set forth in § 155.606.
vii. ACCESSORY USES. Accessory uses on the same property may include but are not
limited to:
• Child day care facilities:
? Serve a maximum of one hundred twenty five (125) children.
? Shall meet all state and federal laws governing such a facility.
? A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of secured
outdoor recreation space must be provided for each child.
• Assisted living facilities, homes for the aged, rest homes, nursing homes
and adult day care centers:
? May serve a maximum of one hundred (100) persons.
? A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of secured
outdoor recreation space must be provided for each resident and
a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of private outdoor
recreation space must be provided for each individual
apartment unit.
? Must meet all North Carolina state license requirements for its
facility type.
• Dwellings: single-family attached, duplex, and single-family detached:
? Must look considerably like a single-family detached dwelling.
? Only one (1) entrance shall be on the front elevation. All other
entrances shall be on the side or rear of the building.
? Maximum of twenty four (24) residential units.
? Dwelling units may be individually owned with no conveyance
of property with ownership, therefore units shall be exempt
from all lot size requirements.
• Outdoor recreational facilities including tennis and basketball courts.
• Parks.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 19
• Picnic areas.
• Pavilion areas.
viii. A master facilities vision plan with multiple phases of proposed development may
be offered for initial site plan review and approval, with future phases in
conceptual form only. Site plan review by the Board of Commissioners shall be
required for all future phases to verify conformance with the approved master
facilities vision plan. (Ord. 1240, passed 7-8-02)
b. CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES.
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
• Minimum Lot Size: 12,000 square feet
• Maximum Lot Size: 2 acres
• Minimum Lot Width: 70 feet
• Minimum Setback: 35 feet
• Minimum Rear Yard: 35 feet
• Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet
• Maximum Height: 35 feet
ii. Must meet all requirements of § 155.506.6.
iii. Protection of existing site vegetation is encouraged.
iv. OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of
§ 155.607.
v. Serve a maximum of thirty (30) children.
vi. Shall meet all state and federal laws governing such a facility.
vii. LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED. The landscaping plan is in conformance with the
regulations set forth in § 155.606.
C. SKILLED CARE FACILITIES, ADULT CARE FACILITIES, AND ADULT DAY CARE CENTERS.
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
• Minimum Lot Size: 12,000 square feet
• Maximum Lot Size: 2 acres
• Minimum Lot Width: 70 feet
• Minimum Setback: 35feet
• Minimum Rear Yard: 35 feet
• Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet
• Maximum Height: 35 feet
ii. Protection of existing site vegetation is encouraged.
iii. OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of
§ 155.607.
iv. May serve a maximum of thirty (30) persons.
v. Each twenty four (24) hour residential structure may contain only five (5)
individual apartment units and these structures must be separated by twenty feet
(20’), on all sides, from all other structures.
vi. A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of secured outdoor recreation
space must be provided for each resident or maximum capacity of day attendees,
plus a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of private outdoor recreation
space must be provided for each individual apartment unit.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 20
vii. Must meet all North Carolina state license requirements for its facility type.
viii. Must not be located within five hundred feet (500’) of another skilled care facility,
adult care facility, or adult day care center.
ix. LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED. The landscaping plan is in conformance with the
regulations set forth in § 155.606.
d. COMMERCIAL USES (limited to the inside of buildings with no drive-through or drive-in
service):
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
• Minimum Lot Size: 6,000 square feet
• Maximum Lot Size: 15,000 square feet
• Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
• Minimum Setback: 20 feet
• Minimum Rear Yard: 30 feet
• Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet
• Maximum Height: 25 feet
• Maximum Building Footprint Area: 2,000 square feet
ii. Protection of existing site vegetation is encouraged.
iii. OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of
§ 155.607.
iv. Alcoholic beverages and adult materials shall not be sold.
v. Commercial developments are limited to non-local streets, Class V and higher.
vi. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 8 am and 8 pm.
vii. LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED. The landscaping plan is in conformance with the
regulations set forth in § 155.606.
viii. All dumpster receptacles are adequately screened from public view, except for
those receptacles normally meant for patron use.
ix. The structure shall use building and roofing materials similar to typical singlefamily
dwellings, and shall significantly appear as a single-family home.
e. DWELLINGS: SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED AND DUPLEX/TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS. (Ord.
No. 1145, passed 1/8/01)
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
• Minimum Lot Size: 4,500 square feet per dwelling
• Minimum Lot Width: 45 feet per dwelling
• Minimum Setback: 25 feet
• Minimum Rear Yard: 25 feet
• Minimum Side Yard: 0 feet on attached sides, 5 feet on unattached sides
• Maximum Height: 35 feet
ii. Protection of existing site vegetation is encouraged.
iii. Must look considerably like a single-family detached dwelling.
iv. Only one entrance shall be on the front elevation. All other entrances shall be on
the side or rear of the building.
f. ACCESSORY APARTMENT, CONSTRUCTED WITHIN A SINGLE-FAMILY HOME.
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The lot development standards given in § 155.503.2.C.4 or 5 above shall be used,
whichever one applies.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 21
ii. MAXIMUM NUMBER: Only one (1) accessory apartment, for a total of two (2)
dwelling units per lot shall be permitted.
iii. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA: The accessory unit shall not exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the total heated square feet of the primary dwelling unit, and shall not exceed
nine hundred (900) square feet in heated area.
iv. There shall be no more than one (1) person for every three hundred (300) square
feet of heated floor area.
v. OFF-STREET PARKING: One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for an accessory apartment.
vi. At least one unit shall be owner occupied.
vii. Any additions to the primary structure must portray the character of a singlefamily
home and materials used must be similar in composition and appearance
to those of the original building. A building may not be expanded by more than
twenty percent (20%) for the purpose of adding an accessory apartment.
viii. If an additional door is added to provide access to the accessory apartment it shall
not be installed on the front elevation of the building.
g. ACCESSORY APARTMENT ON A LOT WITH, BUT SEPARATE FROM, A SINGLE-FAMILY
DETACHED HOUSE.
i. LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The lot development standards given in § 155.503.2.C.4 or 5 above shall be used,
whichever one applies.
ii. MAXIMUM NUMBER: Only one (1) accessory apartment, for a total of two (2)
dwelling units per lot shall be permitted.
iii. LOCATION ON LOT: The accessory apartment must be located within the area of
the lot allowed for principal dwellings (the building envelope).
iv. MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA: The accessory apartment shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the total heated square feet of the primary dwelling unit, and shall not
exceed nine hundred (900) square feet in heated area.
v. There shall be no more than one (1) person for every three hundred (300) square
feet of floor space.
vi. OFF-STREET PARKING: One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for an accessory apartment.
vii. The primary dwelling unit shall be owner occupied.
viii. The accessory unit shall be compatible, in appearance, with the principal dwelling
unit. The accessory unit must be located behind the front plane of the primary
structure.
ix. The primary structure may not have an accessory apartment.
x. The primary structure and the secondary structure shall be separated by at least
ten feet (10’). (Ord. No. 977, passed 5-26-98)
D. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The CrC district establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however may not always be appropriate to a particular segment or building within the development.
Accordingly, new development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures
may require the use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development
requirements specified here for the CrC district in § 155.503.2 may be modified through the Flexible Design
provisions of § 155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.3. Small Residential Neighborhood District (SRN)
A. The Small Residential Neighborhood (SRN) District is established to provide an alternative residential
environment from a traditional single-family detached subdivision pattern which incorporates various styles
of housing intermingled and at differing densities, with an overall density averaging under twenty (20)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 22
dwellings per acre. Improved open space, wooded natural areas, common gardening space, and non-street
walking and biking connections are all encouraged to be interwoven into the neighborhood design. A limited
amount of nonresidential uses may be incorporated into the proposed development when it can clearly serve
the residents within the SRN site through employment opportunities, or by providing civic uses or needed
routine services, such as day care or dry cleaners, but not predominately the sale of merchandise. The map
symbol and short name for the Small Residential Neighborhood District shall be “SRN”.
Consideration of SRN district designation may result from the creation and adoption of a general concept
plan or small area plan which becomes an appendix in the Matthews Land Use Plan. Such a small area plan
may include all the area of one SRN proposed district, or may include a larger geographic location. Any
small area plan which is used as a basis for designation of an SRN district will identify the need for alternative
styles and higher density residential development in the vicinity of the proposed location, and show existing
or future pedestrian connectivity to a proposed SRN site. The small area plan may include required elements
such as minimum required street and pedestrian main networks to assure connectivity to a mix of other uses
within a walkable distance.
As a Conditional-Only District, parcels of land may be zoned to this category following the procedures
explained at § 155.501.3.C. and D., at the time a specific development project is submitted for consideration,
or parcels may receive early designation as outlined in § 155.501.3.I., prior to any specific plan due to their
location as an area identified by the Matthews Board of Commissioners for this zoning designation, with the
condition that prior to any land disturbing activity, a site specific plan for development shall be approved
through the site plan approval process as described at § 155.401.5.B.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the SRN District. Uses allowed within the SRN district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the SRN district are
listed at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.3 specifically for the
SRN district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the SRN district.
C. OTHER STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE SRN DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of other sections of this
Title, development and improvements in the Small Residential Neighborhood district shall comply with the
following requirements. Where the provisions in this § 155.503.3 conflict with the provisions of other
Sections of this Title, except for Overlay district requirements, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. An SRN district may be located anywhere in the Town limits where
the Board of Commissioners determines a mix of housing styles will create a beneficial environment
both within the district and to the surrounding neighborhoods.
2. MINIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA. An SRN designation shall be a minimum of one (1) acre, and
include a minimum of six (6) dwelling units when utilizing the dimensional requirements given in
§ 155.605.A.
3. OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT. The SRN district project shall include an open space system featuring
pedestrian amenities. The open space system may include areas devoted to post construction, water
quality and/or storm water detention measures, any required or provided landscaping or screening
areas, SWIM buffers, greenways or environmental protection features.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION. Where a parcel has received the designation of SRN prior to a full development
proposal on it, as outlined at § 155.501.3.I, sufficient drawings and documents to clearly prove compliance
to the design elements listed in § 155.503.3.E through G below shall be submitted to the Matthews Planning
office for review and recommendation in the same way as a rezoning application is handled by Town staff.
Upon completion of review, Town staff and applicants shall meet to review staff findings. Applicants shall
provide additional or revised documents as determined necessary to show compliance to all standards.
Submission of a request for site plan and/or elevation plan approval shall then be forwarded to the Matthews
Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall receive a report with recommendations from
Town Planning staff on how well the proposal meets the intent of the district and the design criteria listed
below, and determine when the proposal meets the requirements and can be approved.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. In evaluating applications for SRN designation, the Board of Commissioners shall
consider the following:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 23
1. Access to public streets and the adequacy of those streets to carry anticipated traffic.
2. On-site circulation for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
3. The amount, variety, and accessibility of passive open space, pedestrian and bicycle amenities, and
active recreation parkland within the site and in the immediate surrounding areas.
4. Adequacy of existing community facilities such as water, sewer, police, and fire protection.
5. Relationship to and impacts upon adjoining and nearby properties and the adequacy of proposed
measures to minimize any adverse impacts.
6. The appropriateness of the proposal in relationship to the policies and objectives of the Matthews
Land Use Plan and to a more detailed small area plan, if available.
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the SRN district.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. When part of the development of an SRN site, the interconnected network of streets must
extend into adjoining areas except where the general goal of integration and connectivity
with surrounding uses is deemed inappropriate or impractical due to sensitive natural
resources, or unusual topography provide no practical connection alternatives. Street stubs
must be provided to adjoining undeveloped areas to accommodate future street
connectivity.
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets. Intersections between arterials and collectors must have centerline offsets of at
least one hundred fifty feet (150’). This requirement does not apply to intersections
between alleys and local streets.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets.
e. Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted except where physical conditions such as
limited access highways, sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Each dead end must be detailed as a circular turn-around,
a close, a hammerhead, or a “Y” turn-around and should provide pedestrian connectivity
to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Private streets and gated streets are prohibited. All streets must be dedicated to the public,
although alleys may be private.
g. Alley Access. Alleys are encouraged to provide vehicular access to off-street parking for
individual dwellings in the SRN district. Alley entrances should generally align, but
internal deflections or variations in the alley network to prevent excessive lengths or
monotonous views of the rear of structures are encouraged. All alleys shall be identified
as either public or private, and any public alley shall be dedicated to the public as provided
for in Chapter 7.
h. A thematic and cohesive streetscape planting and lighting plan shall be prepared for the
SRN district at time of initial designation. The streetscape plan shall incorporate street
trees to provide both form (canopy) and comfort (shade) to the street. Street trees give
special character and coherence to each street. Lighting shall be incorporated to provide
night-time illumination under the tree canopy for safety and ambiance for pedestrians, and
adequate illumination for vehicular traffic.
i. FRONTS AND REARS. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. Owners and
occupants are encouraged to utilize planters and window boxes filled with colorful plants
along each façade that fronts a public street. The private, interior portions of the
development allow residents to have private and semi-private (for apartment and
condominium buildings) gardens and courtyards.
3. BLOCKS. When new street intersections are created with an SRN designation, the block lengths
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 24
shall meet the standards provided in Chapter 7.
4. PARKING.
a. No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in the required setback for single-family attached
groups in straight line row formation of three (3) or more units, for any multi-family
buildings, or for any nonresidential uses.
b. On corner lots, parking will not be permitted in the street side yard closer than six feet (6’)
to the public right-of-way.
c. Parking along alleys is allowed, may be at 90 degree, angled, or parallel, and must be of
sufficient depth to assure parked vehicles will not impede traffic movement in the alley.
Where 90 degree or angled spaces are provided, they must be a minimum of twenty feet
(20’) in length, and where parallel spaces are provided they must be a minimum of eight
feet (8’) in width. Any alley with parking spaces immediately adjacent must be paved a
minimum of twenty feet (20’) in width, with no obstructions such as doors, planters,
bollards, mechanical equipment, light poles, etc., that could restrict the full width use of
the pavement for vehicular maneuvering in and out of designated parking spaces.
d. Additional parking for guests within the SRN development is encouraged, either on-street
or in small lots of no more than eight (8) spaces in any lot.
G. BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES.
1. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. All buildings in an SRN district shall be architecturally
compatible in appearance and quality through the use of similar or complementary building
materials, colors, architectural features and styles. An identified set of architectural styles or specific
architectural elements may be utilized to create a unique and unifying design theme.
2. A single-family attached dwelling group must be separated by sixteen feet (16’) from any other
single-family attached dwelling group.
3. A single-family attached dwelling group must be separated by twenty feet (20’) from any other style
of housing.
4. Every nonresidential building must be separated from any other building by a distance of twenty
five feet (25’).
H. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The SRN district establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however might not always be appropriate to the particular development. Accordingly, new
development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures may require the
use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development requirements specified
here for the SRN district in § 155.503.13 may be modified through the Flexible Design provisions of §
155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.4. Concentrated Multi-Family District (C-MF)
A. The Concentrated Multi-Family District is established to provide for a variety of multi-family residential uses
at considerably higher densities and within an urban setting not traditionally found in Matthews. This district
is intended primarily for housing in the form of attached units, individual multi-family buildings, and planned
multi-family complexes with front entrances located close to public streets, and in close proximity to existing
or planned transit stops, arterial streets, or the downtown. The district is intended to be employed either as
small scattered locations or in larger tracts, but any location shall be designed to accommodate a minimum
average of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre with no maximum density established by this code. Location
and number of parking spaces is based on various standards that can be met by the development site and its
surroundings. Provision and improvement of public and/or private recreational space is based on location
and number of dwelling units created. Certain nonresidential uses of a public or semi-public nature are also
permitted and strongly encouraged to be incorporated in the overall design. The map symbol and short name
for the Concentrated Multi-Family District shall be "C-MF".
Consideration of C-MF district designation may result from the creation and adoption of a general concept
plan or small area plan which becomes an appendix in the Matthews Land Use Plan. Such a small area plan
may include all the area of one C-MF proposed district, or may include a larger geographic location. Any
small area plan which is used to encourage the designation of a C-MF district shall identify the need for
higher density residential development in the vicinity of the proposed location, and show existing or future
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 25
pedestrian connectivity to a proposed C-MF site. The small area plan may include required elements such
as minimum required street and pedestrian main networks to assure connectivity to a mix of other uses within
a walkable distance.
As a Conditional-Only District, parcels of land may be zoned to this category following the procedures
explained at § 155.501.3.C. and D., at the time a specific development project is submitted for consideration,
or parcels may receive early designation as outlined in § 155.501.3.I., prior to any specific plan due to their
location as an area identified by the Matthews Board of Commissioners for this zoning designation, with the
condition that prior to any land disturbing activity, a site specific plan for development shall be approved
through the site plan approval process as described at § 155.401.5.B.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the C-MF District. Uses allowed within the C-MF district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses
at § 155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the C-MF district
are listed at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.4 specifically for
the C-MF district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the C-MF district.
C. OTHER STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE C-MFDISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of other sections of this
Title, development and improvements in the Concentrated Multi-Family district shall comply with the
following requirements. Where the provisions in this § 155.503.4 conflict with the provisions of other
Sections of this Title, except for Overlay district requirements, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. A C-MF district shall meet one (1) or more of the following:
a. have frontage on an existing or proposed major or minor thoroughfare;
b. at least one-third (1/3) of the site must be within 2,400 lineal feet of a designated transit
station or transit stop shelter; or
c. be located within one-half (1/2) mile of the intersection of Trade and John Streets in
Downtown. In addition, the Board of Commissioners shall identify though small area plans
within the Matthews Land Use Plan, where higher density housing of a C-MF district will
create a beneficial environment both within the district and to the surrounding
neighborhoods.
2. MINIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA: A C-MF designation shall be either:
a. a minimum of three (3) acres, and include a minimum of thirty six (36) dwelling units when
adjacent to a thoroughfare or near a transit station; or (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
b. less than one and one-half (1½) acres when within one-half (1/2) mile of the intersection
of Trade and John Streets. Any C-MF location shall utilize the dimensional requirements
given in § 155.604.3 to determine capacity for maximum build-out density.
3. EXTERIOR PROJECT EDGE. Outside of the downtown area, The C-MF district shall provide an
exterior project edge of at least sixty feet (60’) when abutting single-family residentially zoned or
developed properties. An exterior project edge of at least twenty five feet (25’) will be established
along abutting properties assigned to any other zoning category. The exterior project edge does not
apply to those portions of the project which front on a public street. For C-MF designations within
the downtown less than one and one-half (1 ½) acres in size, the exterior project edge shall be twenty
feet (20’) abutting single-family residentially zoned or developed properties and ten feet (10’)
abutting other zoning categories. Buildings fronting a public street shall not be set back further from
the outside edge of right-of-way, including transitional right-of-way when applicable, more than
twelve feet (12’), and shall have pedestrian pathways to one (1) or more doors from the sidewalk.
No building, parking, maneuvering, loading or service areas may be located within an exterior
project edge.
4. MINIMUM PROJECT EDGE SETBACKS. The minimum distance from any abutting property zoned and
developed for single-family residential purposes to any building within the project site under forty
five feet (45’) in height must be at least one hundred feet (100’). The minimum distance from any
abutting undeveloped property which is zoned for single-family residential purposes to any building
within the project site under forty five feet (45’) in height must be at least fifty feet (50’). The
minimum distance from any abutting property zoned for single-family residential purposes to any
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 26
building within the project site forty five feet (45’) in height or higher must be increased by one foot
for every one foot in added building height over forty five feet (45’). The minimum distance from
any abutting property zoned for any other uses to any building within the project site under forty
five feet (45’) in height must be at least twenty five feet (25’). The minimum distance from any
abutting property zoned for any other uses to any building within the project site forty five feet (45’)
in height or higher must be increased by one foot (1’) for every two feet (2’) in added building height
over forty five feet (45’). These minimum separation distances do not apply to buildings abutting
public streets or to C-MF designations within the downtown that are less than one and one-half (1
½) acres in size.
5. OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT. A C-MF designation of three (3) or more acres shall include an open
space system featuring pedestrian amenities which must be connected to pedestrian and bicycle
facilities in the surrounding neighborhoods. The open space system may include areas devoted to
post construction, water quality and/or storm water detention measures, any required or provided
landscaping or screening areas, SWIM buffers, greenways or environmental protection features. A
minimum of one thirty fifth (1/35) of an acre of open space must be provided for every dwelling
unit created. The open space shall generally be located as a single tract within the C-MF designated
site and at least one-half (1/2) of it shall be usable by residents and the public for recreation. When
the open space requirement cannot feasibly be accomplished on-site, then an off-site location of
equivalent size and within one-half (1/2) mile shall be identified as an alternative public park site.
This off-site property shall be deeded or dedicated to the Town after it is improved as a park. (Am.
Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14)
D. EARLY DESIGNATION. Where a parcel has received the designation of C-MF prior to a full development
proposal on it, as outlined at § 155.501.3.I, sufficient drawings and documents to clearly prove compliance
to the design elements listed in § 155.503.4.E through G below shall be submitted to the Matthews Planning
office for review and recommendation in the same way as a rezoning application is handled by Town staff.
Upon completion of review, Town staff and applicants shall meet to review staff findings. Applicants shall
provide additional or revised documents as determined necessary to show compliance to all standards.
Submission of a request for site plan and/or elevation plan approval shall then be forwarded to the Matthews
Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall receive a report with recommendations from
Town Planning staff on how well the proposal meets the intent of the district and the design criteria listed
below, and determine when the proposal meets the requirements and can be approved.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. In evaluating applications for C-MF designation, the Board of Commissioners shall
consider the following:
1. Access to public streets and the adequacy of those streets to carry anticipated traffic.
2. On-site circulation for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
3. The amount, variety, and accessibility of passive open space, pedestrian and bicycle amenities, and
active recreation parkland within the site and in the immediate surrounding areas.
4. Adequacy of existing community facilities such as water, sewer, police, and fire protection.
5. Relationship to and impacts upon adjoining and nearby properties and the adequacy of proposed
measures to minimize any adverse impacts.
6. The appropriateness of the proposal in relationship to the policies and objectives of the Matthews
Land Use Plan and to a more detailed small area plan, if available.
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the C-MF district.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. The interconnected network of streets must extend into adjoining areas except where the
general goal of integration and connectivity with surrounding uses is deemed inappropriate
or impractical due to sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Street stubs must be provided to adjoining undeveloped
areas to accommodate future street connectivity.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 27
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets. Intersections between arterials and collectors must have centerline offsets of at
least one hundred fifty feet (150’). This requirement does not apply to intersections
between alleys and local streets.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets.
e. Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted except where physical conditions such as
limited access highways, sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Each dead end must be detailed as a circular turn-around,
a close, a hammerhead, or a “Y” turn-around and should provide pedestrian connectivity
to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Private streets and gated streets are prohibited. All streets must be dedicated to the public,
although alleys may be private.
g. Alleys are encouraged to provide vehicular access to off-street parking in the C-MF district.
Alley entrances should generally align. Variations in alley alignment is encouraged to
prevent long stretches of alleys. All alleys shall be identified as either public or private,
and any public alley shall be dedicated to the public as provided for in Chapter 7.
h. A thematic and cohesive streetscape planting and lighting plan shall be prepared for tracts
of three (3) acres or larger at time of initial C-MF designation. Small sites of one and onehalf
(1-1/2) acres or less shall include street trees and lighting consistent with surrounding
development. The streetscape plan shall incorporate street trees to provide both form
(canopy) and comfort (shade) to the street. Street trees give special character and
coherence to each street. Lighting shall be incorporated to provide night-time illumination
under the tree canopy for safety and ambiance for pedestrians, and adequate illumination
for vehicular traffic.
i. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. Owners and occupants are
encouraged to utilize planters and window boxes filled with colorful plants along each
façade that fronts a public street, plaza, parking lot, or similar public use realm. Any
interior portions not visible from the public use realm allow residents to have private and
semi-private gardens and courtyards.
3. BLOCKS. When a C-MF designation will create new streets or extend streets, the block lengths shall
meet the standards provided in Chapter 7.
4. PARKING. No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in the required setback or between buildings
and any public street, in order to allow the structures to be located at or near the public right-of-way
and provide visual screening of parking.
a. Location of Off-Street Parking. Parking may be located within buildings, behind buildings,
in separate garage structures located to the rear of residential buildings and interior to a CMF
site, or along interior alleys. When parking is located beside or between buildings so
that it is visible from a public street or sidewalk, a wall or hedge between three (3’) and
four and one-half (4-1/2’) feet shall be provided to block view of parked vehicles from any
public street or pedestrian pathway. Access to off-street parking shall be provided by alleys
or private driveways. Parking along alleys is allowed, may be at 90 degree, angled, or
parallel, and must be of sufficient depth to assure parked vehicles will not impede traffic
movement in the alley. Where 90 degree or angled spaces are provided, they must be a
minimum of twenty feet (20’) in length, and where parallel spaces are provided they must
be a minimum of eight feet (8’) in width. Any alley with parking spaces immediately
adjacent must be paved a minimum of twenty feet (20’) in width, with no obstructions such
as doors, dumpsters, planters, bollards, mechanical equipment, street light poles, etc., that
could restrict the full width use of the pavement for vehicular maneuvering in and out of
designated parking spaces.
b. PARKING STRUCTURES. Parking structures are encouraged to create shared parking
opportunities and to reduce the footprint of surface lots. Structured parking may extend
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 28
below grade and may contain multiple levels of parking above grade. Parking structures
may contain other uses above the parking levels provided the entire building does not
exceed the height allowed in the C-MF district. Partially enclosed parking spaces may be
created with habitable space cantilevered over them at the rear of a building, or along the
side of a building when a solid wall blocks view of parked vehicles from any public street
or pedestrian pathway.
c. SHARED PARKING. Where nonresidential uses are within or immediately adjacent to a CMF
site, shared parking may be utilized.
i. Shared location of cumulative required spaces. Owners and developers are
encouraged to design a shared parking system for C-MF dwellings and nearby
nonresidential uses to distribute the daily and twenty four (24) hour parking load
in a joint effort in shared parking lots or structures. A written agreement between
property owners explaining what parcels or buildings shall utilize shared parking,
and which will remain binding on future owners and land uses, shall be signed
and recorded with the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds office.
ii. Shared use of same spaces. Shared parking of required parking spaces may be
permitted with approval from the Planning Director as provided in §
155.607.2.G.6 of this Title.
5. BUILDINGS FRONTING ON PUBLIC STREETS. Buildings within a C-MF site shall provide a “front
door” appearance toward any public street, which will require pedestrian scale doors and windows,
with pedestrian walkways from the streetside sidewalk to the buildings and between buildings when
appropriate. When a building is located directly across a street from significantly different style,
use, or scale of lots or buildings, the principal facade on the C-MF building must be varied with a
change of architectural expression that reflects the widths of the narrower lots or smaller buildings.
These changes in expression shall include a break in façade plane and/or roofline, and may also
incorporate other vertical elements running from sidewalk to roof, such as a change in fenestration,
style or texture. These changes must soften the visual effect of larger scale buildings directly across
the street from narrower buildings.
G. BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES.
1. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.603 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the C-MF district. All buildings within the C-MF district must
be architecturally compatible in appearance and quality through the use of similar building
materials, colors, architectural features and styles. An identified set of architectural styles or specific
architectural elements may be utilized to create an overall design theme.
2. EXTERIOR BUILDING WALLS.
a. Primary exterior wall materials, which shall cover at least seventy five percent (75%) of
each façade, excluding any glazed areas, shall consist of brick, other masonry, or native
stone (or synthetic equivalent).
b. Secondary materials, which may cover up to twenty five percent (25%) of each façade,
excluding any glazed areas, may include hardiboard siding, wood siding, and stucco.
c. Accent materials and trim may cover up to ten percent (10%) of each façade excluding any
glazed areas. Such accents and trim materials may include pre-cast masonry (for trim and
cornice elements only), Gypsum Reinforced Fiber Concrete (GFRC—for trim elements
only), metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornamentation only), and split-faced
block (only for piers, foundation walls and chimneys). All accent and trim materials shall
be identified on elevation plans.
d. Colors of all non-glazing exterior materials on any building shall be limited to no more
than three (3), unless the building is both larger in overall size than sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet and at least three (3) stories in height. Such larger buildings may employ up to
five (5) distinct colors on its exterior facades. For the purpose of this standard, the term
color shall also refer to two (2) clearly different shades of the same color, such as a light
green and a dark green, or a pastel pink and a burgundy red.
e. Alternative percentages of listed materials or types of materials may be requested by the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 29
Flexible Design Provisions at § 155.503.4.H. at the time of initial district designation, or
through the Administrative Amendment process for an individual building after it has
received site plan and elevation plan approval.
3. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR EXTERIOR WALLS: The following configurations and
techniques are permitted.
a. WALLS
i. Wall openings shall correspond to interior space and shall not span across building
structure such as the floor structural and mechanical thickness.
ii. Material changes shall be made within a constructional logic as where an addition
(of a different material) is built onto the original building.
b. WOOD SIDING AND WOOD SIMULATION MATERIALS
i. Lap siding (horizontal) configuration
ii. Smooth or rough-sawn finish (no faux wood grain)
c. BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE. Must be detailed and in an appropriate load-bearing
configurations.
d. STUCCO (cementitious finish). Smooth or sand only, no roughly textured finish.
e. STORY HEIGHT. The ground story of residential buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10’) tall. The ground story of nonresidential and mixed-use buildings must be from twelve
feet (12’) to eighteen feet (18’) tall. Buildings with parking at the ground level and
residential units above shall have their first floor a minimum of ten feet (10’) tall. Each
story above the ground story shall be at least eight feet (8’) tall. Any upper story taller than
twelve feet (12’) will count as two (2) stories. Story heights are measured from the floor to
the bottom of the lowest structural member that supports the story above.
f. Minimum stories. All multi-family buildings with more than six (6) dwelling units shall
be at least two (2) stories in height.
g. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
4. ROOFS AND PARAPETS. Buildings in the C-MF district at or under three (3) stories in height shall
not utilize a flat roof design, unless located in the downtown and adjacent or across the street from
a nonresidential structure. The design standards for roofs and parapets are as follows:
a. Roof Materials. The following materials are permitted.
i. Clay or concrete (faux clay)
ii. Tile (barrel or flat roman)
iii. Slate (equivalent synthetic or better)
iv. Metal (standing seam, equivalent or better)
v. Dimensional Asphalt shingles
vi. Cedar Shingles
vii. Cornices and soffits may be a combination of wood, vinyl, and/or metal.
b. Parapets shall generally not extend above the top of a flat or single pitch (shed) roof more
than six feet (6’) fronting a public street. Parapets may be used to visually screen roof-top
mechanical equipment, and a utilitarian penthouse structure may be attached to the interior
side of a parapet extension in order to screen equipment. Parapets shall appear from the
exterior as part of the exterior wall, and as such shall be composed of the same materials
and limited to the same colors and finishes as the materials of the exterior walls. When a
parapet also serves as a security railing for any activity on a rooftop, a parapet not facing a
public street may incorporate different materials than the exterior wall from which it
extends, such as glass, metal mesh, and poles. When a parapet faces a public street and
also serves as a security railing for a rooftop activity, such as a green roof or open air patio,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 30
then the parapet may be designed such that it has openings in its vertical surface to allow
visibility and air flow through it. Such openings shall not be lower than three feet (3’) from
the roof surface nor exceed eighteen inches (18”) in width.
c. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
5. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES. The following configurations and techniques are permitted:
a. PITCHED ROOFS. Pitch is exclusive of roofs behind parapets.
i. Simple hip and gable roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and
10:12.
ii. Shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between 3:12 and 8:12.
iii. Eaves, when provided, must overhang eighteen (18) to thirty inches (30”) on a
principal building for the initial four (4) stories. For each additional story; six
inches (6”) shall be added to the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added
to the maximum, up to a maximum projection of seven feet (7’).
iv. Eaves on accessory buildings, dormers, and other smaller structures must
overhang at least eight inches (8”).
v. Timber eaves and balcony brackets must be a minimum of four-by-four inches
(4” by 4”) in dimension.
b. PARAPET AND CORNICE STANDARDS.
i. Allowed only for sites where the roof material is not visible from any adjacent
street.
ii. Buildings without visible roof surfaces and overhanging eaves may create an
overhang with a cornice projecting horizontally between six (6”) and twelve
inches (12”) beyond the building walls on the primary structure for the initial four
(4) stories. For each additional story; six inches (6”) shall be added to the
minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added to the maximum, up to a
maximum projection of six feet (6’).
c. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
6. WINDOWS AND DOORS. The standards for windows and doors are as follows:
a. Windows shall be of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel.
b. Window glass shall be clear or lightly-tinted and non-reflective, with light transmission at
the ground story at least seventy five percent (75%) and for the upper stories at least sixty
percent (60%), with modification as necessary to meet any applicable building and energy
code requirements.
c. Specialty windows, with a maximum of one per thirty (30) lineal feet along any façade
facing any public street or public use realm, per story is allowed. A specialty window may
utilize stained, opalescent, or translucent glass, or glass block, and shall not exceed forty
eight (48) square feet in area. Mirrored glass shall not be used when visible from any
public street or public use realm.
d. Operable windows and doors onto patios and balconies are allowed for residential units on
any story.
e. Window screens shall be black or gray. Screen frames shall match window frame material
or be dark anodized.
f. Doors designed primarily for pedestrian use shall be of wood, clad wood, or steel and may
include glass panes. Doors designed for vehicular use may be of any material and style
consistent with the architectural detail of the building.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 31
g. Double-height entryways (those that span more than one [1] story) are not allowed.
7. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR DOORS AND WINDOWS. The following are permitted:
a. The horizontal dimension of the opening shall not exceed the vertical dimension except
where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
b. Windows may be ganged horizontally.
c. Bay or bow windows, curved corner windows, or windows at corner of buildings are
allowed on all stories for residential units.
d. Exterior shutters, if applied, shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window at
one-half the width, even if inoperable.
e. Windows on any story above the ground story may be double-hung, single-hung, awning,
or casement windows. Fixed windows are permitted only as specialty windows or when a
component of a system including an operable window within a single wall opening.
f. Residential units shall have panes of glass no larger than sixty inches (60”) vertical by
thirty six inches (36”) horizontal when vertically oriented, or no larger than forty eight
inches (48”) vertical by sixty inches (60”) horizontal when horizontally oriented, except
where opening to an outdoor balcony or patio. When necessary to meet building codes for
egress purposes windows may exceed the dimensions given here.
g. Nonresidential windows and doors at the street level shall not have individual panes of
glass larger than eight feet (8’) in height by four feet (4’) wide.
h. All window pane surface area of ground story nonresidential buildings shall allow views
into the building interior for a depth of at least eight feet (8’) where the interior space is
retail, restaurant, office, or similar area accessible to the public. This shall not include
restrooms, or restricted employee-only accessed areas, such as a kitchen, inventory storage,
or loading dock. Windows shall not be made opaque by window treatments except for
operable sunscreen devices within the conditioned space.
i. Garage doors or operable coverings over vehicle use (service/loading) wall openings shall
not face the primary public street unless they are set back from the building façade and
from the public right-of-way at least twenty feet (20’).
j. Doors shall not be recessed more than three feet (3’) behind the shop-front windows and,
in any case, shall have a clear view and path to a forty five degree (45o) angle past the
perpendicular from each side of the door.
k. FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION ENTRANCES. Nonresidential uses shall have their primary public
walk-in entrances level with, to no greater than six inches (6”) above the adjacent walkway.
When a nonresidential use has more than one (1) primary public entrance and more than a
one foot (1’) difference in finished grade at various doorways, then the entrance adjacent
to a public street shall meet this requirement. Residential buildings shall have their first
habitable story at least eighteen inches (18”) above the adjacent public walkway.
Residential buildings with multiple doors shall meet this height standard for doors facing
public streets. Exceptions may be allowed through a site plan review, when a written
explanation is provided to indicate the basis for alternate design.
l. Awnings and canopies are encouraged at entrance doorways for weather protection.
m. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
8. SIGNAGE. In addition to the sign standards at § 155.608 and any provisions of an overlay district,
when applicable, the following standards apply in the C-MF district:
a. Where a building is designed to house multiple businesses or uses, each capable of desiring
identification signage, the building shall provide a master sign plan prior to receiving a
Certificate of Occupancy. The master sign plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
Town Board of Commissioners as provided at § 155.608.9. It shall include a designated
horizontal sign band for all nonresidential uses on the ground or street level story, and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 32
identify where the building name may be placed. The sign band for the ground story level
shall not be higher than sixteen feet (16’) or lower than nine feet (9’) above the adjacent
public sidewalk, street or public use realm.
b. Individual letters placed within the designated first floor sign band shall not exceed
eighteen inches (18”) in height or width and three inches (3”) in relief for any buildings
placed at, or within ten feet (10’) of the adjacent public street. Company logos and other
non-word elements may be placed within the sign band. All words, logos, and related
elements used within the sign band to identify a business shall be arranged so that together
they fit within a rectangular area up to sixty (60) square feet per business enterprise.
c. Company logos or names may be placed or painted within ground floor office windows.
d. A masonry or bronze plaque bearing the building name may be placed in the building’s
parapet wall or under the eaves, and above the upper story windows. The building name
identification may alternatively be sculpted into the building façade. Any such plaque or
sculpted material shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet and shall be limited to the
façade incorporating the primary pedestrian entrance. When the building exceeds three
stories in height, the building name identification area may be increased by two (2) square
feet for each additional story when the identification is placed at or above the top habitable
story. The building name may also be displayed on a separate masonry or bronze plaque
or sculpted into the building wall material at the ground story level and shall not exceed
four (4) square feet.
e. Projecting signs placed perpendicular to the building facade and identifying a business
enterprise or residential use within the building may be placed within ten feet (10’) of an
associated street level door in the designated first story sign band or on exterior walls of
the second story, not to exceed twenty four feet (24’) in height. Projecting signs shall not
exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area or extend further than four feet (4’) from the
façade, and shall have a minimum of seven feet six inches (7’6”) clear height above any
sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
f. Because all buildings are expected to be at or close to the public street, sidewalk, or a public
use realm, no freestanding signs are allowed for individual buildings. Freestanding signs
may be employed as gateway identification markers to the development as identified in a
master sign plan.
9. AWNINGS, CANOPIES, AND ARCADES: When an awning, canopy, or arcade is incorporated into a
building, the following requirements shall apply:
a. A minimum of ten feet (10’) clear height shall be provided for any awning, canopy, or
arcade above any sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
b. Awnings may extend from the front façade of the building up to one-half (1/2) of the width
of the sidewalk area below, not to exceed nine feet (9’), whichever is less. If this extension
reaches into the public right-of-way, an encroachment agreement with the Town or State
is required. In no case shall an awning interfere with the placement, natural growth, and
maintenance of any street trees, street signs, or lighting.
c. Canopies and arcades may extend from the front façade of the building up to the full width
of the sidewalk area below. If this extension reaches into the public right-of-way, an
encroachment agreement from the Town or State is required. In no case shall a canopy
interfere with the placement, natural growth, and maintenance of any street trees, street
signs, or lighting.
d. Awnings may be made of canvas or treated canvas material, may be designed to retract
against the wall of the building, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
e. Canopies and arcades may be made of wood, metal, or glass, or a combination of these or
similar permanent rigid materials, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
f. No internal illumination shall be projected through an awning, canopy, or arcade.
10. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE ITEMS. The following shall be placed behind
and away from any front or corner side building line, outside of any required sight triangle of any
street or driveway intersection, not be stored or located within any street, and be screened from view
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 33
from the public use realm:
a. Air compressors, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and
telephone company transformers, meters or boxes, storage tanks, garbage dumpsters and
compressors, and similar free-standing equipment shall not be installed or placed within
any area on the site considered public use realm. Any line of view of such items from the
public realm shall be provided with plant materials or other hardscape items to visually
screen them.
b. Backflow preventers as required by the public utility company should not hinder use of, or
block pedestrian flow through, the public use realm, and they shall be covered and screened
from view.
c. Utility meters for individual residential or nonresidential uses that are installed on or near
a building wall and must be regularly accessed for data collection shall be screened from
view from the public realm through the use of a fence, wall, evergreen landscape materials,
or other visual block. When vegetation is used, it shall be evergreen or coniferous species
with a minimum height at planting of three feet (3’), and expected to grow to a height to
shield view of the mechanical equipment from the public realm within four (4) growing
seasons.
d. Garbage and recycling containers, and similar items which must be stored and then moved
on an ongoing schedule for servicing shall be stored in a location that is completely
screened from view from the public realm to a minimum height of six feet (6’) through the
use of a fence, wall, or other visual block. The usual storage location and the temporary
staging area for servicing of such containers shall be designed and identified as part of the
site plan process.
e. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any front or corner side
building line and be screened from view from the public realm. Screening may be
accomplished by parapet walls, utilitarian penthouse structures attached to the interior of a
parapet extension, equipment covers, or similar. These items may also be set back from
the edge of a building at least ten feet (10’) and camouflaged by color matching the roof
when they do not exceed two feet (2’) in height.
f. Skylights, roof vents and stacks, exhaust fans, plumbing for green roofs, elevator
mechanism, and other items or equipment with permanent placement on the roof of a
building shall be physically separated from any portion of a rooftop that is designed for
access and use by the residents of the building.
H. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The C-MF district establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however might not always be appropriate to the particular development. Accordingly, new
development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures may require the
use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development requirements specified
here for the C-MF district in § 155.503.4 may be modified through the Flexible Design provisions of §
155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.5. Mixed-Use District (MUD)
A. The Mixed-Use District is established to create the opportunity for master planning of sites for mixed- and/or
multiple-use development. The Mixed-Use District is intended to be used on multi-acre sites with unique
locational criteria such as at interstate interchanges, intersections of major highways, and/or transit stations.
This district offers an opportunity for creative site development, planning and design standards while
ensuring appropriate land use relationships to surrounding areas. The map symbol and short name for the
Mixed-Use District shall be "MUD". [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.208]
Consideration of MUD district designation may result from the creation and adoption of a general concept
plan or small area plan which becomes an appendix in the Matthews Land Use Plan. Such a small area plan
may include all the area of one MUD district, or may include a larger geographic location. Any small area
plan which is used to encourage the designation of a MUD district shall identify the need for a mixed- or
multiple-use urban and walkable environment, and may provide unique characteristics or thematic elements
to be preserved or enhanced in the vicinity. The small area plan may include required elements if the buildout
is to be phased over time, such as initial required street and pedestrian main networks to assure
connectivity, or a minimum/maximum amount of certain types of land uses to guarantee a full range mix of
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 34
uses.
As a Conditional-Only District, parcels of land may be zoned to this category following the procedures
explained at § 155.501.3.C. and D., at the time a specific development project is submitted for consideration,
or parcels may receive early designation as outlined in § 155.501.3.I., prior to any specific plan due to their
location as an area identified by the Matthews Board of Commissioners for this zoning designation, with the
condition that prior to any land disturbing activity, a site specific plan for development shall be approved
through the site plan approval process as described at § 155.401.5.B.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the MUD District. Uses allowed within the MUD district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at
§ 155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the MUD district are
listed at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.5 specifically for the
MUD district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the MUD district.
C. OTHER STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE MIXED-USE DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of other sections
of this Title, development and improvements in the Mixed Use District (“MUD District”) shall comply with
the following requirements. Where the provisions in this § 155.503.5 conflict with the provisions of other
Sections of this Title, except for Overlay district requirements, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. A MUD District shall have frontage on an existing or proposed major
or minor thoroughfare.
2. MINIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA. A MUD designation shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) acres.
Build-out of the overall development may be constructed in multiple phases over time.
3. EXTERIOR PROJECT EDGE. The MUD District shall provide an exterior project edge of at least one
hundred feet (100’) will be established along abutting single-family residentially zoned and
developed properties. An exterior project edge of at least fifty feet (50’) will be established along
abutting single-family residentially zoned properties which are undeveloped. An exterior project
edge of at least fifteen feet (15’) will be established along abutting properties assigned to any other
zoning category. The exterior project edge does not apply to those portions of the project which
front on a public street. No building, parking, maneuvering, loading or service areas may be located
within an exterior project edge.
4. MINIMUM PROJECT EDGE SETBACKS. The minimum distance from any abutting property zoned and
developed for residential purposes to any building within the project site under forty five feet (45’)
in height must be at least one hundred feet (100’). The minimum distance from any abutting
undeveloped property which is zoned for residential purposes to any building within the project site
under forty five feet (45’) in height must be at least fifty feet (50’). The minimum distance from any
abutting property zoned for residential purposes to any building within the project site forty five feet
(45’) in height or higher must be increased by one foot (1’) for every one foot (1’) in added building
height over five feet (45’). The minimum distance from any abutting property zoned for
nonresidential purposes to any building within the project site under five feet (45’) in height must
be at least fifteen feet (15’). The minimum distance from any abutting property zoned for
nonresidential purposes to any building within the project site forty five feet (45’) in height or higher
must be increased by one foot (1’) for every two feet (2’) in added building height over forty five
feet (45’). These minimum separation distances do not apply to buildings abutting public streets.
However, such buildings must comply with the setback requirements established under § 155.604.3.
5. OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT. The MUD District project shall include an open space system featuring
pedestrian amenities. The open space system may include areas devoted to post construction, water
quality and/or storm water detention measures, any required or provided landscaping or screening
areas, SWIM buffers, greenways or environmental protection features. Any proposal for a MUD
District shall include a comprehensive open space plan along with the implementation schedule for
the open space system. The open space system may be constructed in multiple phases over time.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION. Where a parcel has received the designation of MUD prior to a full development
proposal on it, as outlined at § 155.501.3.I, sufficient drawings and documents to clearly prove compliance
to the design elements listed in § 155.503.5.E through G below shall be submitted to the Matthews Planning
office for review and recommendation in the same way as a rezoning application is handled by Town staff.
Upon completion of review, Town staff and applicants shall meet to review staff findings. Applicants shall
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 35
provide additional or revised documents as determined necessary to show compliance to all standards.
Submission of a request for site plan and/or elevation plan approval shall then be forwarded to the Matthews
Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall receive a report with recommendations from
Town Planning staff on how well the proposal meets the intent of the district and the design criteria listed
below, and determine when the proposal meets the requirements and can be approved.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. Proposals for mixed- and multiple-use development may be eligible for rezoning to the
MUD District only if they incorporate the principles of urban community design, including:
1. A highly interconnected street network, dispersing traffic and providing safe convenient routes for
pedestrians and bicyclists.
2. High-quality public spaces, with all building facades having windows and doors facing tree-lined
streets, plazas, squares, or neighborhood parks.
3. Compact development, creating a walkable urban environment and conserving land and energy
through reduced automobile usage and advanced techniques such as stormwater infiltration.
4. Diversity not homogeneity, with a variety of building types, street types, open spaces, and land uses
providing for people of all ages and every form of mobility.
5. Resilient and sustainable neighborhoods, adaptable over time to improved public transit and to
changing economic conditions.
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the MUD district.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. The interconnected network of streets must extend into adjoining areas except where the
general goal of integration and connectivity with surrounding uses is deemed inappropriate
or impractical due to sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Street stubs must be provided to adjoining undeveloped
areas to accommodate future street connectivity.
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets. Intersections between arterials and collectors must have centerline offsets of at
least one hundred fifty feet (150’). This requirement does not apply to intersections
between alleys and local streets.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets. Street trees may be
omitted where arcades are provided which would restrict adequate space for natural tree
canopy growth.
e. Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted except where physical conditions such as
limited access highways, sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Each dead end must be detailed as a circular turn-around,
a close, a hammerhead, or a “Y” turn-around and should provide pedestrian connectivity
to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Private streets and gated streets are prohibited. All streets must be dedicated to the public,
although alleys may be private.
g. ALLEYS AND SERVICE ACCESS. A clearly-defined network of rear and side alleys is
encouraged to provide vehicular access to off-street parking and service/loading facilities
for individual lots in the MUD District. Alley entrances should generally align so as to
provide ease of ingress for service vehicles, but internal deflections or variations in the
alley network are encouraged to prevent excessive or monotonous views of the rear of
structures resulting from long stretches of alleys. All alleys shall be identified as either
public or private, and any public alley shall be dedicated to the public as provided for in
Chapter 7.
h. THE STREETSCAPE. A thematic and cohesive streetscape planting and lighting plan shall
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 36
be prepared for the MUD district at time of initial designation. The streetscape plan shall
incorporate street trees to provide both form (canopy) and comfort (shade) to the street.
Street trees give special character and coherence to each street. Lighting shall be
incorporated to provide night-time illumination under the tree canopy for safety and
ambiance for pedestrians, and adequate illumination for vehicular traffic.
i. FRONTS AND REARS. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. Owners and
occupants are encouraged to utilize planters and window boxes filled with colorful plants
along each façade that fronts a public street, plaza, parking lot, or similar public use realm.
The private, interior portions of the lots (toward the alley) allow commercial operators to
utilize these spaces as efficient working environments unseen by the public and allow
residents to have private and semi-private (for apartment and condominium buildings)
gardens and courtyards.
3. BLOCKS. Except as otherwise provided, block perimeters may not exceed eight hundred (800) lineal
feet as measured along the edges of each street right-of-way forming the block. Blocks may
alternatively be broken by a civic space provided that lot is at least fifty feet (50’) wide and will
provide perpetual pedestrian access between the blocks and to any lots that front the civic space.
Smaller blocks are encouraged to promote walkability.
Block perimeters may exceed this limit, up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) lineal feet, only
if one or more of the following conditions apply:
a. The block has at least one block face on an arterial street; or
b. The block face contains valuable natural features or significant historic resources that
should not be crossed by a street.
4. PARKING. While public street cross sections may include on-street parking on many streets and
parking requirements may be reduced within the MUD district, a substantial amount of required
parking will need to be provided on private property, either on the same parcel as the associated use
or on a nearby parcel.
a. MINIMUM VEHICULAR PARKING STANDARDS. The following minimum requirements are
established in the MUD district:
i. Nonresidential uses: 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
ii. Planned multiple-family development:
Size of Unit Spaces Required Per Unit
1,249 square feet or less 1.00
1,250 square feet or more 1.25
iii. All other residential uses as permitted in the MUD District are required to provide
off-street motor vehicle parking in accordance with the minimum standards set
forth in § 155.607.2 of this Title.
b. BICYCLE PARKING. Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with §
155.607.2.D of this Title.
c. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING. To the maximum extent practicable, off-street
parking spaces must be located within buildings or behind buildings so that buildings
screen parking areas from sidewalks and streets. In no case may parking be located in the
setback or yard in front of a building. Parking lots in non-streetside (interior of block) side
yards may be allowed provided these lots are placed a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from
lot lines adjoining rights-of-way, excluding alleys. Access to off-street parking shall be
provided by private driveways or shared alleys. Parking along alleys is allowed, may be
at 90 degree, angled, or parallel, and must be of sufficient depth to assure parked vehicles
will not impede traffic movement in the alley. Where 90 degree or angled spaces are
provided, they must be a minimum of twenty feet (20’) in length, and where parallel spaces
are provided they must be a minimum of eight feet (8’) in width. Any alley with parking
spaces immediately adjacent must be paved a minimum of twenty feet (20’)in width, with
no obstructions such as doors, dumpsters, planters, bollards, mechanical equipment, street
light poles, etc., that could restrict the full width use of the pavement for vehicular
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 37
maneuvering in and out of designated parking spaces. Cross access is required between
adjoining rear/side parking lots.
d. The required minimum number of off-street parking spaces may be provided in any
location within the MUD District project area. However, each construction phase of the
MUD project must comply with the off-street parking requirements of this § 155.503.5.
e. SHARED PARKING.
i. Shared location of cumulative required spaces. Owners and developers are
encouraged to design a shared parking system for part or all of a MUD District to
distribute the daily and twenty four (24) hour parking load in a joint effort in
shared parking lots or structures. Shared internal parking facilities increase
building and public use coverage fronting streets within the district. Shared offsite
parking facilities may initially be surface lots that may be converted to
structured parking if and when intensity of development within the district reaches
a level where structured parking becomes economically viable to the surrounding
uses. A written agreement between property owners explaining what parcel or
parcels shall utilize structured parking, and which will remain binding on future
owners and land uses, shall be signed and recorded with the Mecklenburg County
Register of Deeds office. Conversion of surface parking to structured parking
shall provide documentation that minimum required spaces continue to be
provided for all included properties.
ii. Shared use of same spaces. Shared parking of required parking spaces may be
permitted with approval from the Planning Director as provided in §
155.607.2.G.6 of this Title.
f. Where on-street or public parking lot spaces are located within four hundred feet (400’) of
a building entrance, up to a twenty five percent (25%) reduction to required on-site parking
may be allowed for new construction.
g. New on-street parking spaces developed adjacent to and in conjunction with a new building
may be counted toward the minimum on-site parking requirements for that building. Any
such on-street parking spaces may only be attributed to meeting minimum parking
requirements for one new building.
h. PARKING STRUCTURES. Parking structures are encouraged to create shared parking
opportunities and to reduce the footprint of surface lots. Single-use parking structures must
be located behind other buildings. Structured parking is permitted and encouraged in
mixed use buildings. Structured parking may extend below grade and may contain multiple
levels of parking above grade. Parking structures may contain other uses above the parking
levels provided the entire building does not exceed the height allowed in the MUD District.
Partially enclosed parking spaces may be created with habitable space cantilevered over
them at the rear of a building, or along the side of a building when a solid wall blocks view
of parked vehicles from any public street or pedestrian pathway.
5. USES UNABLE TO UTILIZE STREETFRONT FENESTRATION. When certain uses such as a theater or
planetarium cannot comply with the required door and window standards for primary facades, then
they may be constructed in a manner that they will be separated from adjacent streets by a use or
uses that will create the necessary openings in the exterior wall surface.
a. Indoor public assembly space may be created when appropriate for the related use, such as
a ticket and concessions area and customer lobby for a theater, or an exhibition and display
space for a museum. Adequate windows and door openings would be required in this space
along the exterior wall, allowing view from the public realm to an occupied and active
interior space.
b. Liner buildings may be used. When designed to provide visual enclosure for a particular
use from a public street or public use area, they may be detached from or attached to the
building(s) they are concealing. Liner buildings must meet the primary façade transparency
requirements in § 155.503.5.G.
c. Liner buildings may be used for any purpose allowed on the lot on which they are located
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 38
except exclusively for parking.
6. WIDE BUILDINGS. When a wide building is placed directly across a street from significantly
narrower lots or buildings, the principal façade on the wide building must be varied with a change
of architectural expression that reflects the widths of the narrower lots. These changes in expression
may be a vertical element running from sidewalk to roof, a change in fenestration or style, color, or
texture, or a break in façade plane or roof line. These changes may be subtle or significant, but must
soften the visual effect of very wide buildings directly across the street from narrower buildings.
G. BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES.
1. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.603 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the MUD district. All buildings within the MUD District project
must be architecturally compatible in appearance and quality through the use of similar building
materials, colors, architectural features and styles. An identified set of architectural styles or specific
architectural elements may be utilized to create an overall design theme.
2. EXTERIOR BUILDING WALLS.
a. Primary exterior wall materials, which shall cover at least seventy five percent (75%) of
each façade, excluding any glazed areas, shall consist of brick, other masonry, or native
stone (or synthetic equivalent).
b. Secondary materials, which may cover up to twenty five percent (25%) of each façade,
excluding any glazed areas, may include hardiboard siding, wood siding, and stucco.
c. Accent materials and trim may cover up to ten percent (10%) of each façade excluding any
glazed areas. Such accents and trim materials may include pre-cast masonry (for trim and
cornice elements only), Gypsum Reinforced Fiber Concrete (GFRC—for trim elements
only), metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornamentation only), and split-faced
block (only for piers, foundation walls and chimneys). All accent and trim materials shall
be identified on elevation plans.
d. Colors of all non-glazing exterior materials on any building shall be limited to no more
than three (3), unless the building is both larger in overall size than sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet and at least three (3) stories in height. Such larger buildings may employ up to
five (5) distinct colors on its exterior facades. For the purpose of this standard, the term
color shall also refer to two (2) clearly different shades of the same color, such as a light
green and a dark green, or a pastel pink and a burgundy red.
e. Alternative percentages of listed materials or types of materials may be requested by the
Flexible Design Provisions at § 155.503.5.H. at the time of initial district designation, or
through the Administrative Amendment process for an individual building after it has
received site plan and elevation plan approval.
3. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR EXTERIOR WALLS: The following configurations and
techniques are permitted.
a. WALLS
i. The horizontal dimension of the wall opening shall not exceed the vertical
dimension except where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
ii. Wall openings shall not span vertically more than one (1) story.
iii. Wall openings shall correspond to interior space and shall not span across building
structure such as the floor structural and mechanical thickness.
iv. Material changes shall be made within a constructional logic—as where an
addition (of a different material) is built onto the original building.
b. WOOD SIDING AND WOOD SIMULATION MATERIALS
i. Lap siding (horizontal) configuration
ii. Smooth or rough-sawn finish (no faux wood grain)
c. BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE. Must be detailed and in an appropriate load-bearing
configurations.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 39
d. STUCCO (cementitious finish). Smooth or sand only, no roughly textured finish.
e. STORY HEIGHT. The ground story of nonresidential and mixed-use buildings must be from
twelve feet (12’) to eighteen feet (18’) tall. The ground story of residential buildings shall
be a minimum of ten feet (10’) tall. Each story above the ground story shall be at least
eight feet (8’) tall. Any upper story taller than twelve feet (12’) will count as two (2)
stories. Story heights are measured from the floor to the bottom of the lowest structural
member that supports the story above.
f. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
4. ROOFS AND PARAPETS. The design standards for roofs and parapets are as follows:
a. Roof Materials. The following materials are permitted.
i. Clay or concrete (faux clay)
ii. Tile (barrel or flat roman)
iii. Slate (equivalent synthetic or better)
iv. Metal (standing seam, equivalent or better)
v. Dimensional Asphalt shingles
vi. Cedar Shingles
vii. Cornices and soffits may be a combination of wood, vinyl, and/or metal.
b. Parapets shall generally not extend above the top of a flat or single pitch (shed) roof more
than six feet (6’) fronting a public street. Parapets may be used to visually screen roof-top
mechanical equipment, and a utilitarian penthouse structure may be attached to the interior
side of a parapet extension in order to screen equipment. Parapets shall appear from the
exterior as part of the exterior wall, and as such shall be composed of the same materials
and limited to the same colors and finishes as the materials of the exterior walls. When a
parapet also serves as a security railing for any activity on a rooftop, a parapet not facing a
public street may incorporate different materials than the exterior wall from which it
extends, such as glass, metal mesh, and poles. When a parapet faces a public street and
also serves as a security railing for a rooftop activity, such as a green roof or open air
dining, then the parapet may be designed such that it has openings in its vertical surface to
allow visibility through it. Such openings shall not be lower than three feet (3’) from the
roof surface nor exceed eighteen inches (18”) in width.
c. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
5. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES. The following configurations and techniques are permitted:
a. PITCHED ROOFS. Pitch is exclusive of roofs concealed behind parapets.
i. Simple hip and gable roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and
10:12.
ii. Shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between 3:12 and 8:12.
iii. Eaves, when provided, must overhang eighteen inches (18”) to thirty inches (30”)
on a principal building for the initial four (4) stories. For each additional story;
six inches (6”) shall be added to the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be
added to the maximum, up to a maximum projection of seven feet (7’).
iv. Eaves on accessory buildings, dormers, and other smaller structures must
overhang at least eight inches (8”).
v. Timber eaves and balcony brackets must be a minimum of four-by-four inches
(4” by 4”) in dimension.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 40
b. PARAPET AND CORNICE STANDARDS.
i. Allowed only for sites where the roof material is not visible from any adjacent
street.
ii. Buildings without visible roof surfaces and overhanging eaves may create an
overhang with a cornice projecting horizontally between six inches (6”) and
twelve inches (12”) beyond the building walls on the primary structure for the
initial four (4) stories. For each additional story, six inches (6”) shall be added to
the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added to the maximum, up to a
maximum projection of six feet (6’).
c. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
6. WINDOWS AND DOORS. The standards for windows and doors are as follows:
a. Windows shall be of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel.
b. Window glass shall be clear or lightly-tinted and non-reflective, with light transmission at
the ground story at least ninety percent (90%) and for the upper stories at least seventy five
percent (75%), with modification as necessary to meet any applicable building and energy
code requirements.
c. Specialty windows, with a maximum of one per thirty (30) lineal feet along any façade
facing any public street or public use realm, per story is allowed. A specialty window may
utilize stained, opalescent, or translucent glass, or glass block, and shall not exceed forty
eight (48) square feet in area. Mirrored glass shall not be used on any ground story façade
or on any story when visible from any public street or public use realm.
d. Operable windows and doors onto patios and balconies are allowed for residential units on
any story, and for nonresidential and mixed use buildings above the ground story.
e. Window screens shall be black or gray. Screen frames shall match window frame material
or be dark anodized.
f. Doors designed primarily for pedestrian use shall be of wood, clad wood, or steel and may
include glass panes. Doors designed for vehicular use may be of any material and style
consistent with the architectural detail of the building.
g. Double-height entryways (those that span more than one [1] story) are not allowed.
7. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR DOORS AND WINDOWS. The following are permitted:
a. The horizontal dimension of the opening shall not exceed the vertical dimension except
where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
b. Windows may be ganged horizontally (maximum five [5] per group) if each grouping is
separated by a mullion, column, pier or wall section that is at least seven inches (7”) wide.
c. Windows shall be no closer than thirty inches (30”) to building corners (excluding bay
windows).
d. Exterior shutters, if applied, shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window at
one-half the width, even if inoperable.
e. Windows on any story above the ground story may be double-hung, single-hung, awning,
or casement windows. Fixed windows are permitted only as specialty windows or when a
component of a system including an operable window within a single wall opening.
f. Residential buildings or residential floors of mixed use buildings shall have panes of glass
no larger than thirty six inches (36”) vertical by thirty inches (30”) horizontal. The
maximum pane size for office uses is forty eight (48”) vertical by forty (40”) horizontal.
When necessary to meet building codes for egress purposes windows may exceed the
dimensions given here.
g. Nonresidential windows and doors at the street level shall not have individual panes of
glass larger than eight feet (8’) in height by four feet (4’) wide.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 41
h. All window pane surface area of ground story nonresidential buildings shall allow views
into the building interior for a depth of at least eight feet (8’) where the interior space is
retail, restaurant, office, or similar area accessible to the public. This shall not include
restrooms, or restricted employee-only accessed areas, such as a kitchen, inventory storage,
or loading dock. Windows shall not be made opaque by window treatments except for
operable sunscreen devices within the conditioned space.
i. Garage doors or operable coverings over vehicle use (service/loading) wall openings shall
not face the primary public street unless they are set back from the building façade and
from the public right-of-way at least twenty feet (20’).
j. Doors shall not be recessed more than three feet (3’) behind the shop-front windows and,
in any case, shall have a clear view and path to a forty five degree (45o) angle past the
perpendicular from each side of the door.
k. FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION ENTRANCES. Nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall have
their primary public walk-in entrances level with, to no greater than six inches (6”) above
the adjacent walkway. When a nonresidential or mixed use building has more than one
primary public entrance and more than a one foot (1’) difference in finished grade at
various doorways, then the entrance adjacent to a public street shall meet this requirement.
Residential buildings shall have their first habitable story at least eighteen inches (18”)
above the adjacent public walkway. Residential buildings with multiple doors shall meet
these height standards for doors facing public streets. Exceptions may be allowed through
a site plan review, when a written explanation is provided to indicate the basis for alternate
design.
l. Arcades, awnings, and canopies are encouraged along the front of buildings facing public
streets and the public use realm.
m. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
8. SIGNAGE. The standards for signs are as follows:
a. Where a building is designed to house multiple businesses or uses, each capable of desiring
identification signage, the building shall provide a master sign plan prior to receiving a
Certificate of Occupancy. The master sign plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
Town Board of Commissioners as provided at § 155.608.9. It shall include a designated
horizontal sign band for all uses on the ground or street level story, and designated locations
for identification of businesses in upper level stories and for identifying the building name
itself. The sign band for the ground story level shall not be higher than sixteen feet (16’)
or lower than nine feet (9’) above the adjacent public sidewalk, street or public use realm.
b. Individual letters placed within the designated first floor sign band shall not exceed
eighteen inches (18”) in height or width and three inches (3”) in relief for any buildings
placed at, or within ten feet (10’) of the adjacent public street. Company logos and other
non-word elements may be placed within the sign band. All words, logos, and related
elements used within the sign band to identify a business shall be arranged so that together
they fit within a rectangular area up to sixty (60) square feet per business enterprise.
c. Company logos or names may be placed or painted within ground floor or second story
office windows.
d. Attached signs for buildings designed and used as a single business enterprise or a multifamily
residential building:
i. Any combination of letters, logos, and other elements shall be considered one sign
for any building up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet GFA and/or up to three
stories. This sign shall fit within a rectangular area not to exceed one hundred
(100) square feet, and not to exceed ten feet (10’) in height. This single sign is
allowed per each building façade that is at an eighty (80) or greater degree angle
from an adjacent building façade.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 42
ii. Any combination of letters, logos, and other elements shall be considered one sign
for any building equal to or greater than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet GFA
and more than three (3) stories. This sign shall fit within a rectangular area not to
exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet, and not to exceed sixteen feet (16’) in
height.
e. A masonry or bronze plaque bearing the building name may be placed in the building’s
parapet wall or under the eaves, and above the upper story windows. The building name
identification may alternatively be sculpted into the building façade. Any such plaque or
sculpted material shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet and shall be limited to the
façade incorporating the primary pedestrian entrance. The building name may also be
displayed on a separate masonry or bronze plaque or sculpted into the building wall
material at the ground story level and shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
f. Projecting signs placed perpendicular to the building facade and identifying a business
enterprise or residential use within the building may be placed within ten feet (10’) of an
associated street level door in the designated first story sign band or on exterior walls of
the second story, not to exceed twenty four feet (24’) in height. Projecting signs shall not
exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area or extend further than four feet (4’) from the
façade, and shall have a minimum of seven feet six inches (7’6”) clear height above any
sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
g. Because all buildings are expected to be at or close to the public street, sidewalk, or a public
use realm, no freestanding signs are anticipated for individual buildings. Freestanding
signs may be employed as gateway identification markers to various subareas at the
exterior boundaries of and within the MUD District as locations are determined by the
approved general concept plan.
9. AWNINGS, CANOPIES, AND ARCADES: When an awning, canopy, or arcade is incorporated into a
building, the following requirements shall apply:
a. A minimum of ten feet (10’) clear height shall be provided for any awning, canopy, or
arcade above any sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
b. Awnings may extend from the front façade of the building up to one-half (1/2) of the width
of the sidewalk area below, not to exceed nine feet (9’), whichever is less. If this extension
reaches into the public right-of-way, an encroachment agreement with the Town or State
is required. In no case shall an awning interfere with the placement, natural growth, and
maintenance of any street trees, street signs, or lighting.
c. Canopies and arcades may extend from the front façade of the building up to the full width
of the sidewalk area below. If this extension reaches into the public right-of-way, an
encroachment agreement from the Town or State is required. In no case shall a canopy
interfere with the placement, natural growth, and maintenance of any street trees, street
signs, or lighting.
d. Awnings may be made of canvas or treated canvas material, may be designed to retract
against the wall of the building, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
e. Canopies and arcades may be made of wood, metal, or glass, or a combination of these or
similar permanent rigid materials, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
f. No internal illumination shall be projected through an awning, canopy, or arcade.
10. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE ITEMS. The following shall be placed behind
and away from any front or corner side building line, outside of any required sight triangle of any
street or driveway intersection, not be stored or located within any street, and be screened from view
from the public use realm:
a. Air compressors, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and
telephone company transformers, meters or boxes, storage tanks, garbage dumpsters and
compressors, and similar free-standing equipment shall not be installed or placed within
any area on the site considered public use realm. Any line of view of such items from the
public realm shall be provided with plant materials or other hardscape items to visually
screen them.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 43
b. Backflow preventers as required by the public utility company should not hinder use of, or
block pedestrian flow through, the public use realm, and they shall be covered and screened
from view.
c. Utility meters for individual residential or nonresidential uses that are installed on or near
a building wall and must be regularly accessed for data collection shall be screened from
view from the public realm through the use of a fence, wall, evergreen landscape materials,
or other visual block. When vegetation is used, it shall be evergreen or coniferous species
with a minimum height at planting of three feet (3’), and expected to grow to a height to
shield view of the mechanical equipment from the public realm within four (4) growing
seasons.
d. Garbage and recycling containers, and similar items which must be stored and then moved
on an ongoing schedule for servicing shall be stored in a location that is completely
screened from view from the public realm to a minimum height of six feet (6’) through the
use of a fence, wall, or other visual block. The usual storage location and the temporary
staging area for servicing of such containers shall be designed and identified as part of the
site plan process.
e. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any front or corner side
building line and be screened from view from the public realm. Screening may be
accomplished by parapet walls, utilitarian penthouse structures attached to the interior of a
parapet extension, equipment covers, or similar. These items may also be set back from
the edge of a building at least ten feet (10’) and camouflaged by color matching the roof
when they do not exceed two feet (2’) in height.
f. Skylights, roof vents and stacks, exhaust fans, plumbing for green roofs, elevator
mechanism, and other items or equipment with permanent placement on the roof of a
building shall be physically separated from any portion of a rooftop that is designed for
access and use by the residents, occupants, or customers of the building.
H. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The MUD District establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however might not always be appropriate to the particular development. Accordingly, new
development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures may require the
use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development requirements specified
here for the MUD district in § 155.503.5 may be modified through the Flexible Design provisions of §
155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.6. Transit-Supportive District (TS)
A. The Transit-Supportive District is established to create beneficial new mixed-use development opportunities
at higher densities and intensities of use not customarily found in Matthews specifically to provide a
pedestrian-oriented physical environment that reduces vehicle miles traveled within the district and
accommodates the physical needs of public transit services. This district is intended to be established within
one thousand three hundred (1,300’) to two thousand five hundred feet (2,500’) of a transit station or park
and ride facility and may be established in advance of public transit service if located in accordance with the
Matthews Land Use Plan along an existing, planned or proposed transit service corridor. The Transit-
Supportive District is characterized by density and a diversity of land uses in mixed-use buildings with offstreet
parking in parking structures, wide sidewalks, on-street parking, and public plazas. The map symbol
and short name for the Transit-Supportive District shall be "TS District".
A general concept plan will be created and adopted for each identified transit station location, and will
become an appendix in the Matthews Land Use Plan. Each transit station small area plan may offer unique
focus elements based on the specific character of the surrounding land uses and transportation network.
Elements anticipated in all transit station small area plans include placing the densest uses that will generate
the most walkable interfaces closest to the stations, with primary entrances to commercial and service uses
highly accessible to transit passengers as well as neighborhood residents. These transit station general
concept plans may include required elements if the build-out may be phased over time, such as initial required
street and pedestrian main networks to assure connectivity, or a minimum/maximum amount of certain types
of land uses to guarantee a full range mix of uses. The suggested maximum boundaries of each distinct TS
district location may be identified in the station general concept plans.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 44
As a Conditional-Only District, parcels of land may be zoned to this category at the time a specific
development project is submitted for consideration, or parcels may receive early designation as outlined at §
155.501.3.I to this category prior to any specific plans due to their proximity to an identified existing or future
transit station or park and ride facility, with the condition that prior to any land disturbing activity, a site
specific plan for development shall be approved through the site plan approval process as described at §
155.401.5.B.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the TS district. Uses allowed within the TS district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the TS district are listed
at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.6 specifically for the TS
district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the TS district.
C. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE TRANSIT-SUPPORTIVE DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements
of other sections of this Title, development and improvements in the Transit-Supportive District (“TS
District”) shall comply with the following requirements. Where the provisions in this Section conflict with
the provisions of other Sections of this Title, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. The TS District must have frontage on an existing or proposed public
transit route and be located within a ten (10) minute walk (two thousand five hundred feet [2,500’])
of an existing or approved future transit stop or station. A parcel not adjacent to the public transit
corridor but within a ten (10) minute walking distance of an existing improved transit stop or station
may also qualify for designation to the TS District. No development may occur on a parcel zoned
TS until a general concept plan for the nearby transit station area is approved.
2. MINIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA: There is no minimum project area.
3. EXTERIOR PROJECT EDGE. Because the TS District is established to provide and enhance
connectivity between a transit stop or station and its environs and because the edge of the District
should be a seamless transition with adjoining districts, an exterior project edge is not required.
However, land uses and building typologies in the TS District shall closely mimic the land uses and
building typologies on adjacent property or land uses shown on the Matthews Land Use Plan on
adjacent property.
4. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. Development permitted within the TS District shall comply with the
standards for building typologies permitted in the TS District as provided in § 155.605 of this Title,
and the urban design principles in § 155.503.6.F and G. below.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION PROCESS.Where a parcel has received the designation of TS prior to a full development
proposal on it, as outlined at § 155.501.3.I, sufficient drawings and documents to clearly prove compliance
to the design elements listed in § 155.503.6.E through G below shall be submitted to the Matthews Planning
office for review and recommendation in the same way as a rezoning application is handled by Town staff.
Upon completion of review, Town staff and applicants shall meet to review staff findings. Applicants shall
provide additional or revised documents as determined necessary to show compliance to all standards.
Submission of a request for site plan and/or elevation plan approval shall then be forwarded to the Matthews
Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall receive a report with recommendations from
Town Planning staff on how well the proposal meets the intent of the district and the design criteria listed
below, and determine when the proposal meets the requirements and can be approved.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. Proposals for transit-supportive development may be eligible for rezoning to the TS
District only if they incorporate the principles of transit-supportive design, including:
1. A highly interconnected street network, dispersing traffic and providing safe convenient routes for
pedestrians and bicyclists.
2. High-quality public spaces, with all building facades having windows and doors facing tree-lined
streets, plazas, squares, or neighborhood parks.
3. Compact development, creating a walkable urban environment and conserving land and energy
through reduced automobile usage and advanced techniques such as stormwater infiltration.
4. Diversity not homogeneity, with a variety of building types, street types, open spaces, and land uses
providing for people of all ages and every form of mobility.
5. Resilient and sustainable neighborhoods, adaptable over time to improved public transit and to
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 45
changing economic conditions.
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT GENERAL DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. Principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the TS district
a. Buildings form the public realm that is primarily streets and pedestrian pathways.
b. The street is a coherent space, with consistent building form. This agreement of buildings
facing across the public realm contributes to a clear public space and identity.
c. Buildings oversee the street with active fronts. This overview of the public realm
contributes to vital and safe public space.
d. Land should be clearly public or private in public view and under surveillance or private
and protected.
e. Buildings are designed for communal encounters, and must be designed for the urban
situation within the Town. Views are directed to the public space as much as possible.
f. Vehicle storage/parking, (not including on-street parking), garbage storage and collection,
and mechanical equipment are kept away from the public realm.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. The interconnected network of streets must extend into adjoining areas except where the
general goal of integration and connectivity with surrounding uses is deemed inappropriate
or impractical due to sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Street stubs must be provided to adjoining undeveloped
areas to accommodate future street connectivity.
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets. Intersections between arterials and collectors must have centerline offsets of at
least one hundred fifty feet (150’). This requirement does not apply to intersections
between alleys and local streets.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets. Street trees may be
omitted where arcades are provided which would restrict adequate space for natural tree
canopy growth.
e. Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted except where physical conditions such as
limited access highways, sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Each dead end must be detailed as a circular turn-around,
a close, a hammerhead, or a “Y” turn-around and should provide pedestrian connectivity
to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Private streets and gated streets are prohibited. All streets must be dedicated to the public.
g. ALLEYS AND SERVICE ACCESS. A continuous network of rear and side alleys must provide
vehicular access to off-street parking and service/loading facilities for individual lots in the
TS District. Alley entrances should generally align so as to provide ease of ingress for
service vehicles, but internal deflections or variations in the alley network are encouraged
to prevent excessive or monotonous views of the rear of structures resulting from long
stretches of alleys. All alleys shall be identified as either public or private, and any public
alley shall be dedicated to the public as provided for in Chapter 7.
h. THE STREETSCAPE. A streetscape planting and lighting plan shall be prepared for each
block face of each public street as any adjacent parcel is designated into the TS district.
The streetscape plan shall incorporate street trees to provide both form (canopy) and
comfort (shade) to the street. Street trees give special character and coherence to each
street. Lighting shall be incorporated to provide night-time illumination under the tree
canopy for safety and ambiance for pedestrians, and adequate illumination for vehicular
traffic.
i. FRONTS AND REARS. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. Owners and
occupants are encouraged to utilize planters and window boxes filled with colorful plants
along each façade that fronts a public street, plaza, parking lot, or similar public use realm.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 46
The private, interior portions of the lots (toward the alley) allow commercial operators to
utilize these spaces as efficient working environments unseen by the public and allow
residents to have private and semi-private (for apartment and condominium buildings)
gardens and courtyards.
3. BLOCKS. Except as otherwise provided, block perimeters may not exceed eight hundred (800) lineal
feet as measured along the edges of each street right-of-way forming the block. Blocks may
alternatively be broken by a civic space provided that lot is at least fifty feet (50’) wide and will
provide perpetual pedestrian access between the blocks and to any lots that front the civic space.
Smaller blocks are encouraged to promote walkability.
a. Block perimeters may exceed this limit, up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) lineal
feet, only if one or more of the following conditions apply:
i. The block has at least one block face on an arterial street; or
ii. The block face contains valuable natural features or significant historic resources
that should not be crossed by a street.
b. Any single block face wider than six hundred feet (600’) must include a publicly dedicated
sidewalk, passage, or trail at least twelve feet (12’) in width that connects to another street.
4. OFF-STREET PARKING. While public street cross sections may include on-street parking on many
streets and parking requirements may be reduced within the TS district, a substantial amount of
required parking will need to be provided on private property, either on the same parcel as the
associated use or on a nearby parcel.
a. PARK-ONCE SYSTEM. An owner/developer is encouraged to implement a park-once system
of shared parking for part or all of a TS District to distribute the commercial parking load
between on-street parking and shared parking lots or structures. An extensive park-once
system may be submitted for approval as an alternative parking plan.
In order to reduce the amount of separate surface parking lots which can visually and
spatially dominate development and therefore adversely affect desired density of build-out,
vehicle parking shall have both a short-term and a long-term plan. Any development
project proposed in the TS District shall show how it can provide for its share of parking
needs when initially constructed, as well as a longer-term future demand. Off-site parking
within shared parking facilities shall be allowed and is encouraged in order to increase
building and/or public use coverage fronting streets within the district. At the time of initial
approval, a development proposal shall identify whether the project will include one or
more of the following, either upon initial construction or at a later phase: twenty (20) or
more residential units; six thousand (6,000) square feet or more of business or retail space;
fifty (50) or more seating accommodations in a restaurant; or any public assembly or
recreational use facility that can accommodate fifty (50) or more persons (participants or
attendees). Any proposed development meeting any of the given categories shall agree to
participation in the district-wide shared parking program. This shared parking program
may allow multiple separate buildings or development projects to allocate a certain
percentage of their required parking to a shared off-site parking facility, and may require
property owners to participate in a special assessment process to build structured parking
when certain district build-out levels are reached. Shared off-site parking facilities may
initially be surface lots that shall be converted to structured parking when district density
levels are reached. A written agreement between property owners explaining what parcel
or parcels may utilize parking on a separate parcel, now and/or in the future, and which
will remain binding on future owners and land uses, shall be signed and recorded with the
Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds office prior to any land disturbing activity or any
permit being issued for a parcel that requires off-site parking to meet minimum parking
standards.
b. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING. To the maximum extent practicable, off-street
parking spaces must be located within buildings or behind buildings so that buildings
screen parking areas from sidewalks and streets. In no case may parking be located in the
setback or yard in front of a building. Parking lots in non-streetside (interior of block) side
yards may be allowed provided these lots are placed a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 47
lot lines adjoining rights-of-way, excluding alleys. Parking in shared off-site lots shall be
within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the property.
C. ACCESS TO OFF-STREET PARKING. Alleys must be the primary source of vehicular access
to off-street parking. Parking along alleys or lanes may be 90 degree, angled, or parallel,
and must be of sufficient depth to assure parked vehicles will not impede traffic movement
in the alley. Where 90 degree or angled spaces are provided, they must be a minimum of
twenty feet (20’) in length, and where parallel spaces are provided they must be a minimum
of eight feet (8’) in width. Any alley with parking spaces immediately adjacent must be
paved a minimum of twenty feet (20’) in width, with no obstructions such as doors,
dumpsters, planters, bollards, mechanical equipment, street light poles, etc., that could
restrict the full width use of the pavement for vehicular maneuvering in and out of
designated parking spaces. Cross access is required between adjoining rear/side parking
lots.
d. PARKING STRUCTURES. Parking structures are encouraged to create shared parking
opportunities and to reduce the footprint of surface lots. Single-use parking structures must
be located behind other buildings. Structured parking is permitted and encouraged on liner
buildings and mixed use buildings. Structured parking may extend below grade and may
contain multiple levels of parking above grade. Parking structures may contain other uses
above the parking levels provided the entire building does not exceed the height allowed
in the TS District. Partially enclosed parking spaces may be created with habitable space
cantilevered over them at the rear of a building, or along the side of a building when a solid
wall blocks view of parked vehicles from any public street or pedestrian pathway.
5. USES UNABLE TO UTILIZE STREETFRONT FENESTRATION. When certain uses such as a theater,
parking, or planetarium cannot comply with the required door and window standards for primary
facades, then they may be constructed in a manner that they will be separated from adjacent streets
by liner buildings.
a. Liner buildings must be at least two (2) stories in height with not less than twenty feet (20’)
in depth.
b. Liner buildings may be detached from or attached to the building(s) they are concealing.
c. Liner buildings may be used for any purpose allowed on the lot on which they are located
except exclusively for parking.
d. Liner buildings must meet the primary façade transparency requirements in § 155.503.6.G.
6. WIDE BUILDINGS. When a wide building is placed directly across a street from significantly
narrower lots or buildings, the principal facade on the wide building must be varied with a change
of architectural expression that reflects the widths of the narrower lots. These changes in expression
may be a vertical element running from sidewalk to roof, a change in fenestration or style, color, or
texture, or a break in facade plane or roof line. These changes may be subtle or significant, but must
soften the visual effect of very wide buildings directly across the street from narrower buildings.
a. STORY HEIGHT. The ground story of nonresidential and mixed-use buildings must be from
twelve feet (12’) to eighteen feet (18’) tall. The ground story of residential buildings shall
be a minimum of ten feet (10’) tall. Each story above the ground story shall be at least
eight feet (8’) tall. Any upper story taller than twelve feet (12’) will count as two (2)
stories. Story heights are measured from the floor to the bottom of the lowest structural
member that supports the story above.
b. FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION ENTRANCES. Nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall have
their primary public walk-in entrances level with, to no greater than six inches (6”) above
the adjacent walkway. When a nonresidential or mixed use building has more than one
primary public entrance and more than a one foot (1’) difference in finished grade at
various doorways, then the entrance adjacent to a public street shall meet this requirement.
Residential buildings shall have their first habitable story at least eighteen inches (18”)
above the adjacent public walkway. Residential buildings with multiple doors shall meet
these height standards for doors facing public streets. Exceptions may be allowed through
a site plan review, when a written explanation is provided to indicate the basis for alternate
design.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 48
c. LINER BUILDINGS. The character of some uses of land, such as theaters and parking
structures, would preclude their buildings from complying with the door and window
requirements for primary facades. Such buildings may be constructed in a manner that they
will be separated from adjacent streets (but not alleys) by liner buildings. Liner buildings:
i. Must be at least two (2) stories in height with not less than twenty feet (20’) in
depth;
ii. May be detached from or attached to the buildings they are concealing;
iii. May be used for any purpose allowed on the lot on which they are located except
for parking; and
iv. Must meet the primary facade transparency requirements in the preceding
subsection.
G. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
1. The principles listed at § 155.603 shall be adhered to when designing any development within the
TS district. An identified set of architectural styles or specific architectural elements may be utilized
to create an overall design theme.
2. EXTERIOR BUILDING WALLS
a. Primary materials, which shall cover at least seventy five percent (75%) of each façade,
excluding any glazed areas, shall consist of brick, other masonry, or native stone (or
synthetic equivalent).
b. Secondary materials, which may cover up to twenty five percent (25%) of each façade,
excluding any glazed areas, may include hardiboard siding, wood siding, and stucco.
c. Accent materials and trim may cover up to ten percent (10%) of each façade excluding any
glazed areas. Such accents and trim materials may include pre-cast masonry (for trim and
cornice elements only), Gypsum Reinforced Fiber Concrete (GFRC—for trim elements
only), metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornamentation only), and split-faced
block (only for piers, foundation walls and chimneys). All accent and trim materials shall
be identified on elevation plans.
d. Colors of all non-glazing exterior materials on any building shall be limited to no more
than three, unless the building is both larger in overall size than sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet and at least three (3) stories in height. Such larger buildings may employ up to
five (5) distinct colors on its exterior facades. For the purpose of this standard, the term
color shall also refer to two (2) clearly different shades of the same color, such as a light
green and a dark green, or a pastel pink and a burgundy red.
e. Alternative percentages of listed materials or types of materials may be requested by the
Flexible Design Provisions at § 155.503.6.H. at the time of initial district designation, or
through the Administrative Amendment process for an individual building after it has
received site plan and elevation plan approval.
3. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR EXTERIOR WALLS: The following configurations and
techniques are permitted.
a. WALLS
i. The horizontal dimension of the wall opening shall not exceed the vertical
dimension except where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
ii. Wall openings shall not span vertically more than one (1) story.
iii. Wall openings shall correspond to interior space and shall not span across building
structure such as the floor structural and mechanical thickness.
iv. Material changes shall be made within a constructional logic—as where an
addition (of a different material) is built onto the original building.
b. WOOD SIDING AND WOOD SIMULATION MATERIALS
i. Lap siding (horizontal) configuration
ii. Smooth or rough-sawn finish (no faux wood grain)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 49
c. BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE. Must be detailed and in an appropriate load-bearing
configurations.
d. STUCCO (cementitious finish). Smooth or sand only, no roughly textured finish.
4. ROOFS AND PARAPETS. Roofs and parapets should demonstrate a commonsense recognition of the
climate by utilizing appropriate pitch, drainage, and materials in order to provide visual coherence
to the Station Area. The design standards for roofs and parapets are as follows:
a. ROOF MATERIALS. The following materials are permitted.
i. Clay or concrete (faux clay)
ii. Tile (barrel or flat roman)
iii. Slate (equivalent synthetic or better)
iv. Metal (standing seam, equivalent or better)
v. Dimensional Asphalt shingles
vi. Cedar Shingles
vii. Cornices and soffits may be a combination of wood, vinyl, and/or metal.
b. Parapets shall generally not extend above the top of a flat or single pitch (shed) roof more
than six feet (6’)fronting a public street. Parapets may be used to visually screen roof-top
mechanical equipment, and a utilitarian penthouse structure may be attached to the interior
side of a parapet extension in order to screen equipment. Parapets shall appear from the
exterior as part of the exterior wall, and as such shall be composed of the same materials
and limited to the same colors and finishes as the materials of the exterior walls. When a
parapet also serves as a security railing for any activity on a rooftop, a parapet not facing a
public street may incorporate different materials than the exterior wall from which it
extends, such as glass, metal mesh, and poles. When a parapet faces a public street and
also serves as a security railing for a rooftop activity, such as a green roof or open air
dining, then the parapet may be designed such that it has openings in its vertical surface to
allow visibility through it. Such openings shall not be lower than three feet (3’) from the
roof surface nor exceed eighteen inches (18”) in width.
5. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES. The following configurations and techniques are permitted:
a. PITCHED ROOFS. Pitch is exclusive of roofs concealed behind parapets.
i. Simple hip and gable roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and
10:12.
ii. Shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between 3:12 and 8:12.
iii. Eaves, when provided, must overhang eighteen (18) to thirty inches (30”) on a
principal building for the initial four (4) stories. For each additional story; six
inches (6”) shall be added to the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added
to the maximum, up to a maximum projection of seven feet (7’).
iv. Eaves on accessory buildings, dormers, and other smaller structures must
overhang at least eight inches (8”).
v. Timber eaves and balcony brackets must be a minimum of four-by-four inches
(4” x 4”) in dimension.
b. PARAPET, CORNICE AND COPING STANDARDS.
i. Allowed only for sites where the roof material is not visible from any adjacent
street.
ii. Buildings without visible roof surfaces and overhanging eaves may create an
overhang with a cornice projecting horizontally between six (6”) and twelve
inches (12”) beyond the building walls for the on the primary structure for the
initial four (4) stories. For each additional story; six inches (6”) shall be added to
the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added to the maximum, up to a
maximum projection of six feet (6’).
iii. SKYLIGHTS, ROOF VENTS,MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT, AND SIMILAR UTILITARIAN
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 50
ITEMS. Skylights, roof vents, stacks, mechanical equipment, plumbing apparatus
for green roofs, and other mechanical or utility equipment with permanent
placement on the roof of a building shall be screened from view from any public
street or public use area. Screening may be accomplished by parapet walls,
utilitarian penthouse structures attached to the interior of a parapet extension,
equipment covers, or similar. These items may also be set back from the edge of
a building at least ten feet (10’) and camouflaged by color matching the roof when
they do not exceed two feet (2’) in height.
6. WINDOWS AND DOORS. The placement, type, and size of windows and doors help to establish the
scale and vitality of the public realm. For nonresidential and mixed use buildings, they allow
interplay between the business interiors and the street or public realm space. For residential
buildings, they foster “eyes on the street” surveillance which provides for security and safety in the
area. Windows should be divided by multiple panes of glass. This helps the window “hold” the
surface of the façade, rather than appearing like a “hole” in the wall, an effect produced by a large
single sheet of glass. The standards for windows and doors are as follows:
a. Windows shall be of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel.
b. Window glass shall be clear or lightly-tinted and non-reflective, with light transmission at
the ground story at least ninety percent (90%) and for the upper stories at least seventy five
percent (75%), with modification as necessary to meet any applicable building and energy
code requirements.
c. Specialty windows, with a maximum of one per thirty (30) lineal feet along any façade
facing any public street or public use realm, per story is allowed. A specialty window may
utilize stained, opalescent, or translucent glass, or glass block, and shall not exceed forty
eight (48) square feet in area. Mirrored glass shall not be used on any ground story façade
or on any story when visible from any public street or public use realm.
d. Operable windows and doors onto patios and balconies are allowed for residential units on
any story, and for nonresidential and mixed use buildings above the ground story.
e. Window screens shall be black or gray. Screen frames shall match window frame material
or be dark anodized.
f. Doors designed primarily for pedestrian use shall be of wood, clad wood, or steel and may
include glass panes. Doors designed for vehicular use may be of any material and style
consistent with the architectural detail of the building.
7. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR DOORS AND WINDOWS. The following are permitted:
a. The horizontal dimension of the opening shall not exceed the vertical dimension except
where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
b. Windows may be ganged horizontally (maximum five [5] per group) if each grouping is
separated by a mullion, column, pier or wall section that is at least seven inches (7”) wide.
c. Windows shall be no closer than thirty inches (30”) to building corners (excluding bay
windows).
d. Exterior shutters, if applied, shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window at
one-half the width, even if inoperable.
e. Windows on any story above the ground story may be double-hung, single-hung, awning,
or casement windows. Fixed windows are permitted only as specialty windows or when a
component of a system including an operable window within a single wall opening.
f. Residential buildings or residential floors of mixed use buildings shall have panes of glass
no larger than thirty six inches (36”) vertical by thirty inches (30”) horizontal. The
maximum pane size for office uses is forty eight inches (48”) vertical by forty (40”)
horizontal. When necessary to meet building codes for egress purposes windows may
exceed the dimensions given here.
g. Nonresidential windows and doors at the street level shall not have individual panes of
glass larger than eight feet (8’) in height by four feet (4’) wide.
h. All window pane surface area of ground story nonresidential buildings shall allow views
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 51
into the building interior for a depth of at least eight feet (8’) where the interior space is
retail, restaurant, office, or similar area accessible to the public. This shall not include
restrooms, or restricted employee-only accessed areas, such as a kitchen, inventory storage,
or loading dock. Windows shall not be made opaque by window treatments except for
operable sunscreen devices within the conditioned space.
i. Garage doors or operable coverings over vehicle use (service/loading) wall openings shall
not face the primary public street unless they are set back from the building façade and
from the public right-of-way at least twenty feet (20’).
j. Double-height entryways (those that span more than one [1] story) are not allowed.
k. Doors shall not be recessed more than three feet (3’) behind the shop-front windows and,
in any case, shall have a clear view and path to a forty five degree (45o) angle past the
perpendicular from each side of the door.
l. Arcades, awnings, and canopies are encouraged along the front of buildings facing public
streets and the public use realm.
8. SIGNAGE. Signs within the TS district commercial frontages should be clear, informative to the
public and should weather well. Signage is desirable for advertising shops and offices, and as
decoration. Signs should be scaled to the nature of the district, which is a mixed-use, pedestrianoriented
environment centered by a heavily trafficked motor vehicle corridor. Signage that is glaring
or too large creates distraction, intrudes into and lessens the urban environment pedestrian
experience, and creates visual clutter. The standards for signs are as follows:
a. Where a building is designed to house multiple businesses or uses, each capable of desiring
identification signage, the building shall provide a master sign plan prior to receiving a
Certificate of Occupancy. The master sign plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
Town Board of Commissioners as provided at § 155.608.9. It shall include a designated
horizontal sign band for all uses on the ground or street level story, and designated locations
for identification of businesses in upper level stories and for identifying the building name
itself. The sign band for the ground story level shall not be higher than sixteen feet (16’)
or lower than nine feet (9’) above the adjacent public sidewalk, street or public use realm.
b. Individual letters placed within the designated first floor sign band shall not exceed
eighteen inches (18”) in height or width and three inches (3”) in relief for any buildings
placed at, or within ten feet (10’) of the adjacent public street. Company logos and other
non-word elements may be placed within the sign band. All words, logos, and related
elements used within the sign band to identify a business shall be arranged so that together
they fit within a rectangular area up to sixty (60) square feet per business enterprise.
c. Company logos or names may be placed or painted within ground floor or second story
office windows.
d. Attached signs for buildings designed and used as a single business enterprise or a multifamily
residential building:
i. Any combination of letters, logos, and other elements shall be considered one (1)
sign for any building up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet GFA and/or up to
three (3) stories. This sign shall fit within a rectangular area not to exceed one
hundred (100) square feet, and not to exceed ten feet (10’) in height. This single
sign is allowed per each building façade that is at an eighty (80) or greater degree
angle from an adjacent building façade.
ii. Any combination of letters, logos, and other elements shall be considered one sign
for any building equal to or greater than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet GFA
and more than three (3) stories. This sign shall fit within a rectangular area not to
exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet, and not to exceed sixteen feet (16’) in
height.
e. A masonry or bronze plaque bearing the building name may be placed in the building’s
parapet wall or under the eaves, and above the upper story windows. The building name
identification may alternatively be sculpted into the building façade. Any such plaque or
sculpted material shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet and shall be limited to the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 52
façade incorporating the primary pedestrian entrance. The building name may also be
displayed on a separate masonry or bronze plaque or sculpted into the building wall
material at the ground story level and shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
f. Projecting signs placed perpendicular to the building facade and identifying a business
enterprise or residential use within the building may be placed within ten feet (10’) of an
associated street level door in the designated first story sign band or on exterior walls of
the second story, not to exceed twenty four feet (24’) in height. Projecting signs shall not
exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area or extend further than four feet (4’) from the
façade, and shall have a minimum of seven feet six inches (7’6”) clear height above any
sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
g. Because all buildings are expected to be at or close to the public street, sidewalk, or a public
use realm, no freestanding signs are anticipated for individual buildings. Freestanding
signs may be employed as gateway identification markers to various subareas at the
exterior boundaries of and within the TS District as locations are determined by the
approved general concept plan.
9. AWNINGS AND CANOPIES: When an awning or canopy is incorporated into a building, the following
requirements shall apply:
a. A minimum of ten feet (10’) clear height shall be provided for any awning or canopy above
any sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
b. Awnings may extend from the front façade of the building up to one-half (1/2) of the width
of the sidewalk area below, not to exceed nine feet (9’), whichever is less. If this extension
reaches into the public right-of-way, an encroachment agreement with the Town or State
is required. In no case shall an awning interfere with the placement, natural growth, and
maintenance of any street trees, street signs, or lighting.
c. Canopies may extend from the front façade of the building up to the full width of the
sidewalk area below. If this extension reaches into the public right-of-way, an
encroachment agreement from the Town or State is required. In no case shall a canopy
interfere with the placement, natural growth, and maintenance of any street trees, street
signs, or lighting.
d. Awnings may be made of canvas or treated canvas material, may be designed to retract
against the wall of the building, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
e. Canopies may be made of wood, metal, or glass, or a combination of these or similar
permanent rigid materials, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
f. No internal illumination shall be projected through an awning or canopy.
10. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE ITEMS. The following shall be placed behind
and away from any front or corner side building line, not be stored or located within any street, and
be screened from view from the public use realm:
a. Air compressors, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and
telephone company transformers, meters or boxes, storage tanks, garbage dumpsters and
compressors, and similar equipment shall not be installed or placed within any area
considered public use realm.
b. Backflow preventers as required by the public utility company shall not be located within
the public use realm, and shall be covered or screened from view.
c. Garbage and recycling containers, and similar items which must be stored and then moved
on an ongoing schedule for servicing shall be stored in a location that is completely
screened from view from the public realm to a minimum height of six feet (6’) through the
use of a fence, wall, or other visual block.
d. Utility meters for individual residential or nonresidential uses that are installed on or near
a building wall and must be regularly accessed for data collection shall be screened from
view from the public realm through the use of a fence, wall, evergreen landscape materials,
or other visual block.
e. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any front or corner side
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 53
building line and be screened from view from the public realm.
H. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The TS district establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however may not always be appropriate to a particular segment or building within the development.
Accordingly, new development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures
may require the use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development
requirements specified here for the TS district (in § 155.503.6) may be modified through the Flexible Design
provisions of § 155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.7. Shopping Center District (B-1SCD)
A. The Shopping Center District is established to provide for the development and efficient operation of
integrated shopping centers or retail sales establishments which exceed one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of total floor area. “Retail” for this district shall include predominately the sale of merchandise
and prepared food and drink. This district requires locations with easy vehicular access and high visibility
to draw visitors from a wide geographic area, while providing adequate treatment of district edges to ensure
these developments are not detrimental to adjacent uses or the orderly and well-planned development of the
community. All development of land within the Shopping Center district shall comply with a site plan
approved at the time of district designation. The Shopping Center District is primarily intended for properties
that already have been developed as predominately or exclusively retail complexes. Where new sites are
considered for this zoning district, it is anticipated they will be designed with multi-story structures and be
located in conjunction with higher density residential and mixed use developments. The map symbol and
short name for the Shopping Center District shall be “B-1SCD”.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the B-1SCD District. Uses allowed within the B-1SCD district are given in the Table of Allowed
Uses at § 155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the B-1SCD
district are listed at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.7
specifically for the B-1SCD district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at §
155.608, and the lighting provisions at § 155.609 apply to the B-1SCD district.
C. Additional Standards Unique to B-1SCD District. In addition to the requirements of other sections of this
Title, development and improvements in the Shopping Center District shall comply with the following
requirements. Where the provisions in this § 155.503.7 conflict with the provisions of other Sections of this
Title, except for Overlay district requirements, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. A B-1SCD district shall have frontage on an existing or proposed major
or minor thoroughfare.
2. MINIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA. A B-1SCD designation shall be a minimum of three (3) acres,
and shall be designed to have more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of retail (sale
of merchandise and food establishments) and other commercial building area. Build-out of the
overall development may be constructed in multiple phases over time.
3. EXTERIOR STREET EDGE. The B-1SCD district shall provide an exterior street edge of at least forty
feet (40’) along all public streets at the exterior edge of a B-1SCD district. No building, patio,
parking, maneuvering, loading or service areas may be located within this streetside edge.
4. MINIMUM INTERIOR AND NONSTREET EDGES. The minimum distance from any building at or under
thirty five feet (35’) high to an abutting property line must be at least twenty five feet (25’). The
minimum distance from any building greater than thirty five feet (35’) in building height to an
abutting property line shall be twenty five feet (25’) plus one foot (1’) for every one foot (1’) in
added building height when the adjacent property is zoned or used for residential purposes. When
the abutting property is zoned for nonresidential purposes, the distance shall be increased over
twenty five feet (25’) by an additional one foot (1’) for every two feet (2’) of additional building
height. Buildings abutting public streets in the interior of a B-1SCD district shall be set back a
minimum of forty feet (40’) from the street.
5. OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT. The B-1SCD district encourages development of an open space system
featuring pedestrian amenities. The open space system may include areas devoted to post
construction, water quality and/or storm water detention measures, any required or provided
landscaping or screening areas, SWIM buffers, greenways or environmental protection features.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION. The B-1SCD district is not eligible for early designation. Each request for BTOWN
OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 54
1SCD designation shall include a site plan showing, at a minimum, general exterior dimensions, total square
footage, proposed locations of parking and off-street loading facilities, proposed new streets or improvements
to existing streets, driveway access points, an internal traffic and circulation plan, and pedestrian facilities
within and providing connections to adjacent properties.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. Proposals for B1-SCD designation shall provide explanation on how they complement
the surrounding neighborhoods and incorporate principles of good community design, including:
1. Access to public streets and the adequacy of those streets to carry anticipated traffic.
2. On-site circulation for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
3. Adequacy of existing community facilities such as water, sewer, police, and fire protection.
4. Relationship to and impacts upon adjoining and nearby properties and the adequacy of proposed
measures to minimize any adverse impacts.
5. The appropriateness of the proposal in relationship to the policies and objectives of the Matthews
Land Use Plan and to a more detailed small area plan, if available.
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the B-1SCD district.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. The interconnected network of streets must extend into adjoining areas except where the
general goal of integration and connectivity with surrounding uses is deemed inappropriate
or impractical due to sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Street stubs must be provided to adjoining undeveloped
areas to accommodate future street connectivity.
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets. Intersections between arterials and collectors must have centerline offsets of at
least one hundred fifty feet (150’). This requirement does not apply to intersections
between alleys and local streets.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets. Street trees may be
omitted where arcades are provided which would restrict adequate space for natural tree
canopy growth.
e. Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted except where physical conditions such as
limited access highways, sensitive natural resources, or unusual topography provide no
practical connection alternatives. Each dead end must be detailed as a circular turn-around,
a close, a hammerhead, or a “Y” turn-around and should provide pedestrian connectivity
to the maximum extent practicable.
f. Private streets and gated streets are prohibited. All streets must be dedicated to the public,
although alleys may be private.
g. ALLEYS AND SERVICE ACCESS. A clearly-defined network of rear and side alleys is
encouraged to provide vehicular access to off-street parking and service/loading facilities
for individual buildings. Alley entrances should generally align so as to provide ease of
ingress for service vehicles, but internal deflections or variations in the alley network are
encouraged to prevent excessive or monotonous views of the rear of structures resulting
from long stretches of alleys. All alleys shall be identified as either public or private, and
any public alley shall be dedicated to the public as provided for in Chapter 7.
h. THE STREETSCAPE. A thematic and cohesive streetscape planting and lighting plan shall
be prepared for the B-1SCD district at time of initial designation. The streetscape plan
shall incorporate street trees to provide both form (canopy) and comfort (shade) to the
street. Street trees give special character and coherence to each street. Lighting shall be
incorporated to provide night-time illumination under the tree canopy for safety and
ambiance for pedestrians, and adequate illumination for vehicular traffic.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 55
i. FRONTS AND REARS. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. Owners and
occupants are encouraged to utilize planters and window boxes filled with colorful plants
along each façade that fronts a public street, plaza, parking lot, or similar public use realm.
3. BLOCKS. When a B-1SCD designation will create new streets or extend streets, the block lengths
shall meet the standards provided in Chapter 7.
4. PARKING. While public street cross sections may include on-street parking, a substantial amount of
required parking will need to be provided on private property, generally require on the same parcel
as the associated.
a. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING. Off-street parking spaces must be located on the
same parcel as the associated use, except where shared parking as outlined in this
subsection is involved. In no case may required minimum parking be located in the
transitional setback or yard of arterial streets subject to future expansion. Parking shall not
be located within the streetscape planting area adjacent to any street, or a required perimeter
planting area or landscape screening area at the outer edge of a property. Access to offstreet
parking shall be provided by private driveways or shared alleys. Parking along alleys
is allowed, may be at ninety degree (90o), angled, or parallel, and must be of sufficient
depth to assure parked vehicles will not impede traffic movement in the alley. Where ninety
degree (90o), or angled spaces are provided, they must be a minimum of twenty feet (20’)
in length, and where parallel spaces are provided they must be a minimum of eight feet (8’)
in width. Any alley with parking spaces immediately adjacent must be paved a minimum
of twenty feet (20’) in width, with no obstructions such as doors, dumpsters, planters,
bollards, mechanical equipment, street light poles, etc., that could restrict the full width use
of the pavement for vehicular maneuvering in and out of designated parking spaces. Cross
access is required between adjoining parking lots.
b. SHARED PARKING.
i. Shared location of cumulative required spaces. Owners and developers are
encouraged to design a shared parking system for part or all of a B-1SCD district
in shared parking lots or structures. A written agreement between property
owners explaining what parcel or parcels shall utilize shared parking, and which
will remain binding on future owners and land uses, shall be signed and recorded
with the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds office.
ii. Shared use of same spaces. Shared parking of required parking spaces may be
permitted with approval from the Planning Director as provided in §
155.607.2.G.6 of this Title.
c. PARKING STRUCTURES. Parking structures are encouraged to create shared parking
opportunities and to reduce the footprint of surface lots. Single-use parking structures must
be located behind other buildings or internal to the district. Structured parking is permitted
and encouraged in mixed use buildings. Structured parking may extend below grade and
may contain multiple levels of parking above grade. Parking structures may contain other
uses above the parking levels provided the entire building does not exceed the height
allowed in the B-1SCD district. Partially enclosed parking spaces may be created with
habitable space cantilevered over them at the rear of a building, or along the side of a
building when a solid wall blocks view of parked vehicles from any public street or
pedestrian pathway.
G. BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES.
1. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.603 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the B-1SCD district. All buildings within the B-1SCD district
project must be architecturally compatible in appearance and quality through the use of similar
building materials, colors, architectural features and styles. An identified set of architectural styles
or specific architectural elements may be utilized to create an overall design theme.
2. EXTERIOR BUILDING WALLS.
a. Primary exterior wall materials, which shall cover at least seventy five percent (75%) of
each façade, excluding any glazed areas, shall consist of brick, other masonry, or native
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 56
stone (or synthetic equivalent).
b. Secondary materials, which may cover up to twenty five percent (25%) of each façade,
excluding any glazed areas, may include hardiboard siding, wood siding, and stucco.
c. Accent materials and trim may cover up to ten percent (10%) of each façade excluding any
glazed areas. Such accents and trim materials may include pre-cast masonry (for trim and
cornice elements only), Gypsum Reinforced Fiber Concrete (GFRC—for trim elements
only), metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornamentation only), and split-faced
block (only for piers, foundation walls and chimneys). All accent and trim materials shall
be identified on elevation plans.
d. Colors of all non-glazing exterior materials on any building shall be limited to no more
than three, unless the building is both larger in overall size than sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet and at least three (3) stories in height. Such larger buildings may employ up to
five (5) distinct colors on its exterior facades. For the purpose of this standard, the term
color shall also refer to two (2) clearly different shades of the same color, such as a light
green and a dark green, or a pastel pink and a burgundy red.
e. Alternative percentages of listed materials or types of materials may be requested through
the site plan and elevation plan approval process.
3. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR EXTERIOR WALLS: The following configurations and
techniques are permitted.
a. WALLS
i. The horizontal dimension of the wall opening shall not exceed the vertical
dimension except where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
ii. Wall openings shall not span vertically more than one (1) story.
iii. Wall openings shall correspond to interior space and shall not span across building
structure such as the floor structural and mechanical thickness.
iv. Material changes shall be made within a constructional logic—as where an
addition (of a different material) is built onto the original building.
b. WOOD SIDING AND WOOD SIMULATION MATERIALS
i. Lap siding (horizontal) configuration
ii. Smooth or rough-sawn finish (no faux wood grain)
c. BRICK, BLOCK AND STONE. Must be detailed and in an appropriate load-bearing
configurations.
d. STUCCO (cementitious finish). Smooth or sand only, no roughly textured finish.
e. STORY HEIGHT. The ground story of buildings must be a minimum of twelve feet (12’)
tall. Each story above the ground story shall be at least eight feet (8’) tall. Any upper story
taller than twelve feet (12’) will count as two stories. Story heights are measured from the
floor to the bottom of the lowest structural member that supports the story above.
f. Exceptions. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
4. ROOFS AND PARAPETS. The design standards for roofs and parapets are as follows:
a. Roof Materials. The following materials are permitted.
i. Clay or concrete (faux clay)
ii. Tile (barrel or flat roman)
iii. Slate (equivalent synthetic or better)
iv. Metal (standing seam, equivalent or better)
v. Dimensional Asphalt shingles
vi. Cedar Shingles
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 57
vii. Cornices and soffits may be a combination of wood, vinyl, and/or metal.
b. Parapets shall generally not extend above the top of a flat or single pitch (shed) roof more
than six feet (6’) fronting a public street. Parapets may be used to visually screen roof-top
mechanical equipment, and a utilitarian penthouse structure may be attached to the interior
side of a parapet extension in order to screen equipment. Parapets shall appear from the
exterior as part of the exterior wall, and as such shall be composed of the same materials
and limited to the same colors and finishes as the materials of the exterior walls. When a
parapet also serves as a security railing for any activity on a rooftop, a parapet not facing a
public street may incorporate different materials than the exterior wall from which it
extends, such as glass, metal mesh, and poles. When a parapet faces a public street and
also serves as a security railing for a rooftop activity, such as a green roof or open air
dining, then the parapet may be designed such that it has openings in its vertical surface to
allow visibility through it. Such openings shall not be lower than three feet (3’) from the
roof surface nor exceed eighteen inches (18”) in width.
c. Exceptions. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
5. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES. The following configurations and techniques are permitted:
a. PITCHED ROOFS. Pitch is exclusive of roofs concealed behind parapets.
i. Simple hip and gable roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and
10:12.
ii. Shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between 3:12 and 8:12.
iii. Eaves, when provided, must overhang eighteen (18) to thirty inches (30”) on a
principal building for the initial four (4) stories. For each additional story, six
inches (6”) shall be added to the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added
to the maximum, up to a maximum projection of seven feet (7’).
iv. Eaves on accessory buildings, dormers, and other smaller structures must
overhang at least eight inches (8”).
v. Timber eaves and balcony brackets must be a minimum of four-by-four inches
(4” by 4”) in dimension.
b. PARAPET AND CORNICE STANDARDS.
i. Allowed only for sites where the roof material is not visible from any adjacent
street.
ii. Buildings without visible roof surfaces and overhanging eaves may create an
overhang with a cornice projecting horizontally between six (6”) and twelve
inches (12”) beyond the building walls on the primary structure for the initial four
(4) stories. For each additional story, six inches (6”) shall be added to the
minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added to the maximum, up to a
maximum projection of six feet (6’).
c. Exceptions. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
6. WINDOWS AND DOORS. The standards for windows and doors are as follows:
a. Windows shall be of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel.
b. Window glass shall be clear or lightly-tinted and non-reflective, with light transmission at
the ground story at least ninety percent (90%) and for the upper stories at least seventy five
percent (75%), with modification as necessary to meet any applicable building and energy
code requirements.
c. Specialty windows are allowed only when approved through the elevation plan. A
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 58
specialty window may utilize stained, opalescent, or translucent glass, or glass block, and
shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet in area. Mirrored glass shall not be used when
visible from any public street or public use realm.
d. Operable windows and doors onto patios and balconies are allowed for nonresidential and
mixed use buildings above the ground story.
e. Window screens shall be black or gray. Screen frames shall match window frame material
or be dark anodized.
f. Doors designed primarily for pedestrian use shall be of wood, clad wood, or steel and may
include glass panes. Doors designed for vehicular use may be of any material and style
consistent with the architectural detail of the building.
g. Double-height entryways (those that span more than one [1] story) are not allowed.
7. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR DOORS AND WINDOWS. The following are permitted
a. The horizontal dimension of the opening shall not exceed the vertical dimension except
where otherwise prescribed in this Title.
b. Windows may be ganged horizontally without limit to encourage storefront design.
c. Windows may reach to or turn at building corners.
d. Exterior shutters, if applied, shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window at
one-half the width, even if inoperable.
e. Windows on any story above the ground story may be double-hung, single-hung, awning,
or casement windows.
f. Nonresidential windows and doors at the street level may utilize large individual panes of
glass without size limit.
g. All window pane surface area of ground story nonresidential buildings shall allow views
into the building interior for a depth of at least eight feet (8’) where the interior space is
retail, restaurant, office, or similar area accessible to the public. This shall not include
restrooms, or restricted employee-only accessed areas, such as a kitchen, inventory storage,
or loading dock. Windows shall not be made opaque by window treatments except for
operable sunscreen devices within the conditioned space.
h. Garage doors or operable coverings over vehicle use (service/loading) wall openings shall
not face the primary public street unless they are set back from the building façade and
from the public right-of-way at least twenty feet (20’).
i. Doors shall not be recessed more than three feet (3’) behind the shop-front windows and,
in any case, shall have a clear view and path to a forty five degree (45o) angle past the
perpendicular from each side of the door.
j. FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION ENTRANCES. Nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall have
their primary public walk-in entrances level with, to no greater than six inches (6”) above
the adjacent walkway. When a nonresidential or mixed use building has more than one (1)
primary public entrance and more than a one foot (1’) difference in finished grade at
various doorways, then the entrance adjacent to a public street shall meet this requirement.
Exceptions may be allowed through a site plan review, when a written explanation is
provided to indicate the basis for alternate design.
k. Arcades, awnings, and canopies are encouraged along the front of buildings facing public
streets and the public use realm.
l. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these standards shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
8. SIGNAGE. In addition to the sign standards at § 155.608 and any provisions of an overlay district,
when applicable, the following standards apply in the B-1SCD district:
a. Where a building is designed to house multiple businesses or uses, each capable of desiring
identification signage, the building shall provide a master sign plan prior to receiving a
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 59
Certificate of Occupancy. The master sign plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
Town Board of Commissioners as provided at § 155.608.9. It shall include a designated
horizontal sign band for all nonresidential uses on the ground or street level story, and
identify where the building name may be placed. The sign band for the ground story level
shall not be higher than sixteen feet (16’) or lower than nine feet (9’) above the adjacent
public sidewalk, street or public use realm.
b. Anchor and junior anchor tenants desiring sign placement other than on a designated sign
band shall have sign placement identified and approved through the master sign plan.
9. AWNINGS, CANOPIES, AND ARCADES: When an awning, canopy, or arcade is incorporated into a
building, the following requirements shall apply:
a. A minimum of ten feet (10’) clear height shall be provided for any awning, canopy, or
arcade above any sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
b. Awnings may extend from the front façade of the building up to one-half (1/2) of the width
of the sidewalk area below, not to exceed nine feet (9’), whichever is less. If this extension
reaches into the public right-of-way, an encroachment agreement with the Town or State
is required. In no case shall an awning interfere with the placement, natural growth, and
maintenance of any street trees, street signs, or lighting.
c. Canopies and arcades may extend from the front façade of the building up to the full width
of the sidewalk area below. If this extension reaches into the public right-of-way, an
encroachment agreement from the Town or State is required. In no case shall a canopy
interfere with the placement, natural growth, and maintenance of any street trees, street
signs, or lighting.
d. Awnings may be made of canvas or treated canvas material, may be designed to retract
against the wall of the building, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
e. Canopies and arcades may be made of wood, metal, or glass, or a combination of these or
similar permanent rigid materials, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
f. No internal illumination shall be projected through an awning, canopy, or arcade.
10. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE ITEMS. The following shall be placed behind
and away from any front or corner side building line, outside of any required sight triangle of any
street or driveway intersection, not be stored or located within any street, and be screened from view
from the public use realm:
a. Air compressors, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and
telephone company transformers, meters or boxes, storage tanks, garbage dumpsters and
compressors, and similar free-standing equipment shall not be installed or placed within
any area on the site considered public use realm. Any line of view of such items from the
public realm shall be provided with plant materials or other hardscape items to visually
screen them.
b. Backflow preventers as required by the public utility company should not hinder use of, or
block pedestrian flow through, the public use realm, and they shall be covered and screened
from view.
c. Utility meters that are installed on or near a building wall and must be regularly accessed
for data collection shall be screened from view from the public realm through the use of a
fence, wall, evergreen landscape materials, or other visual block. When vegetation is used,
it shall be evergreen or coniferous species with a minimum height at planting of three feet
(3’), and expected to grow to a height to shield view of the mechanical equipment from the
public realm within four (4) growing seasons.
d. Garbage and recycling containers, and similar items which must be stored and then moved
on an ongoing schedule for servicing shall be stored in a location that is completely
screened from view from the public realm to a minimum height of six feet (6’) through the
use of a fence, wall, or other visual block. The usual storage location and the temporary
staging area for servicing of such containers shall be designed and identified as part of the
site plan process.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 60
e. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any front or corner side
building line and be screened from view from the public realm. Screening may be
accomplished by parapet walls, utilitarian penthouse structures attached to the interior of a
parapet extension, equipment covers, or similar. These items may also be set back from
the edge of a building at least ten feet (10’) and camouflaged by color matching the roof
when they do not exceed two feet (2’) in height.
f. Skylights, roof vents and stacks, exhaust fans, plumbing for green roofs, elevator
mechanism, and other items or equipment with permanent placement on the roof of a
building shall be physically separated from any portion of a rooftop that is designed for
access and use by the occupants or customers of the building.
155.503.8. Entertainment District (ENT)
A. The Entertainment (ENT) District is established to provide a unique set of land uses and design criteria for a
defined geographic portion of the community, with a specific emphasis on providing multiple entertainment
opportunities for people of all ages, both permanent residents and visitors. The Entertainment District shall
incorporate spaces for permanent residences, transitory housing, employment opportunities, indoor and
outdoor recreation, shopping, dining, and daily living services in a compact pedestrian-friendly
neighborhood. Provision shall be made for various modes of transportation. All construction and uses of
land within the Entertainment district shall comply with an approved general concept plan for the District,
and no land disturbing activity may take place until compliance with the approved concept plan is
documented to, and confirmed by, the Town Planning Office. The map symbol and short name for the
Entertainment District shall be “ENT”.
The general concept plan to be created and adopted for the ENT district will become an appendix in the
Matthews Land Use Plan. This small area plan should include required elements for build-out to be
conducted in phases over time, such as initial required street/pedestrian primary, or main, networks to assure
interconnectivity through the overall area, minimum different types of land uses required to be built in the
first phase, communal storm water detention facilities, a minimum/maximum amount of certain types of land
uses to guarantee a full range mix of uses, at what point temporary surface parking lots will be converted to
shared or structured parking, minimum required building heights, or maximum footprint size of big box
buildings. Overall maximum development build-out may also be included in the conceptual small area plan.
As a Conditional-Only District, parcels of land may be zoned to this category following the procedures
explained at § 155.501.3.C. and D., at the time a specific development project is submitted for consideration,
or parcels may receive early designation as outlined in § 155.501.3.I., prior to any specific plan due to their
location within the geographic area identified for this zoning designation, with the condition that prior to any
land disturbing activity, a site specific plan for development shall be approved through the site plan approval
process as described at § 155.401.5.B.
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in §155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the ENT District. Uses allowed within the ENT district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the ENT district are
listed at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.8 specifically for the
ENT district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at § 155.608, and the lighting
provisions at § 155.609 apply to the ENT district.
C. Additional Standards Unique to the ENT District. In addition to the requirements of other sections of this
Title, development and improvements in the Entertainment District shall comply with the following
requirements. Where the provisions in this Section conflict with the provisions of other Sections of this Title,
this Section shall prevail. Due to the nature of the Sportsplex as a public park, density and structural buildout
related criteria included below would not logically apply to the Sportsplex portion of the overall
neighborhood. Where such urban design standards would conflict with the open space and protected forested
portions within the public Sportsplex itself, they shall not apply within the Sportplex portion of the overall
neighborhood, and the specific design criteria of the approved park plans shall prevail.
1. LOCATION. The ENT District shall only be applied within the geographic area designated by
Matthews Board of Commissioners as the regional Sportsplex and adjacent new mixed use
neighborhood. This area is roughly bounded by Matthews-Mint Hill Road, Independence
Boulevard, I-485, and Tank Town Road/Crestdale neighborhood.
2. EXTERIOR PROJECT EDGE. The ENT District is established to provide and enhance both daily
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 61
living activities and recreational opportunities for local residents and visitors within a distinct and
limited geographic area, as well as enabling easy and logical connections to surrounding and nearby
development. Therefore, clearly defined gateway entrances to the ENT neighborhood are
appropriate. All development within the ENT district and along Matthews-Mint Hill Road frontage
shall be designed to be visually complementary to existing or planned development across the street.
All development within the ENT District and adjacent to the Crestdale neighborhood shall be
designed to be visually complementary and shall incorporate uses that do not adversely impact the
predominantly residential nature of the Crestdale community. Height and bulk of buildings shall be
designed so they do not visually overwhelm adjacent single story scale development. This may be
accomplished through stepped back building heights, relatively narrow building extensions toward
the adjacent properties, landscaped buffers, greenway trails, public plazas, and/or other design
elements.
3. OVERALL ARCHITECTURAL THEME AND DESIGN. Because the ENT District creates an
opportunity for a concentrated location of development unlike any other site within the Town, an
overall set of architectural elements and site design amenities to “brand” the area may be
appropriate. The specific elements shall be determined by the Town Board of Commissioners prior
to construction of any buildings or improvements. Details may include specific exterior building
materials to be incorporated within structures, maximum dimensions of surface parking lots, street
lighting and other street furniture, landscape species and hardscape elements, placement of public
art, gateway and internal directory signage design, greenway and pedestrian trail cross sections,
mandatory inclusion/location of pedestrian connectivity, street cross sections, and similar public
area amenities that may benefit from being internally consistent. Exterior boundary pedestrian
amenities extending to surrounding locations may also be incorporated into the required design
themes for the ENT District.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION PROCESS. Where a parcel has received designation of ENT district prior to a full
development proposal on it, as outlined at § 155.501.3.I, sufficient drawings and documents to clearly prove
compliance to the design elements listed in § 155.503.8.E through G below shall be submitted to the
Matthews Planning Office for review and recommendation in the same way as a rezoning application is
handled by Town staff. Upon completion of review, Town staff and applicants shall meet to review staff
findings. Applicants shall provide additional or revised documents as determined necessary to show
compliance to all standards. Submission of a request for site plan and/or elevation plan approval shall then
be forwarded to the Matthews Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall receive a report
with recommendations from Town Planning staff on how well the proposal meets the intent of the district
and the design criteria listed below, and determine when the proposal meets the requirements and can be
approved.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. Proposals for development in the ENT District shall be approved only if they conform to
the adopted overall concept plan for the area and incorporate adopted desired elements of a mixed use
entertainment focused neighborhood, including:
1. A highly interconnected street network, dispersing traffic while providing safe and convenient
routes for pedestrians and bicyclists.
2. High-quality public spaces, with all building facades which face such public spaces having windows
and doors facing tree-lined streets, plazas, squares, or neighborhood parks.
3. Compact development, creating a walkable urban environment and conserving land and energy
through reduced automobile usage and advanced techniques such as stormwater infiltration.
4. Diversity not homogeneity, with a variety of building types, street types, open spaces, and land uses
providing for people of all ages and every form of mobility.
5. Resilient and sustainable mix of residential, business, service, and recreational land uses that will
be adaptable over time to improved public transit and to changing economic conditions.
6. Vertical and horizontal mix of uses to maximize the opportunities for a safe and active
neighborhood.
7. Parking plans that address both short-term and long-term needs, with strategies for future shared
structured parking within the overall neighborhood. This may include creation of a neighborhoodwide
shared parking special assessment system as further outlined in § 155.503.8.F. below.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 62
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT GENERAL DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. With proper urban form, a greater integration of
building uses is natural and comfortable. The principles listed in § 155.602.1 shall apply in the ENT
District outside of the Sportsplex.
2. STREET NETWORK.
a. The interconnected network of streets must extend into adjoining areas except where
connectivity is deemed inappropriate or impractical due to sensitive natural resources or
unusual topography, or where existing development patterns provide no practical
connection opportunities. The entire district is anticipated to be built out over time, in
phases, so the exact placement of all streets is not expected to be determined prior to initial
development within the district.
b. Streets do not have to form a rectangular grid, but may curve or bend to connect to other
streets. In order to assure an overall framework for connectivity within, and through, the
ENT district, a “main street” layer of proposed street network shall be determined as part
of the approved general concept plan. At least two street intersections shall be identified
to directly connect the Sportsplex public park to the remainder of the ENT District, and at
least one (1) street intersection shall directly connect the Sportsplex public park to the
exterior edge of the district.
c. The proposed street network should respect topography and designated environmental
resources and be modified accordingly to avoid damages to such resources.
d. Sidewalks and street trees must be provided on both sides of all streets. Street trees may
be omitted where alternative public use areas are designed adjacent to a street.
e. Permanent dead end streets are not permitted, except for side or rear access alleys.
f. Private streets or gated streets are prohibited, and all streets must be dedicated to the public.
However, streets that provide vehicular access solely to a building or buildings where at
least 90 percent (90%) of the gross floor area of the building or buildings is devoted to
residential uses, or streets that provide vehicular access to a building or buildings that also
abut and have frontage on a public street may be private provided that all private streets
must be constructed to public street standards and a public access easement must be
provided over and across all private streets to allow public use of such private streets. (Am.
Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-17)
g. Rear or side access alleys are permitted throughout the neighborhood and may serve as
primary vehicular ingress to individual buildings or parcels in the ENT District. Alleys
may be utilized to separate vehicular access and parking for residential units, to access
loading and delivery spaces for nonresidential uses, to provide access to employee parking,
and to allow the public to reach side or rear secondary entrances to businesses. All alleys
shall be identified as either public or private, and any public alley shall be dedicated to the
public as provided for in Chapter 7.
h. A streetscape planting and lighting plan shall be prepared for each block face of each public
street, and shall incorporate street trees designed to grow into an arching canopy that will
not impede pedestrian or vehicular movement or visibility. A variety of species may be
utilized throughout the neighborhood, but will not exceed five (5) tree species per block
face. To the greatest extent possible, street trees and street lighting shall be installed when
the street and sidewalk are constructed.
i. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. Owners and tenants are
encouraged to utilize planters and window boxes filled with colorful plants along each
façade that fronts a public street, plaza, parking lot, or similar public use area.
3. BLOCKS. Except as otherwise provided, block perimeters may not exceed eight hundred (800)
lineal feet as measured along the edges of each street right-of-way forming the block. Blocks may
alternatively be broken by a civic space provided that lot is at least fifty feet (50’) wide and shall
provide perpetual pedestrian access between the blocks and to any lots that front the civic space.
Smaller blocks are encouraged to promote walkability.
a. Blocks may exceed this limit, up to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) linear feet, only
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 63
if one (1) or more of the following conditions apply:
i. The block has at least one block face on a numbered state or federal highway or
expressway/freeway.
ii. The block has at least a portion of its block face partially within the Sportsplex
public park property.
iii. The block face contains valuable natural features which should not be crossed by
a street.
iv. The block face cannot have buildings on one side due to utility easement
restrictions.
b. Any single block face wider than six hundred feet (600’) must include a publicly dedicated
sidewalk, or walkway at least twelve feet (12’) in width that connects to another street.
4. OFF-STREET PARKING. While public street cross sections should include on-street parking on
many streets within the overall neighborhood, the majority of required parking spaces will be
provided on private property, either on the same parcel as the associated use or on a nearby parcel.
a. SHARED PARKING PROGRAM. An owner/developer is expected to design and implement a
park-once system of shared parking to distribute the commercial parking load between onstreet
spaces and shared parking lots or structures. In order to reduce the amount of
separate surface parking lots which can visually and spatially dominate development and
therefore adversely affect desired density of build-out, vehicle parking shall have both a
short-term and a long-term plan. Any development project proposed in the ENT District
shall show how it can provide for its share of parking needs when initially constructed, as
well as a longer-term future demand. Off-site parking within shared parking facilities shall
be allowed and is encouraged in order to increase building and/or public use coverage
fronting streets within the district. At the time of initial approval, a development proposal
shall identify whether the project will include one or more of the following, either upon
initial construction or at a later phase: twenty (20) or more residential units; six thousand
(6,000) square feet or more of business or retail space; fifty (50) or more seating
accommodations in a restaurant; or any public assembly or recreational use facility that can
accommodate fifty (50) or more persons (participants or attendees). Any proposed
development meeting any of the given categories shall agree to participation in the
neighborhood-wide shared parking program. This shared parking program may allow
multiple separate buildings or development projects to allocate a certain percentage of their
required parking to a shared off-site parking facility, and may require property owners to
participate in a special assessment process to build structured parking when certain
neighborhood build-out levels are reached. Shared off-site parking facilities may initially
be surface lots that shall be converted to structured parking when neighborhood density
levels are reached. A written agreement between property owners explaining what parcel
or parcels may utilize parking on a separate parcel, now and/or in the future, and which
will remain binding on future owners and land uses, shall be signed and recorded with the
Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds office prior to any land disturbing activity or any
permit being issued for a parcel that requires off-site parking to meet minimum parking
standards.
b. To the maximum extent possible, off-street parking spaces must be located within buildings
or behind buildings so that buildings screen parking areas from sidewalks and streets. In
no case shall parking be located in the setback or yard in front of a building. Parking lots
in non-streetside (interior of block) side yards may be allowed provided these lots are
placed a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from lot lines adjoining rights-of-way, excluding
alleys.
c. Access to off-street parking spaces shall be provided by one- or two-way private drives or
public alleys. Parking spaces immediately adjacent to drives or alleys may be ninety degree
(90O), angled, or parallel, and must be of sufficient depth to assure parked vehicles will not
impede traffic movement in the drive or alley. Where ninety degree (90O) or angle spaces
are provided, they must be a minimum of twenty feet (20’) in length, and where parallel
spaces are provided they must be a minimum of eight feet (8’) in width. Any drive or alley
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 64
with parking spaces immediately adjacent must be paved a minimum of twenty feet (20’)
in width, with no obstructions, such as doors, dumpsters, planters, bollards, mechanical
equipment, street light poles, etc., that could restrict the full width use of the pavement for
vehicular maneuvering in and out of the designated parking spaces. Cross access is
required between adjoining rear/side parking lots.
d. Parking structures are encouraged to create shared parking opportunities and to reduce the
footprint of surface lots. Single-use parking structures must be located behind other
buildings. Structured parking is permitted and encouraged on liner buildings and mixed
use buildings. Structured parking may extend below grade and may contain multiple levels
of parking above grade. Parking structures may contain other uses above the parking levels
provided the entire building does not exceed the height allowed in the ENT District.
Partially enclosed parking spaces may be created with habitable space cantilevered over
them at the rear of a building, or along the side of a building when a solid wall blocks view
of parked vehicles from any public street or pedestrian pathway.
5. USES UNABLE TO UTILIZE STOREFRONT FENESTRATION. When certain uses such as a
theater, parking, or planetarium cannot comply with the required door and window standards for
primary facades, then they may be constructed in a manner that they will be separated from adjacent
streets (but not alleys) by liner buildings. Liner buildings:
a. Must be at least two stories in height with not less than twenty feet (20’) in depth.
b. May be detached from or attached to the building(s) they are concealing.
c. May be used for any purpose allowed on the lot on which they are located except for
parking.
d. Must meet the primary façade transparency requirements in § 155.503.8.G. below.
6. WIDE BUILDINGS. When a wide building is placed directly across a street from substantially
narrower lots or buildings, the principal façade of wide buildings must be varied with a change of
architectural expression that reflects the widths of the narrower lots. These changes in expression
may be a vertical element running from the sidewalk to the roof, a change in fenestration or style,
color, or texture, or a break in façade plane or roof line. These changes must be of sufficient visual
impact to soften the perception of a single wide building.
7. BUILDING STORIES AND STORY HEIGHT. All buildings shall be a minimum of two (2) stories
in height within the ENT District, except when a single story structure has a ground floor at least
twenty feet (20’) tall. The ground story of nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall be from
twelve (12’) to eighteen feet (18’) tall. The ground floor of residential buildings shall be a minimum
of ten feet (10’) tall. Each story above the ground floor in residential, nonresidential, and mixed use
buildings shall be at least eight feet (8’) tall. Story heights are measured from the floor to the bottom
of the lowest structural member that supports the story above.
8. FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION ENTRANCES. Nonresidential and mixed use buildings shall have
their primary public walk-in entrances level with, to no greater than six inches (6”) above, the
adjacent public walkway. When a nonresidential or mixed use building has more than one (1)
primary public entrance and has more than a one foot (1’) difference in finished grade at the various
doorways, then the entrance adjacent to a public street shall meet this requirement. Residential
buildings shall have their first habitable story at least eighteen inches (18”) above the adjacent public
walkway. Residential buildings with multiple doors shall meet this height standard for doorways
facing public streets. Exceptions may be allowed through a site plan review, when a written
explanation is provided to indicate the basis for alternate design.
G. BUILDING AND STRUCTURE DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
1. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. These principles favor an aesthetic that allows a
contemporary influence within a more traditional framework. They call for a determination of an
overall visual or architectural theme and selection of exterior materials that are appropriate for the
region. Structures may exhibit unique details and should not utilize a standard or corporate facade
that is repeated, or intended to be repeated, in multiple communities. While structures within the
ENT district may be initially built to house a specific use, the buildings shall be designed to
accommodate future alternative uses. These building design principles concentrate on the views
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 65
from the public realm, including public streets, public sidewalks or walkways, parks, plazas, civic
greens, squares, and unrestricted parking areas (those not reserved solely for residents/employees).
The general building design principles listed at § 155.603 shall be utilized when designing any site
within the ENT district. While only materials, techniques, and product types are prescribed here,
equivalent or better practices and products are encouraged when appropriate. When requested, they
must be submitted to the Town Planning office either for Administrative Amendment as explained
at 155.401.5 or Flexible Design as explained at § 155.401.7., whichever applies.
2. EXTERIOR BUILDING WALLS. Exterior walls of buildings shall generally reflect a unified
design and set of materials (all-sided architecture). They should express the construction techniques
and structural constraints to assure long-lasting buildings. Extensive use of glass or glazing,
particularly at ground floor level and facing any public use areas is strongly encouraged and
expected.
a. Primary materials, which shall cover at least sixty percent (60%) of each façade, excluding
any glazed areas, shall consist of brick, other masonry, native stone or synthetic equivalent,
or cementicious materials with a distinct dimensional surface.
b. Secondary materials, which may cover up to forty percent (40%) of each façade excluding
any glazed areas, may include hardiboard siding, wood siding, stucco, and metal.
c. Accent materials and trim may cover up to ten percent (10%) of each façade excluding any
glazed areas. Such accents and trim materials shall be identified on elevation plans.
d. Colors of all non-glazing exterior materials on any building shall be limited to no more
than three, unless the building is both larger in overall size than sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet and at least three (3) stories in height. Such larger buildings may employ up to
five (5) distinct colors on its exterior facades. For the purpose of this standard, the term
color shall also refer to two (2) clearly different shades of the same color, such as a light
green and a dark green, or a pastel pink and a burgundy red.
e. Alternative percentages of listed materials or types of materials may be requested by the
Flexible Design Provisions at § 155.503.8.H. at the time of initial district designation, or
through the Administrative Amendment process for an individual building after it has
received site plan and elevation plan approval.
3. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR EXTERIOR WALLS. The following are
permitted:
a. DOORWAYS AND WALL OPENINGS.
i. Pedestrian use doors to nonresidential uses from a public street shall not be
recessed more than three feet (3’) behind the building façade and shall have a clear
view and path to a forty five degree (45o) angle past the perpendicular from each
side of the door.
ii. The horizontal dimension of a door or wall opening shall not exceed the vertical
dimension except where required for a specific purpose such as loading, or vehicle
entrance/exit. When a wall opening has its horizontal dimension exceeding its
vertical measurement, it shall not directly face a public pedestrian use area.
Where a garage door or vehicular service opening with an operable covering is
located, the garage door or covering shall be recessed at least two feet (2’) in from
the vertical plane of the surrounding wall.
iii. Doorways and wall openings shall not span vertically more than one (1) story.
iv. Doorways and wall openings shall correspond to interior space.
v. Changes from one material to another shall have a logical placement from a
construction viewpoint, so that the placement of a separate material is visually
and structurally appropriate.
b. WOOD AND WOOD-LOOK.
i. Horizontal lap siding of wood or simulated wood material is allowed.
ii. Wood or wood-look products used as an exterior wall covering and placed in any
other configuration than horizontal lap siding shall be identified on elevation
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 66
plans.
iii. Wood or wood-look products may have a smooth or rough-sawn appearance.
c. Brick, other masonry, and stone must be used in an appropriate load-bearing configuration.
Generally heavier masonry and stone materials shall be utilized at the base of a building
and support lighter-weight materials such as wood. All masonry materials shall have a
distinct dimensional surface.
d. Stucco and other cementicous finish materials may be rough or sand finish, but shall have
a distinct dimensional surface.
e. Metal materials may have a smooth or flat finish, and may be protected to preserve a shine
or satin appearance, or may be intended to weather to a dull finish. Metal materials may
also have a three-dimensional surface with embossing or sculptural elements embedded
within it.
f. Any requested deviations from these standards for exterior walls shall be submitted for
consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation plan has been
approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative Amendment
may be submitted which shall automatically require Town Board final determination.
4. ROOFS AND PARAPETS. Roofs and parapets should demonstrate a commonsense recognition of
the climate by utilizing appropriate pitch, drainage, color, and materials in order to provide visual
coherence to the district’s overall aesthetic theme. Specific design standards for roofs and parapets
are as follows:
a. ROOF MATERIALS. The following roofing materials are permitted:
i. Dimensional asphalt shingles.
ii. Cedar shingles.
iii. Metal – standing seam, equivalent or better.
iv. Slate – natural, synthetic equivalent or better.
v. Tile.
vi. Clay, natural or faux, or concrete.
vii. Cornices and soffits may be a combination of wood vinyl, and/or metal.
viii. Alternative “green roof” materials that provide adequate support for live
plantings and surrounding walking/maintenance space are encouraged.
b. Parapets shall generally not extend above the top of a flat or single pitch (shed) roof more
than six feet (6’)fronting a public street. Parapets may be used to visually screen roof-top
mechanical equipment, and a utilitarian penthouse structure may be attached to the interior
side of a parapet extension in order to screen equipment. Parapets shall appear from the
exterior as part of the exterior wall, and as such shall be composed of the same materials
and limited to the same colors and finishes as the materials of the exterior walls. When a
parapet also serves as a security railing for any activity on a rooftop, a parapet not facing a
public street may incorporate different materials than the exterior wall from which it
extends, such as glass, metal mesh, and poles. When a parapet faces a public street and
also serves as a security railing for a rooftop activity, such as a green roof or open air
dining, then the parapet may be designed such that it has openings in its vertical surface to
allow visibility through it. Such openings shall not be lower than three feet (3’) from the
roof surface nor exceed eighteen inches (18”) in width.
5. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR ROOFS AND PARAPETS. The following are
permitted:
a. PITCHED ROOFS. Pitch is exclusive of roofs concealed behind parapets.
i. Simple hip and gable roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and
10:12.
ii. Single pitch shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between
3:12 and 8:12.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 67
iii. Eaves, when provided, must overhang eighteen (18) to thirty (30) inches on a
principal building for the initial four (4) stories. For each additional story, six
inches (6”) shall be added to the minimum, and twelve inches (12”) shall be added
to the maximum, up to a maximum projection of seven feet (7’).
iv. Eaves on accessory buildings, dormers, and other smaller structures must
overhang at least eight inches (8”).
v. Timber eaves and balcony brackets must be a minimum of four by four inches
(4” x 4”) in dimension.
b. PARAPET, CORNICE AND COPING STANDARDS.
i. Buildings without visible roof surfaces due to parapet wall extensions and without
overhanging eaves may create an overhang with a cornice projecting horizontally
between six (6”) and twelve inches (12”) beyond the plane of the building wall on
a principal building for the initial four (4) stories. For each additional story, six
inches (6”) shall be added to the minimum and twelve inches (12”) shall be added
to the maximum, up to a maximum projection of six feet (6’).
c. Skylights, Roof Vents, Mechanical Equipment, and Similar Utilitarian Items. Skylights,
vents, stacks, mechanical equipment, plumbing apparatus for green roofs, and other
mechanical or utility equipment with permanent placement on the roof of a building shall
be screened from view from any public street or public use area. Screening may be
accomplished by parapet walls, utilitarian penthouse structures attached to the interior of a
parapet extension, equipment covers, or similar. These items may also be set back from the
edge of a building at least ten feet (10’) and camouflaged by color matching the roof when
they do not exceed two feet (2’) in height.
d. Exceptions. Any requested deviations from these roof and parapet standards shall be
submitted for consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation
plan has been approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative
Amendment may be submitted which will automatically require Town Board final
determination.
6. WINDOWS AND DOORS. The placement, type, and size of windows and doors help establish
scale and vitality. For nonresidential and mixed use buildings, they allow interplay between
business interior and the adjacent street or public realm space. For residential buildings, they foster
“eyes on the street” surveillance which provides for security and safety in the vicinity. Windows
should be divided by multiple panes of glass. This helps retain the consistency of the vertical surface
of the building façade, rather than appearing like a “hole” in the wall, an effect which can be
produced by a large single sheet of glass. Standards are as follows:
a. Windows shall be of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel.
b. Window glass shall be clear or lightly-tinted and non-reflective, with light transmission at
least sixty percent (60%), with modification as necessary to meet any applicable building
and energy code requirements.
c. Specialty windows, with a maximum of one per thirty (30) lineal feet along any façade
facing any public street or public use realm, per story, is allowed. A specialty window may
utilize stained, opalescent, or translucent glass, or glass block, and shall not exceed forty
eight (48) square feet in area. Mirrored glass shall not be used on any ground story façade
or on any story when visible from any public street or public use realm.
d. Operable windows and doors onto patios or balconies are allowed for residential units on
any story, and for nonresidential and mixed use buildings above the ground story.
e. Window screens shall be black or gray. Screen frames shall match window frame material
or be dark anodized aluminum.
f. Doors designed primarily for pedestrian use shall be of wood, clad wood, or steel and may
include glass panes. Doors designed for vehicular use may be of any material and style
consistent with the architectural detail of the building.
7. CONFIGURATIONS AND TECHNIQUES FOR DOORS AND WINDOWS. The following are
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 68
permitted:
a. The horizontal dimension of an opening shall not exceed the vertical dimension except
where otherwise prescribed in this section.
b. Windows may be ganged horizontally if each grouping is separated by a mullion, column,
pier, or wall section that is at least seven inches (7”) wide.
c. Exterior shutters, if applied, shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window at
one-half the width, even if inoperable.
d. Windows on any story above the ground story may be double-hung, single-hung, awning,
or casement windows. Fixed windows are permitted only as specialty windows or when a
component of a system including an operable window within a single wall opening.
e. Windows above the ground story level shall not have any individual pane of glass exceed
forty eight inches (48”) vertical by forty inches (40”) horizontal.
f. When necessary to meet building codes for egress purposes, windows may exceed the
dimensions given here.
g. Nonresidential windows and doors at the street level shall not have individual panes of
glass larger than eight feet (8’) in height by four feet (4’) wide.
h. All window pane surface area of ground story nonresidential buildings shall allow views
into the building interior for depth of at least eight feet (8’) where the interior space is retail,
restaurant, office or similar area accessible to the public. This shall not include restrooms,
or restricted employee-only accessed areas, such as a kitchen, inventory storage, or loading
dock. Windows shall not be made opaque by window treatments except for operable
sunscreen devices within the conditioned space.
i. Garage doors or operable coverings for vehicle use (service/loading) wall openings shall
not directly face the primary public street unless they are set back from the building façade
and from the public right-of-way at least twenty feet (20’).
j. EXCEPTIONS. Any requested deviations from these window and door standards shall be
submitted for consideration during the elevation plan approval process. If the elevation
plan has been approved and a building permit has been issued, a request for Administrative
Amendment may be submitted which will automatically require Town Board final
determination.
8. SIGNAGE. Signs within the ENT Entertainment District should be clear and informative to the
public and should weather well. Signage should be scaled to the nature of the district, which is a
mixed use, pedestrian-oriented environment with slower-moving vehicular traffic. Signage that is
glaring or too large creates distraction, intrudes into and lessens the Entertainment District
experience, and creates visual clutter. In addition to the regulations in the Signs subchapter at §
155.608, standards for signs in the ENT District are as follows:
a. Where a building is designed to house multiple businesses or uses, each capable of desiring
identification signage:
i. The building shall provide a master sign plan prior to receiving a Certificate of
Occupancy. The master sign plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Town
Board of Commissioners as provided at § 155.608.9. It shall include a designated
horizontal sign band for all uses on the ground or street level story, and designated
locations for identification of businesses in upper level stories and for identifying
the building name itself. The sign band for the ground story level shall not be
higher than sixteen feet (16’) or lower than nine feet (9’) above the adjacent public
sidewalk, street or public use realm.
ii. Individual letters placed within the designated first floor sign band shall not
exceed twenty four inches (24”) in height or width for any buildings placed at, or
within ten feet (10’) of, the adjacent public street. Company logos and other nonword
elements may be placed within the sign band. All words, logos, and related
elements used within the sign band to identify a business shall be arranged so that
together they fit within a rectangular area up to sixty (60) square feet per business
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 69
enterprise.
iii. Nonresidential uses on stories above the street or ground level may display
identification signs within areas designated by the master sign plan for the
building. These signs shall be on exterior walls of the second story only, and shall
not exceed twenty four feet (24’) in height from the adjacent public sidewalk,
street, or public use realm.
b. Attached signs for buildings designed and used as a single business enterprise or a multifamily
residential building:
i. Any combination of letters, logos, and other elements shall be considered one sign
for any building up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet GFA and/or up to three
stories. This sign shall fit within a rectangular area not to exceed one hundred
(100) square feet, and not to exceed ten feet (10’) in height. This single sign is
allowed per each building façade that is at an eighty (80) or greater degree angle
from an adjacent building façade.
ii. Any combination of letters, logos, and other elements shall be considered one sign
for any building equal to or greater than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet GFA
and more than three (3) stories. This sign shall fit within a rectangular area not to
exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet, and not to exceed sixteen feet (16’) in
height.
c. A masonry or bronze plaque bearing the building name may be placed on the building’s
parapet wall or under the eaves, and above the top story windows. The building name
identification may alternatively be sculpted into the building façade. Any such plaque or
sculpted material shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet and shall be limited to the
façade incorporating the primary pedestrian entrance. The building name may also be
displayed on a separate masonry or bronze plaque or sculpted into the building wall
material at the ground story level and shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
d. Projecting signs placed perpendicular to the building façade and identifying a business
enterprise or residential use within the building may be placed within ten feet (10’) of an
associated street level door in the designated first story sign band or on exterior walls of
the second story, not to exceed twenty four feet (24’) in height. Projecting signs shall not
exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area or extend further than four feet (4’) from the
façade, and shall have a minimum of seven feet six inches (7’6”) clear height above any
sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
e. Because all buildings are expected to be at or close to the public street, sidewalk, or a public
use realm, no freestanding signs are anticipated for individual buildings. Freestanding
signs may be employed as gateway identification markers to various subareas at the
exterior boundaries of and within the ENT District.
9. AWNINGS AND CANOPIES. When an awning or canopy is incorporated into a building, the
following requirements shall apply:
a. A minimum of ten feet (10’) clear height shall be provided for any awning or canopy above
any sidewalk, plaza, or public use realm.
b. Awnings may extend from the front façade of the building up to one-half of the width of
the sidewalk area below, not to exceed nine feet (9’), whichever is less. If this extension
reaches into the public right-of-way, an encroachment agreement with the Town or State
is required. In no case shall an awning interfere with the placement, natural growth, and
maintenance of any street trees, street signs, or lighting.
c. Canopies may extend from the front façade of the building up to the full width of the
sidewalk area below. If this extension reaches into the public right-of-way, an
encroachment agreement from the Town or State is required. In no case shall a canopy
interfere with the placement, natural growth, and maintenance of any street trees, street
signs, or lighting.
d. Awnings may be made of canvas or treated canvas material, may be designed to retract
against the wall of the building, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 70
e. Canopies may be made of wood, metal, or glass, or a combination of these or similar
permanent rigid materials, and shall not include any shiny or reflective materials.
f. No internal illumination shall be projected through an awning or canopy.
10. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE ITEMS. The following shall be placed behind
and away from any front or corner side building line, not be stored or located within any street, and
be screened from view from the public use realm:
a. Air compressors, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and
telephone company transformers, meters or boxes, storage tanks, garbage dumpsters and
compressors, and similar equipment shall not be installed or placed within any area
considered public use realm.
b. Backflow preventers as required by the public utility company shall not be located within
the public use realm, and shall be covered or screened from view.
c. Garbage and recycling containers, and similar items which must be stored and then moved
on an ongoing schedule for servicing shall be stored in a location that is completely
screened from view from the public realm to a minimum height of six feet (6’) through the
use of a fence, wall, or other visual block.
d. Utility meters for individual residential or nonresidential uses that are installed on or near
a building wall and must be regularly accessed for data collection shall be screened from
view from the public realm through the use of a fence, wall, evergreen landscape materials,
or other visual block.
e. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any front or corner side
building line and be screened from view from the public realm as outlined at §
155.503.8.G.5.c.
H. FLEXIBLE DESIGN. The ENT district establishes minimum standards for development and design. Those
standards however may not always be appropriate to a particular segment or building within the development.
Accordingly, new development concepts, innovative design, unique circumstances or public/private ventures
may require the use of alternative development or design standards. In such cases, the development
requirements specified here for the ENT district (as shown in ENT section text above) may be modified
through the Flexible Design provisions of § 155.401.7 of this Title.
155.503.9. Adult Use District (AU)
A. The Adult Use District is established to provide areas in which adult entertainment or sexually oriented
business may be established. Adult establishments, because of their very nature, are recognized as having
serious objectionable operational characteristics upon adjacent neighborhoods and residential or institutional
uses. It has been demonstrated that the establishment of adult businesses often creates problems for law
enforcement agencies, by the very nature of these businesses and the difficulty often experienced in trying to
determine if the operations are of a legal nature. Special regulation of these establishments is necessary to
ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to a de facto downgrading or blighting of surrounding
neighborhoods and uses. It is the intent of this District to restrict the concentration of these uses and to
separate these uses from residential and institutional uses or areas. All development of land within the Adult
Uses district shall comply with a site plan approved at the time of district designation. The map symbol and
short name for the Adult Use District shall be "AU". [formerly part of regulation known as § 153.059]
B. Lot development and design standards, as outlined in § 155.605, and dimensional standards of § 155.604.3,
apply to the AU District. Uses allowed within the AU district are given in the Table of Allowed Uses at §
155.505.3. Supplementary standards which may be applicable to certain uses within the AU district are listed
at § 155.506. Except where the standards given within this subsection § 155.503.9 specifically for the AU
district differ, the parking provisions at § 155.607, the sign provisions at 155.608, and the lighting provisions
at § 155.609 apply to the AU district.
C. OTHER STANDARDS UNIQUE TO THE ADULT USE DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of other sections
of this Title, development and improvements in the Adult Use district shall comply with the following
requirements. Where the provisions in this § 155.503.9 conflict with the provisions of other Sections of this
Title, except for Overlay district requirements, this Section shall prevail.
1. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. An AU district shall not be located:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 71
a. within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500’) of another AU designated property; or
b. within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500’) of any elementary or secondary school, any
church or place of worship, any child day care facility, or any single-family residence
(attached or detached); or
c. within one thousand feet (1,000’) of any establishment with an on-premise ABC license;
all as measured in a straight line from property line to property line.
2. MAXIMUM TOTAL PROJECT AREA: An AU designation shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square
feet in floor area. No more than one (1) adult business establishment shall be allowed on the same
property or in the same building in any AU district designation.
3. EXTERIOR PROJECT EDGE. An AU property shall meet the dimensional standards listed at §
155.604.3. In order to prevent unintended exposure of adult business establishment activities by
individuals off-site, no printed material, photograph, video, live show, or other visual presentation
format shall be visible from outside the walls of the establishment, nor shall any live or recorded
voices, music, or sounds be heard from outside the walls of the establishment.
D. EARLY DESIGNATION. The AU district is not eligible for early designation. Each request for AU
designation shall include a site plan showing, at a minimum, a scale drawing of the property, the location of
required setbacks and yards, the location of existing and proposed buildings, doors, parking, landscaping,
lighting, and signage.
E. REVIEW CRITERIA. In evaluating applications for AU designation, the Board of Commissioners shall
consider the following:
1. Access to public streets.
2. Visibility of doors and parking areas from public streets.
3. Adequacy of existing community facilities such as water, sewer, police, and fire protection.
4. Relationship to and impacts upon adjoining and nearby properties and the adequacy of proposed
measures to minimize any adverse impacts.
5. The appropriateness of the proposal in relationship to the policies and objectives of the Matthews
Land Use Plan and to a more detailed small area plan, if available.
F. SITE PLAN LAYOUT DESIGN.
1. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.602 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the AU district.
2. STREET NETWORK. Due to the small size nature of AU properties, new streets or expansions of
streets are not anticipated to be included with an AU designation.
a. Sidewalk and street trees shall be provided in front of any AU property if not already in
existence.
b. A lighting plan shall be prepared for the AU district as required at § 155.609. Lighting
shall be incorporated to provide night-time illumination under the tree canopy for safety
and ambiance for pedestrians, and adequate illumination for vehicular traffic.
c. Building facades are the public “face” of every building. The primary patron entrance shall
face the public street or be a side entrance adjacent to the parking area.
3. BLOCKS. Due to the small size nature of AU properties, block lengths are not anticipated to be
included with an AU designation.
4. PARKING. No ground level parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted in the required setback.
The space within the required setback shall not be used as maneuvering space for the parking or
unparking of vehicles, except that driveways providing ingress and egress to the parking area may
be installed across the setback area. Parking structures are not allowed.
G. BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES.
1. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN PRINCIPLES. The principles listed at § 155.603 shall be adhered to when
designing any development within the AU district. Because any structure in an AU district shall
provide for a business establishment, the standards given for building walls, roofs, windows and
doors, and mechanical equipment in the B-1SCD district shall be used for the AU district.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 72
2. SIGNAGE. The standards given in § 155.608 shall apply in the AU district.
3. AWNINGS, CANOPIES, AND ARCADES: No canopy or arcade shall be used in an AU district. An
awning may be placed over a doorway entrance.
4. STORAGE. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in an AU district.
155.504 Overlay Districts Created
155.504.1. Downtown Overlay District (DO)
A. GENERAL CONCEPT OF OVERLAY. The Downtown Overlay District is established to implement the policies,
recommendations and standards of the Downtown Master Plan and any related adopted Design Guidelines
and Streetscape which together create a framework for preserving, revitalizing, and expanding on the social,
cultural and architectural heritage of the downtown area of the Town of Matthews. The Downtown Master
Plan was developed after thorough study of the downtown’s characteristics and its history. The Downtown
Overlay District is created to continue to focus on the concentrated central business area of Matthews to
protect its unique position in the community, and to acknowledge the downtown’s role in economic viability
and general welfare of the Town as a whole. The historic downtown and its fringe areas are anticipated to
develop and redevelop in the near future due to increased population and demand for more urban services
nearby. The Downtown Overlay District includes both the existing historic core and proposed extensions of
the commercial hub in order to direct new expansion in a compatible development approach to the existing
urban core. This district stresses sensitivity to the pedestrian environment; urban design; urban open space;
pedestrian scale signs, street furniture and amenities; and, urban landscaping in both the existing historic
business core and in fringe areas anticipated to receive development pressure/opportunities over time. The
Downtown Master Plan is hereby adopted by reference. Development and improvement of property in the
Downtown Overlay District shall comply with the requirements of § 155.504.1. The map symbol and short
name for the Downtown Overlay District shall be "DO District." [formerly known as § 153.064.A]
B. DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s),
development and improvements in the DO District shall comply with the following requirements, and where
the regulations in this Section are in conflict with the regulations of the underlying zoning district, the
regulations in this Section shall prevail:
1. PERMITTED USES. Permitted uses, uses permitted subject to specific conditions, and accessory uses
within the DO District shall be determined by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
2. Live/work units are permitted in the DO District provided they comply with the requirements of §
155.503.2.W.
3. AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS. Area, yard, and height regulations shall be determined by
the requirements of the underlying zoning district, except that:
a. Communications antenna, wireless facility, or tower height within the DO District shall
not exceed thirty-five feet (35’);
b. Only wireless stealth applications are allowed in the 100 block of N Trade Street because
it is a designated National Historic Commercial District. These wireless facilities shall
comply with the requirements in § 155.506.41. (Am. Ord. 2280A, passed 2-12-18)
C. Forming the Unique Character of the Overlay District. The Downtown Master Plan provides general concepts
and policies for future development in the downtown area. Design Guidelines and Streetscape Improvements,
as may be amended from time to time, and adopted by the Board of Commissioners, are incorporated here
by reference.
1. CREATION OF STREETSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS. The relationship between a building and areas for
pedestrian or vehicular circulation must be carefully planned in order to avoid negative impacts of
one upon the other. The Downtown Master Plan illustrates design standards for the public rightsof-
way for the majority of existing streets within the DO District. New streets shall be assigned a
street type category as they are proposed, in order to assure consistency in development of the public
rights-of-way. All buildings and uses developed in the DO District must meet the following
minimum standards.
a. PAVING. Paving systems in the public rights of- way must conform to the standards of the
Downtown Master Plan and/or adopted standards in Chapter 7 of this Title. The paving
systems used on private plazas, walkways, drives, and parking areas not in the public rightTOWN
OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 73
of-way may be different in color, material, and texture from those specified for public
properties. The paving systems must be of a compatible pattern and scale to provide a
transition into the paving system on public property.
b. STREET FURNITURE AND AMENITIES. Walking surfaces, street furniture, light fixtures,
information signs, and kiosks constructed in the public right-of-way or required
setback/minimum build-to line must be consistent with the Downtown Master Plan.
Exterior lighting used on private plazas and walkways must be complementary in design
motif to that specified in the Streetscape Improvements.
c. STREET TREES. Street trees in public right-of-way shall be installed as properties are
developed or separate from adjacent private property activity in accordance with the
Downtown Master Plan. Above ground planters shall not be used to fulfill the street tree
requirement. As new streets are proposed, the streetscape design shall be developed
consistent with the class of street type assigned to it.
2. GENERAL URBAN DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES. The harmonious relationship between
land uses and their environment requires that certain areas be addressed during project planning.
These relationships deal with the streetscape, historic buildings and places, and open spaces.
Development or redevelopment subject to these provisions shall be built in accordance with the
minimum urban design standards set forth in this Section. The purpose of this Section is to define
the minimum urban design standards for development in the DO District in order to preserve the
small-town character while encouraging revitalization and expansion. It is not the intent or
expectation that new development should replicate a previous time period, but the general design
principles in place when the majority of the current historic core was developed are being recreated
here for consistency in context for those buildings constructed between 1900 and 1940. The guiding
general principles are as follows:
a. Buildings should address the street.
i. Entrances should face the street and be accessible from the sidewalk.
ii. Site layout should place the building generally at or near the front of the lot as
indicated in the Streetscape Improvements, with parking to the side and/or rear of
the building.
b. Buildings should be designed to be compatible with the context of the neighborhood.
i. Scale of new buildings should be in harmony with existing structures.
ii. Materials, colors, and styles should be compatible with existing structures.
c. Building styles should be traditional, or styles adapted from local and regional
interpretations of traditional architecture
i. Building style should be appropriate to the intended use.
ii. Choice of building materials, elements, and details should be consistent with
chosen architectural style. Elements that are obviously of another style should be
avoided.
d. Overall design, use of materials, and ornamentation should be kept simple and in harmony
with the scale of the building. Additional illustrative detail on how urban design standards
may be satisfied is provided in the Downtown Master Plan.
3. STRUCTURE DESIGN GUIDELINES
a. BUILD-TO LINES REQUIRED. Build-to lines are established for most existing streets in the
DO District. As new streets are proposed, they will be assigned a street type category and
build-to lines shall be assigned. Any new construction in the 100 block of North Trade
Street, because it contains the majority of historic commercial structures set at or near the
sidewalk, shall not exceed ten feet (10’) setback from the right-of-way, except for outdoor
café-type or other outdoor uses when a fence or wall is carried across the right-of-way to
continue the visual continuity of building faces.
b. BUILDING BULK AND MASSING. Building bulk is categorized in width-to-height or heightto-
width ratio and by a percentage of lot width coverage. All new buildings or additions
to existing structures shall fall within a width-to-height or height-to width ratio between
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 74
1:1.5 to 1:1. New nonresidential or mixed use construction located within the DO District
shall utilize a design in which the building coverage of the lot facing the street at the street
entrance level shall be at least seventy five percent (75%) of the total frontage of the lot.
Required landscape areas, and up to twenty-five feet (25’) of driveway width, may be
excluded from the lot frontage calculation. Where several new buildings are proposed to
be developed adjacent to each other along the same side of a street front, the percentage
for drive openings may be combined and averaged within that block face, in order to allow
one (1) or two (2) driveways or loading areas for all the adjacent buildings.
c. BUILDING DESIGN. Street walls and entrances must be designed to encourage and
complement pedestrian-scale activity. Building design should not be conceived in
isolation, as a singular entity, but should consider the structures at either side and in the
neighborhood in general. It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of
architectural criteria such as building materials, roof styles, attachments to buildings, and
windows and doors arranged so that the uses are visible from and/or accessible to the street
on at least fifty percent (50%) of the length of the ground level street frontage.
i. WINDOWS. Where windows are used, they must be clear, transparent glass. Multipaned
shop front windows are preferred and no single glass pane shall be greater
than twelve (12) square feet. Double hung windows with a height-to-width
proportion of 2:1 are preferred for upper stories. Casements for windows shall be
of wood, vinyl, or painted metal and may have stone, brick, or cast concrete lintels
and sills. Window glass shall always be set back from the building face rather than
flush. Shop front windows shall not be lower than two feet (2’) from the ground
plane at front wall. Windows on the front of a building facing a street shall be at
least fifteen (15) square feet and up to forty percent (40%) of the total street front
first floor facade in Precinct 1 (described in the Downtown Master Plan) and up
to sixty percent (60%) of the total street front first floor facade in Precinct 2
(described in the Downtown Master Plan).
ii. BLANK WALLS. Expanses of solid wall facing a pedestrian use area, which may
include a street, plaza, park, or parking lot, are not permitted to exceed ten (10)
linear feet. A blank exterior wall, when necessary, shall be broken or interrupted
by one or more of the following:
• A public doorway made of transparent materials;
• A doorway made of opaque materials and recessed at least three feet (3’) and
not more than five feet (5’);
• A public stairway directly available at street/plaza/park/parking lot level, but
not fire escapes or false stairways;
• A window of at least fifteen (15) square feet in area and no more than four
feet (4’) above the ground surface.
iii. BUILDING MATERIALS. Building materials should repeat and/or complement the
types found in existing downtown buildings. Brick or wood shall be the
predominant building materials of any wall facing a public street or pedestrian use
area. Predominant shall mean no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the nonglassed
wall surface facing the street or pedestrian use area. Materials used for
awnings and canopies are exempt from this provision and shall not be included in
the calculation. Other acceptable materials include stone, concrete-based stucco,
concrete, horizontal wood siding or wood shingle. Brick may be painted or
unpainted. Trim shall be stone, cast stone, cast concrete, or painted wood.
iv. ROOF STYLES. Roof styles shall reflect those generally found in the downtown
and fringe areas. Due to the concentration of flat-roofed commercial buildings on
the 100 block of North Trade Street, any new development there shall use a flat
roof. Elsewhere in the DO District flat roofs may be used if appropriate to the
overall building style and to neighboring structures. Other acceptable roof styles
include hipped, gables, or cross gabled. Roof pitch shall be between 5:12 and
10:12. Single pitch shed roofs are not allowed except as a minor attachment to
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 75
the rear of a structure, with minor defined as less than ten percent (10%) of the
building footprint. Mansard-style roofs or mansard attachments to a building wall
are not permitted.
v. DOORWAYS. Recessed doorways at street fronts are required and at non-street
pedestrian use areas are encouraged. This provides a sense of entry and adds
subtle variety to the streetscape. All structures shall have a street front entryway
of at least one (1) square foot for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area
with a ten (10) square foot minimum. When a structure will provide off-street
parking to the side or rear in a separate or combined lot, then the same doorway
size requirements apply to the side or rear of the building. The maximum distance
of recess from the exterior wall plan is five feet (5’). Doors shall be of wood,
painted metal, or simulated wood material, or a combination of one of the above
materials and glass. No glass shall be positioned lower than two feet (2’) above
ground level at door entrance.
vi. COLORS. Colors of buildings shall follow the Design Guidelines, including the
number of main and trim colors and the combinations of light and dark shades.
Colors of adjacent structures shall be considered in choosing color schemes for
compatibility.
vii. EXTERIOR SURFACES. Reflectivity of exterior surfaces, except for painted wood
siding, shall not exceed a reflectivity value of thirty six percent (36%), as
measured under the applicable provisions of Federal Specifications DD-G-451d
1977.
viii. PROTECTED BUILDING ENTRANCES. The entrances to buildings and shop front
windows are permitted to have canopies and awnings made of canvas or treated
canvas material. Vinyl or metal awnings are not permitted. Awnings or canopies
may extend from the building up to one-half (1/2) of the width of the sidewalk
area in front of the building or nine (9), whichever is less. If this extension would
reach into the public right-of-way, an encroachment agreement from the town or
state is required. In no case shall an awning or canopy extend beyond the curb line
of any public street, nor shall it interfere with the growth or maintenance of street
trees. A minimum overhead clearance of eight feet (8’) from the adjacent
pedestrian area or sidewalk must be maintained. Curved awnings shall not be
used, except over a single door at the rear entrance of a building.
4. SIGNS. Signs shall comply with the requirements of § 155.608, generally, and § 155.608.14,
specifically.
5. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION DESIGN STANDARDS. The Downtown Master Plan provides details on
building design and setting for single-family and multi-family residential structures and shall be
applied to any new residential development within the DO District.
D. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW. Applicants planning any demolition, development, or redevelopment on property
located in the DO District are required to meet with the Town Planning Department and Development
Technical Review Committee during the conceptual design process in order that the applicant and staff may
review the building and streetscape of the Downtown Master Plan as they relate to that location. The
applicant shall submit plans to the Town Planning Department during the formal design review stage prior
to receiving any building permit to ensure that the plans meet the minimum standards for the DO District.
Building, demolition and/or zoning permits shall not be issued until the Town Planning Department approves
the proposal as in conformance with this Title.
1. SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. Site plan submittal for any development activity in the DO
District shall include but not be limited to:
a. A vicinity map clearly establishing the location of the project with readily recognizable
landmarks.
b. A development summary including land area in development, proposed use(s), total
building square footage, required parking, provided parking spaces, indicating where offlot
parking is being included.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 76
c. An accurate drawing of property boundaries.
d. Existing topography of existing vacant land to be disturbed by the development activity,
and where appropriate, water courses and water bodies, floodplains and floodways, or other
areas that would require extensive clearing and grading or alteration for development.
e. Identification and location of all existing site improvements, including streets, water,
sewer, storm drainage, buildings, overhead power or telephone/cable lines, cross access
easements, and utility easements.
f. Proposed location, type, and size of each sign (attached, freestanding, portable) to be
employed on the site.
g. Location of proposed buildings, driveways, and parking areas.
h. Location of trash dumpsters or bins and required screening.
i. Grading, drainage, erosion and sedimentation control, and utility plans.
j. Landscaping, including street trees, parking lot islands, and perimeter planting where
required. The canopy drip line of any existing trees meeting the sizes listed in § 155.606.6
shall be indicated and noted whether or not they will remain. Details of required
landscaping, showing species, dimensions, and spacing of planted materials shall be
provided, with a proposed timeline for installation.
k. Name of the project, owner, and name and address of engineer, architect, planner or
landscape architect, scale, date, and north arrow.
2. In the event a parcel of land is also located within the Highway NC51 Overlay which creates
conflicting regulations, such as building or pavement location, then any parcel fronting on Highway
NC51 shall follow only the provisions in the HO district, and not the Downtown Overlay, for any
regulated criteria where conflicts exist. [formerly known as § 153.064]
E. Parking and Loading Standards. Permitted uses within the Downtown Overlay are required to provide offstreet
motor vehicle and bicycle parking and loading according to the minimum standards in § 155.607,
except where the Historic Urban Core District (HUC) specifically authorizes different parking allotments for
specific uses. If off-site, non-street parking to meet these requirements are not met, the office or agent
authorized by the Board of Commissioners to issue Certificates of Occupancy shall revoke the occupancy
permit for the applicable use and shall not issue a building or occupancy permit, as explained at § 155.213,
until those requirements are met. One of the following parking reduction options may be used to reduce onsite
motor vehicle parking requirements.
1. PUBLIC PARKING SPACES. Where on-street or public parking lot spaces are located within four
hundred feet (400’) of a building entrance, up to a twenty five percent (25%) reduction to required
on-site parking may be allowed for new construction or where a change of use requires more
intensive parking.
2. SHARED PARKING. Joint use of up to twenty five percent (25%) of required parking spaces may be
permitted with approval from the Zoning Administrator for different uses on newly-developed
mixed use parcels provided that the property owner can demonstrate that uses will not overlap in
hours of operation or in demand for shared spaces. If a newly developed site is to be subdivided, a
shared parking agreement shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator for any lots that would
otherwise show a parking deficiency. This agreement must include written permission from the
private parking lot owner(s) and must identify the location and number of parking spaces to be made
available, and at what days and times of the day these spaces may be credited to the use which
otherwise is deficient in parking.
3. ON-STREET SPACES. New marked on-street parking spaces developed adjacent to and in conjunction
with a new building or group of buildings, or a change of use within an existing building, may be
counted toward the minimum on-site parking requirements for that/those buildings. New marked
spaces must be located on public streets and within four hundred feet (400’) of the new building(s)
or change of use with which they are associated. Any such on-street spaces may only be attributed
to meeting minimum parking requirements for one new building.
155.504.2. Highway NC51 Overlay District (HO)
A. GENERAL CONCEPT OF OVERLAY. The Highway NC51 Overlay District is established to protect and preserve
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 77
the natural scenic beauty along designated lengths of this major thoroughfare, while allowing the orderly
development of land located along the highway. In order to protect and enhance both the public and private
interests in and along the highway system, this district is established for the additional purpose of:
1. Protecting the public investment and lengthening the time during which the highway can
continue to serve its functions without expansion or relocation by expediting the free flow
of traffic and reducing the hazards arising from unnecessary points of ingress, egress and
cluttered roadside development.
2. Reducing the costs of future highway expansions by requiring that buildings and structures
be sufficiently set back from the right-of-way to provide adequate storage for vehicles until
they can safely enter the highway; and
3. Reserving adequate roadside space through which neighborhood traffic may be admitted
to and from the highway system in a manner that avoids undue traffic concentrations,
sudden turnings and stops and other hazards.
Development and improvement of property in the Highway 51 Overlay District shall comply with the
requirements of § 155.504.2. The map symbol and short name for the Highway 51 Overlay District shall be
"HO District." [formerly known as § 153.066.A]
B. HIGHWAY NC51 OVERLAY DISTRICT. In addition to the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s),
development and improvements in the Highway NC51 Overlay District (“HO District”) shall comply with
the following requirements, and where the regulations in this Section are in conflict with the regulations of
the underlying zoning district, the regulations in this Section shall prevail:
1. PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the intent of these regulations that development in the HO District shall
be in harmony with and shall preserve the natural beauty and character of the existing landscape.
Ensuring the attractiveness of uses will in turn contribute to and enhance capital investment, trade,
tourism, and the general welfare. Therefore, this district is adopted for the additional purposes of:
a. Improving the appearance and livability of the community while enhancing its economic
vitality.
b. Preserving and improving property values by creating and maintaining an ecosystem of
sustainable development. This assures a management system of renewable natural
resources for both the present and future generations.
c. Protecting and enhancing the environment by preserving trees and natural ground cover,
which reduces soil erosion and localized flooding, recharges ground water and regenerates
oxygen, reduces the impacts of heat and cold to the man-made urban fabric of pavement
and buildings, and conserves energy.
2. LOCATION AND DIMENSIONS.
a. The HO District should be generally located along limited access interstate or divided
highway approaches to, through or, around the Town.
b. The HO District shall be located on both sides of an existing or proposed major
thoroughfare within the Town's zoning jurisdiction and shall be not less than five hundred
feet (500’) and not more than one thousand feet (1,000’) deep measured from the edge of
the existing or proposed right-of-way. The HO District shall follow identifiable boundaries
whenever possible and shall be delineated as an overlay on the official zoning map of the
Town. When a new right-of-way has been established by an approved Comprehensive
Transportation Plan, the district boundaries shall be calculated from the newly established
right-of-way. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
c. In the event a parcel of land is also located within the Downtown Overlay which creates
conflicting regulations, such as building or pavement location, then any parcel fronting on
Highway NC51 shall follow only the provisions in the HO district, and not the Downtown
Overlay, for any regulated criteria where conflicts exist.
3. PERMITTED USES. Permitted uses, uses permitted subject to specific conditions, and accessory uses
located within the HO District shall be determined by the requirements of the underlying zoning
district(s). Any development or land disturbing activity on previously approved plans are still
subject to the requirements of the HO District.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 78
4. PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
a. INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT. No conditional districts,
development, rezoning, land disturbing activity, or site improvement activity, other than
single-family residential development may occur within the HO District without first
obtaining approval of a detailed or abbreviated site plan from the Town Planning
Department as allowed in § 155.504.2.B.5. Any change to zoning conditions or zoning
districts shall be subject to all provisions of the HO District, and building or grading
permits shall not be issued until a HO District site plan submittal has been approved. All
development shall conform to an approved site plan. Any substantial deviation from the
approved site plan must be resubmitted for review and approval by the Town Planning
Department in accordance with these requirements. Appeals of Planning Department
decisions on site plans shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment.
b. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. All new or re-platted single-family
residential developments and subdivisions must comply with the minimum thoroughfare
buffering, signage, underground utility, and access standards of the HO District. Plan
review shall be administered through the normal zoning and subdivision review process,
supplemented by applicable additional requirements of the HO District.
5. SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. Site plan submittal for any development activity, except
those listed in § 155.504.2.B.5.l, shall include but not be limited to:
a. A vicinity map clearly establishing the location of the project with readily recognizable
landmarks.
b. A development summary including total acres in development, proposed uses, total
building square footage, required parking, and provided parking spaces, total impervious
surface area, and the percentage of lot covered by impervious surface. This information
shall be supplied in table form on the site plan.
c. An accurate drawing of property boundaries.
d. Existing topography, water courses and water bodies, floodplains and floodways, or other
areas that would require extensive clearing and grading or alteration for development.
e. Identification and location of all existing site improvements, including streets, water,
sewer, storm drainage, buildings, and other significant site features and any existing or
former easements (driveway, street, utility, construction, etc.) which may have cleared
vegetative matter, and/or could allow clearing or grading.
f. Proposed location, type, and size of each sign to be employed on the site.
g. Location of proposed buildings, driveways, and parking areas.
h. Location of trash dumpsters and required screening.
i. Grading, drainage, erosion and sedimentation control, layout, and utility plans.
j. Landscaping Plan to include:
i. Prior to any site disturbance, approximate locations and species of all deciduous
and coniferous trees at least three inches (3”) DHB, and all dogwoods, redbuds
and American hollies at least four feet high, which are located in any required
buffer or screen area, and in any area not being disturbed by the planned
development. The canopy drip line of those trees shall be delineated. A brief
assessment of the above inventoried trees, indicating major deformity, disease,
and or damage may be included. Where groves of the protected trees exist that
will not be removed or disturbed, it is permitted to label the grove as such on the
plan drawing, stating the approximate number of protected trees and species mix,
without specifying data of each individual tree.
ii. Locations, species, and size of all protected trees proposed for removal shall be
shown in outline form using a dashed line for the canopy drip line. Reasons for
removing protected trees shall be explicitly stated on the Landscaping Plan.
iii. Locations, dimensions, and square footage of required buffer strips and parking
lot landscaping.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 79
iv. Details of required landscaping, showing species, dimensions, and spacing of
planted materials and the use and protection of existing vegetation. Each plant
unit in front tree buffer areas shall be marked as meeting one (1) of the options
given in § 155.504.2.B.7.h.
v. Proposed timeline for landscaping.
k. Name of the project, owner, name and address of engineer, architect, planner or landscape
architect, scale, date, and north arrow.
l. Minor changes or additions to existing development or approved plans may submit an
abbreviated site plan. An abbreviated site plan shall be allowed when the proposed change
is physically limited to only a contained portion of the site. An abbreviated site plan shall
include, but shall not be limited to, items a, b, e, g, j, and k in this Section. The Planning
Director shall determine when an abbreviated site plan may be submitted for a detailed site
plan and what items must be included.
6. GENERAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. The lot development standards of both the HO District
and the underlying zoning district shall apply. Where the standards of the HO District and the
underlying district(s) differ, the more restrictive standard shall apply:
a. REQUIRED MINIMUM LOT AREA.
i. For lots for single-family detached or attached dwellings, multi-family dwellings,
and all other lots not bordering directly on Highway NC51, the required minimum
lot area of the underlying district shall apply.
ii. All nonresidential lots bordering on Highway NC51 shall be at least two (2) acres
in size, except that lots may be smaller: i) when those lots are contained within a
unified multi-lot development plan which is part of a conditional district zoning
process; and ii) where shared driveway access is used; and iii) where no more than
one (1) driveway for a minimum five hundred feet (500’) of frontage along
Highway NC51 will exist. All lots shall be developed with a unified approach to
landscaping and buffering, access points, parking and loading, lighting, and noise.
iii. Lots bordering on Highway NC51 which were created prior to January 7, 1991,
and which are less than two (2) acres shall be handled in accordance with the
nonconforming regulations in Chapter 3 of this Title. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-
8-14)
b. LOT COVERAGE. Stormwater retention shall be required on all lots, and in no case shall
impervious surface, such as rooftops, walkways, paving, and the like exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the site.
c. YARDS. The required front, side, and rear yard requirements of the underlying zoning
district shall apply, except that the required protective buffer areas shall in all instances
take precedence. No building shall in any instance be closer than fifteen feet (15’) from
any required buffer or screen area.
d. BUILDING HEIGHT. The maximum building height limit of the underlying zoning district
shall apply, except that where allowed, communications antennas, wireless facilities, or
communications towers shall comply with the height limits given in § 155.506.4.
Communication towers shall be located a minimum straight line distance of one hundred
fifty feet (150’) from the nearest edge of right-of way to Highway NC51. Where guy wires
are used, their point of connection to the ground shall be used to determine the minimum
one hundred fifty foot (150’) distance. (Ord. 912, passed 1-27-97; Am. Ord. 2280A, passed
2-12-18)
e. PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. Parking and loading requirements shall be
provided in accordance with the underlying zoning district, except as provided otherwise
as follows:
i. LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING, AND STORAGE AREAS.Any paved
or impervious surface designed or intended to be used by vehicles, including offstreet
parking, loading and storage areas shall be located to the side and rear of all
principal nonresidential structures of sites fronting Highway NC51. Off-street
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 80
parking to the side of a structure shall be no closer to Highway NC51 right-ofway
than the structure or sixty feet (60’), whichever is less. For corner lots, the
side of the lot facing the more major thoroughfare shall be considered the front
yard for the purpose of this requirement. Exemptions to this provision may only
be granted under certain circumstances:
• When the applicant can demonstrate that placement of those facilities in
the side or rear yards would require greater clearing and grading than if
those facilities were to be located in the front yard. An alternative design
layout showing what vegetation would be lost that can be retained by
front yard paving must be provided.
• When the applicant can demonstrate that the necessary vehicular and
pedestrian circulation of the proposed use cannot function without front
yard parking, loading, or storage. A written description of the use, and
why the front yard vehicular use area cannot be eliminated or relocated
elsewhere on the site must be provided.
ii. ENHANCED LANDSCAPING PLAN REQUIRED. An enhanced landscaping plan shall
be part of any request for an exemption as described in § 155.504.2.B.6.e.i, above.
Enhanced landscaping located between the vehicular use area and Highway NC51
shall include evergreen shrub screening, berms, low fencing with evergreen
shrubs on the street side, or a combination of methods to significantly reduce the
amount of pavement and vehicles viewed from Highway NC51. In addition, any
paved area used for parking subject to a request for an exemption shall be required
to provide at least one existing or planted tree of a minimum three inch (3”) caliper
and minimum eight foot (8’) height for every five (5) parking spaces. These trees
must be located in tree islands with minimum dimensions as given in §
155.504.2.B.11.b. Property at a higher grade than Highway NC51 shall not be
reason to exempt the requirement for enhanced landscaping.
iii. EXEMPTIONS. An exemption may be granted under § 155.504.2.B.6.e.i, above by
the Planning Director when no other variances to the HO District requirements
are requested. If any other variances are necessary, an exception to front yard
paved areas may only be determined by the Board of Adjustment.
f. LOCATION OF UTILITY CONNECTIONS. For properties fronting Highway NC51, utilities
such as water, sewer, natural gas, telephone, cable, etc., shall only be located in the portion
of the required front protective buffer that is disturbed for driveway access when trees of
protected size exist. If a variance to this provision is requested, the applicant must
demonstrate how trees and tree roots will be protected from damage during construction or
future maintenance/repair, and that new easements will not include any existing or new
trees required by § 155.504.2.B.7.
7. PROTECTED BUFFER YARD REQUIRED ALONG HIGHWAY NC51.
a. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. A protected buffer yard shall be created on all sites fronting
Highway NC51. Within this yard, all deciduous and coniferous trees three inches caliper
or larger, and all dogwoods, redbuds, and American hollies four feet (4’) high or larger
shall be considered of protected size. The front of the protected buffer yard shall be left in
a natural state to the greatest extent possible. Clearing of small brush, vines, dead wood,
trash, etc., is permitted when done in a method so as not to damage roots, limbs, trunks,
bark, etc., of protected vegetation. Mulch of natural material only may be placed around
existing or added trees and shrubs in the protected buffer yard.
b. MINIMUM PROTECTED BUFFER YARD REQUIRED. A protected buffer yard shall be
established from the edge of the existing or proposed right-of-way as follows:
i. HIGHWAY NC51: Thirty feet (30’), minimum.
ii. SERVICE ROAD ALONG HIGHWAYNC51: Where a service road right-of-way abuts
and parallels Highway NC51 right-of-way, twenty five feet (25’), minimum.
c. When road construction, utility locations, or similar action has cleared some or all of this
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 81
buffer yard of tree cover, then the buffer yard shall be measured from the undisturbed tree
line, when one exists within fifty feet (50’) of the edge of the right-of-way. Utility
easements, sidewalk easements, current or former temporary construction easements, and
similar restrictions shall be shown on the site plan submittal as described in §
155.504.2.B.5.e.
d. Where no natural vegetation including trees of protected size exists within a fifty foot (50’)
depth from the right-of-way of Highway NC51, or parallel service road, then the minimum
buffer yard shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way.
e. INTERSECTING STREETS. A minimum protected yard of twenty five feet (25’) shall be
established adjacent to any street right-of-way which intersects and shares common access
with Highway NC51 for a distance of two hundred feet (200’) from the intersection of the
rights-of-way of the street and Highway NC51.
f. APPEAL. In a case where an individual parcel has been rendered virtually unusable due to
establishment of the buffer yard, there may be grounds for a variance or appeal, provided
that all other conditions set forth in this section are met. In granting any such variance or
appeal, the Town Board of Adjustment may require the applicant to compensate in
equivalent landscaping improvements any vegetative matter that is lost through an
encroachment into the buffer yard
g. EMERGENCY ACCESS DRIVEWAYS. Emergency access driveways may cross through the
special highway buffer yard when included as a zoning condition in a conditional district
zoning. Emergency access driveways may be paved or may use a porous surface, but
existing or new landscape plant material will not be required. An emergency access
driveway may not exceed twenty four feet (24’) in width through the front protected buffer
yard (Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-03)
h. SPECIFIC LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. A distinctive streetscape will be created along
Highway NC51 buffer, including two hundred feet (200’) on intersecting streets and on
parallel service roads, composed of one (1) plant unit for every forty feet (40’) or fraction
thereof, not including necessary drive access points and required sight triangle locations.
A plant unit shall be composed, at a minimum, of one (1) of the following combinations of
plants as listed in § 155.606.14 of this Title:
i. A combination of existing trees of required protected size which will be retained,
and which total more than twenty four inches (24”) caliper.
ii. A combination of both existing trees of required protected size and newly planted
trees which would total more than twenty four inches (24”) caliper.
iii. Two (2) large-maturing deciduous trees, and three (3) small-maturing trees; or
iv. Three (3) large-maturing evergreen trees, and three (3) small maturing trees; or
v. Two (2) large-maturing deciduous trees, and two (2) large-maturing evergreen
trees; or
vi. One (1) large-maturing deciduous tree, two (2) large-maturing evergreen trees,
and two (2) small-maturing trees; or
vii. Two (2) large-maturing deciduous trees, one (1) large-maturing evergreen tree,
and one (1) small-maturing tree; or
viii. Seven (7) small-maturing trees.
The arrangement and location of landscaping in Highway NC51 buffer yard shall be
designed in a random spacing, not in a straight line, to give the appearance of a naturalized
setting, and shall be part of the landscape plan submitted for site plan approval. Existing
plant material of minimum protected size shall be retained, except where an approved
driveway access or existing utility easements are located.
8. SITE PERIMETER BUFFER YARD REQUIRED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY USES IN
THE HO DISTRICT. In addition to Highway NC51 protected buffer yard, an undisturbed buffer yard
shall be retained along all side and rear yard property boundaries abutting an existing residential use
or residentially zoned area. Single-family residential uses shall provide Highway NC51 protected
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 82
buffer yard but are not be required to provide side and rear yard buffers.
a. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
i. MINIMUM BUFFER YARD REQUIRED. A minimum twenty foot (20’) undisturbed
buffer strip shall be retained along all side and rear yard property boundaries
abutting an existing residential use or residentially zoned area.
ii. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The required side or rear yard buffers shall be
seventy five percent (75%) opaque year round. The more intense land use shall
be required to provide the buffer as part of its yard requirement. Natural vegetation
must be retained whenever possible. Buffer strips may be occupied only by natural
and/or planted vegetation, berms, and fencing.
b. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS. One or more of the following means shall be used to
supplement the natural vegetation as necessary or to provide an adequate buffer where no
natural vegetation exists:
i. PLANTED BUFFER STRIPS. The planted buffer strips shall be at least six foot (6’)
tall and provide approximately seventy five percent (75%) visual opacity within
two (2) years of planting. Three (3) rows of planting material shall be provided.
ii. COMBINATION BUFFER STRIP WITH FENCING:
• Fencing shall be five (5) to seven (7) feet in height. The use of natural
fence materials such as wood, brick, and stone is encouraged.
• If a solid fence is used, two (2) rows of planted materials shall be
provided at a minimum height of three feet (3’) at initial planting and
give at least fifty percent (50%) visual opacity of the fence at planting.
• If a permeable fence is used, two (2) rows of planted materials shall be
provided and give approximately seventy five percent (75%) visual
opacity of the fence within two (2) years of planting.
• The buffer vegetation shall be located between the fence and the
common property line.
iii. COMBINATION BERM WITH VEGETATION.
• An earthen berm may be used in conjunction with planted vegetation,
provided that the combined height of berm and planted vegetation shall
be at least six feet (6’) and provide approximately seventy five percent
(75%) opacity within two (2) years of planting.
• The slope of the berm shall be stabilized with vegetation and be no
steeper than 3:1. The height of the berm shall be six feet (6’) or less, with
a level or rounded area on top of the berm. The berm shall be constructed
of compacted earth.
9. PRESERVATION OF EXISTING SITE VEGETATION. In addition to the required minimum protected
buffer yard along the right-of-way of Highway NC51 and site perimeter buffers on non single-family
developments, it is the intent of the HO District regulations to retain existing vegetation on the site
at the time of development or any other land disturbing activity. In any required landscape buffer,
and in any location within the site that will not be disturbed, all deciduous and coniferous trees at
least three inches (3”) caliper and all dogwoods, redbuds, and American hollies at least four feet (4’)
high shall be considered protected. Elsewhere on the site, trees of these sizes and larger are
encouraged to be preserved and incorporated into required landscaping, but will not be considered
protected as described below. The following steps shall be accomplished in chronological order:
a. Trees shall be initially inventoried as part of the Landscape Plan, in accordance with §
155.504.2.B.5.j.
b If any of these trees are to be cleared from the site, reasons for doing so shall be clearly
stated on the Landscape Plan. Those trees marked as being required to be removed are not
considered protected trees for the remainder of this Section.
c. Existing trees specified on the required Landscape Plan to remain on the site under these
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 83
requirements shall be considered protected trees. Individual protected trees or groves of
protected trees shall be staked, fenced, or otherwise clearly marked and protected from
material storage and vehicular movement during construction and in the final landscape
design.
d. If a protected tree is destroyed or dies within three years after completion of construction,
then replacement trees of total equal diameter shall be planted on the site. Tree destruction
or death during this three (3) year period shall be assumed to be the result of
construction/development work unless: i) the tree destruction is easily verified as due to an
act of God (storm, lightning strike, and the like); or, ii) the property owner provides
documentation from an arborist of an alternate explanation for the tree's death.
e. A minimum of fifteen (15) large maturing deciduous or evergreen trees at least three inch
(3”) caliper and a minimum of eight feet (8’) in height shall be retained or planted on the
parcel for each acre of proportionate area disturbed by development. Required front, side
or, rear landscaped buffers should be included in calculating this overall requirement. For
every twenty four inches (24”) caliper total retained within the disturbed area of the site,
the project shall be credited with one tree which may be counted toward this fifteen (15)
tree per acre minimum performance standard. Credits shall not apply to the removal of
existing trees at or over the size limits for “protected” status listed elsewhere in this §
155.504.2.B.9.
10. ADEQUATE SIGHT TRIANGLES REQUIRED. At all points of egress from off-street parking areas to a
road and at corners of road intersections, unobstructed visibility shall be maintained in accordance
with the requirements of the Mecklenburg County Engineering Department and the regulations
adopted by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, in “Subdivision Roads: Minimum
Construction Standards” (May 1, 1983) and any subsequent amendments, or the regulations adopted
by the governing body, whichever are the greater.
11. PARKING LOT AND PAVEMENT LANDSCAPING. Landscaping is required for parking lots and other
areas of paved surface to reduce the aesthetic impacts of paving or removal of natural vegetation
from large areas; to reduce the noise, heat, glare, and dust associated with parking lots; and to control
the direction and velocity of surface water runoff.
a. APPLICABILITY. Landscaping shall be required for all off-street parking facilities with five
(5) or more spaces or any areas of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more
devoted for vehicular use. A landscaping plan shall be submitted in accordance with §
155.504.2.B.5.j.
b. INTERIOR LANDSCAPING REQUIRED. Interior landscaping is defined as the landscaping
required within the perimeter of the parking lot, including the planting islands, curbed
areas, corner lots, parking spaces, and all interior driveways and aisles, except those with
no parking spaces located on either side. Interior landscaping shall be in the form of
planting islands, either separate or protruding from the perimeter of the parking lot. The
planting islands shall be located appropriately in the parking facility to create parking sub
areas and to help establish distinct patterns of traffic flow. No planted area in any island
shall have a dimension of less than twelve feet (12’), or eight feet (8’) with minimum
overall area not less than one hundred forty four (144) square feet. Smaller protrusions
from planting islands shall not have deciduous trees planted within them. At least one (1)
existing or planted large-maturing tree shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces,
except small trees are allowed where they are within an overhead power line easement. No
parking space shall be located more than forty feet (40’) from a tree either in an island or
outside of the parking lot. Trees should be generally distributed evenly throughout the
parking lot. All parking spaces shall be blocked or curbed to prevent vehicles from
overhanging planting islands or landscaped yards by more than one foot (1’) or damaging
adjacent fences or screens. (Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
c. ENHANCED INTERIOR LANDSCAPING REQUIRED In accordance with § 155.504.2.B.6.e, the
interior landscaping requirements for parking lots and other paved vehicular use areas
approved in front yards shall be increased as required in § 155.504.2.B.6.e.ii.
12. LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE. The owner, tenant, and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping existing or hereafter installed
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 84
which shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Maintenance shall include watering,
weeding, mowing, fertilizing, treating, mulching, pruning, removal and replacement of dead or
diseased trees and shrubs on a regular basis so as to present a neat and well-kept appearance at all
times. All replacement plantings should be installed at a frequency and species composition similar
to that found under similar environmental conditions in undisturbed forested areas. Trees and shrubs
are to be maintained in their natural form, and should not be pruned or shaped inconsistent with
their species natural growth habits.
13. SIGNAGE STANDARDS. The sign standards of the underlying zoning district and the requirements of
§ 155.608 of this Title shall apply to land development in the HO District. In addition, for sites
bordering Highway NC51, the location of freestanding signs is further limited to any disturbed
portion of the site, including the roadway or driveway access corridor from Highway NC51 rightof-
way, but not in any other portion of the required front Highway NC51 protected buffer yard, and
no additional clearing shall be permitted in said buffer yard. Permanent signs may only be installed
within the portion of the protected buffer which must be cleared for driveway access. Feather signs
shall not be placed within, or in front of, the protected buffer yard.
14. OUTDOOR LIGHTING. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded in a manner that no direct glare from the
light source can be seen from an abutting right-of-way line or from an abutting residential use or
district.
15. UNDERGROUND UTILITIES REQUIRED. All utilities under the control of the property owner or
developer shall be placed underground.
16. ACCESS POINTS AND TRAFFIC MOVEMENT ALONG HIGHWAY NC51. Traffic service and land access
are necessary but conflicting functions of a highway system. Although major roadways may provide
both traffic service and land access, access is a secondary function that should be controlled to avoid
jeopardizing the primary traffic service function. The following provisions are intended to protect
the public interest and safety of highway users by achieving reasonable access control.
a. The term “access control” refers to all techniques intended to minimize the traffic
interference associated with driveway access, whether the use is commercial, industrial, or
residential.
b. Whenever a tract proposed for a residential subdivision borders on a special highway, then
all lots created out of that tract must have sufficient frontage on another street (either preexisting
or created as part of the subdivision) so that direct access to that lot need not be
provided by the special highway, unless compliance with this requirement is not reasonably
practicable due to the size or shape of the tract to be divided. The final plat creating the
subdivision shall indicate a limitation on driveway access to the special highway for those
lots which have alternative access.
c. To separate basic conflict areas and gain control of access, techniques which will allow the
reduction of driveway numbers or directly increase the spacing between driveways or
between driveways and intersections will be required to achieve the following limitations
for driveway access in relation to highway frontage:
i. For lots having more than five hundred feet (500’) of frontage on special highway,
driveways shall be no closer than five hundred (500) linear feet.
ii. For a lot having less than five hundred feet (500’) of frontage on a special
highway, only one (1) driveway onto that highway shall be allowed. Whenever
possible, a minimum distance of two hundred feet (200’) must be maintained
between driveways of adjacent lots.
iii. Ingress to and egress from a corner lot or reverse frontage lot adjacent to a special
highway shall be limited to the more minor thoroughfare.
iv. Adjacent or adjoining lots with small highway frontages are encouraged to
combine access to one (1) driveway. In those instances, a wider driveway may be
permitted, conditioned on DOT approval.
v. Whenever separate or single parcels are assembled under one purpose, plan,
entity, or usage, consolidation of existing direct access shall be required to the
extent feasible. Approval depends on the developers' plans to use existing
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 85
driveways, close other existing driveways, or redesign and rebuild some existing
driveways. However, the spacing and number of access points should not exceed
the limits set based on highway frontage.
vi. Emergency access driveways may be created, using the separation requirements
listed in (i) through (v), above, where specifically included as part of approved
zoning conditions in a conditional zoning district and designed to meet NCDOT
requirements. Emergency access driveways shall primarily use a solid subsurface
with natural cover, such as porous block subsurface and grass cover, and may be
crossed with a removable or breakaway barricade, gate, chain, bollards, or other
method to prevent general public use. (Ord. 1303, passed 9-8-03)
vii. Departures from the foregoing standards may be authorized when the town
determines, upon the advice of the NCDOT, that a particular development design
or technique can achieve a satisfactory level of access control consistent with the
objectives of this Section.
17. APPROVED PLANT LIST. Recommended plant species for use within the HO District shall be as set
forth in the “Table of Approved Trees and Shrubs,” in § 155.606.14 of this Title. The list has been
prepared to increase the likelihood of survival and to reduce maintenance requirements of plant
species and varieties which are most commonly found in a natural wooded setting in the region.
These are the plant varieties most likely to be found and are desired to be retained in buffer areas,
and other required landscaped areas. All plants utilized in all developments in the HO District
should pay particular attention to preserving and protecting the species identified in the “Table of
Approved Trees and Shrubs,” when they are found on sites to be developed or otherwise disturbed.
All plants utilized in landscape plans, whether identified in the Table or not, should be generally
adapted to the normal climatic and environmental conditions expected for the Matthews area. This
list is not intended to be a comprehensive survey of plants found within the overlay district, but it
will serve as a guide to appropriate plant selection. If the plants selected are from this approved list,
further review will not be necessary. Plants which are not on this list may be used, if it can be shown
that the selected species satisfies one (1) or more of the following criteria:
a. An indigenous species to the area, adapted to the proposed site conditions; or
b. A cultivated species which is well suited for use in this area; or
c. A cultivated species which will be used in a manner that it will not be adversely affected
by normal climatic environmental conditions; or
d. Any plant species which has been previously approved for use.
18. ALTERNATIVE HO DISTRICT BUFFER PLAN. In the event that property located in the HO District
also abuts the boundary of another overlay district, competing interest may occur. When the Board
of Commissioners receives a petition to rezone such property to a conditional use district or a parallel
conditional use district (or a petition to amend a previously approved conditional use district site
plan or parallel conditional use district site plan), a condition may be added that provides for an
alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan that provides a significant increase in benefit over
the HO District requirements and complies with the requirements of this § 155.504.2.B.18.
Petitioner shall include in the petition to rezone the request for the Board of Commissioners’
consideration and approval of an alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan, and such plan shall
be submitted to the Town Planning Department concurrently with the petition to rezone. In the event
that the Board of Commissioners approves the petition to rezone, it may, in its discretion, approve
or deny the request for an alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan.
a. REQUIRED INFORMATION. When applying for the consideration and approval of an
alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan, the following information must be
submitted with the petition to rezone:
i. A site plan containing all of the information outlined in § 155.504.2.B.5, including
the HO District buffer landscaping plan;
ii. A letter to the Planning Director that contains a statement of intent that outlines
the purposes and objectives of the proposed alternative HO District buffer
landscaping plan, and that describes the nature of the existing vegetation in the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 86
required HO District buffer and the special landscape design features being
proposed by the alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan that make the
request a significant increase in benefit over the existing HO District requirements
and worthy of approval;
iii. The pedestrian walkway system proposed for the entire property included in the
petition to rezone and its connections to adjoining properties; and
iv. Any other relevant information that Petitioner may feel is appropriate.
b. The Planning Director may require additional information that may be necessary for an
adequate review of the proposed alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan.
c. The intent of this § 155.504.2.B.18 is to allow for the removal of coniferous trees and
certain deciduous trees from the required HO District buffer and to provide for the
replacement of any such trees three inches (3”) in caliper or larger that are removed with
superior deciduous trees at three inches (3”) in caliper at the time of installation to be
installed in various locations on the property subject to the petition to rezone. Specifically,
Petitioner may propose the removal of the following trees in the HO District buffer
landscaping plan:
i. Coniferous trees of any size;
ii. Sweet gum or black gum trees less than eight inches (8”) in caliper; and
iii. Any other deciduous trees less than three inches in caliper. Petitioner may not
propose the removal of the following trees:
• Dogwoods, redbuds and American hollies of any size;
• Sweet gum or black gum trees eight inches in caliper or larger; and
• Any other deciduous trees three inches in caliper or larger.
For each and every tree three inches (3”) in caliper or larger to be removed from the HO
District buffer, the alternative HO District buffer landscaping plan must provide by way of
a note that each such tree will be replaced with one (1) deciduous tree at least three inches
(3”) in caliper at the time of installation to be installed on the property subject to the petition
to rezone inside or outside of the HO District buffer. The specific locations of the
replacement trees will be set out on the landscaping plan that must be submitted to the
Town Planning Department pursuant to § 155.504.2.B.5.j.
d. Those portions of the property subject to the petition to rezone that are not within the HO
District buffer shall comply with the minimum landscaping requirements of § 155.606 of
this Title. Accordingly, the replacement trees required to be installed on the property
subject to the petition to rezone shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the minimum
landscaping requirements for such property under the requirements of § 155.606 of this
Title.
e. REVIEW AND APPROVAL. In evaluating a request for the approval of an alternative HO
District buffer landscaping plan, the Board of Commissioners may consider whether such
plan meets the objectives listed below:
i. Preserves all dogwoods, redbuds, and American hollies of any size within the HO
District buffer.
ii. Excepting sweet gum or black gum trees less than eight inches (8”) in caliper,
preserves all deciduous trees three inches (3”) in caliper or larger within the HO
District buffer.
iii. Provides for the replacement of any tree removed from the HO District buffer that
is three inches (3”) in caliper or larger with one (1) deciduous tree at least three
inches (3”) in caliper at the time of installation to be installed on the property
subject to the petition to rezone.
iv. Provides for the protection of existing trees that remain in the HO District buffer
and their root systems during the grading and construction processes and for the
replacement of any trees inadvertently damaged during grading or construction.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 87
v. Gives consideration to the location of existing trees to be preserved within the HO
District buffer and their proximity to retaining walls, parking lot grading areas
and other factors that may affect such trees.
vi. Provides assurances for the maintenance of the original quality of all landscape
elements including both existing and new planting materials located within the
HO District buffer in accordance with the provisions of § 155.504.2.B.
vii. Exhibits innovative and thoughtful landscape elements and design.
viii. Provides for a reasonable and appropriate relationship to the abutting Highway
NC51 and surrounding public street system.
ix. Enhances the walkability of the community at large as well as the livability of the
people living within the proposed development. (Ord. 1283, passed 2-10-03)
[formerly known as § 153.066.]
155.504.3. Entertainment District Overlay District
A. ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
1. General concept. This Overlay District is established to ensure that the policies and intentions of the
adopted Entertainment District Small Area Plan are followed as the area develops over time. The Small
Area Plan was developed with active participation by stakeholder groups and the general public, and
adopted by the Matthews Board of Commissioners becoming an Appendix to the Matthews Land Use Plan.
The intent of the Plan is to provide multiple entertainment opportunities (in addition to those available at
the Mecklenburg County Regional Sportsplex located within the district) for people of all ages, and to
incorporate space for residences, transitory housing, employment, recreation, shopping, dining and daily
living services in a compact pedestrian-friendly neighborhood, while accommodating various modes of
transportation (including fixed guideway public transit, scheduled to traverse the district in the future).
The Plan creates a vision for future land use and future motorized and non-motorized transportation
opportunities for all the land area within the study boundaries while including flexibility in specific future
land uses and their densities/intensities, and providing appropriate land use goals. The Plan places priority
on creating extensive internal and external connectivity - especially for pedestrians – in recognition of the
eventual development of a rapid transit line and station within the district’s boundaries.
2. Location and dimensions.
a. The Entertainment Overlay District shall be delineated as an overlay on the Official Zoning Map of
the Town. The map symbol and short name for the Entertainment District Small Area Plan Overlay
District shall be "ENT-O District."
b. The ENT-O District incorporates the same geographical boundaries as the adopted Entertainment
District Small Area Plan.
c. Development and improvement of property in the ENT-O District shall comply with the
requirements of § 155.504.3.
3. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of these regulations is to guide future development in the ENTO
District so as to be in harmony with and preserve, where appropriate, the natural beauty and character of
the existing landscape while allowing appropriate new development to occur. Ensuring the attractiveness of
future land uses will in turn contribute to and enhance capital investment, trade, tourism, and the general
welfare of both the population of the district and of the larger community. Therefore, this district is adopted
for the purposes of:
a. Improving the appearance and livability of the community while enhancing its economic vitality.
b. Preserving and improving property values by creating and maintaining an ecosystem of
sustainable development thereby assuring a management system of renewable natural resources
for both the present and future generations.
c. Encouraging new development and redevelopment consistent with the land development visions
established and explained by the adopted Small Area Plan.
d. Balancing the sometimes-opposing Town goals of allowing new construction and land disturbance
while protecting and enhancing the environment. Preserving trees and natural ground cover will be
closely monitored as plans are provided for new development activities, with the understanding
that some vegetation loss is inevitable in order to allow new development which will have as
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 88
significant a long-term economic and social impact on the community as on the Town’s
environmental vitality.
B. UNIQUE CHARACTER
1. The unique character and vision for the Entertainment District led to adoption of the following Principles in
the area planning process:
a. Create urban scale neighborhood, notably in anticipation of establishment of a future public transit
station within the study area.
b. Create a diverse mixture of complementary land uses, taking advantage of proximity of the
Sportsplex.
c. Extend pedestrian friendly features developed within the Sportsplex property throughout the
remainder of the district.
d. Create unique identity that represents the appeal of the area.
e. Practice energy-efficient design.
f. Adopt and apply a set of urban design principles that when applied to the built environment will
result in an attractive, vibrant, and sustainable community.
2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses, uses permitted subject to specific conditions, and accessory uses located
within the ENT-O District shall be determined by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
C. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
In addition to the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s), development and improvements in the ENTO
District shall comply with the following requirements, and where the regulations in this Section are in
conflict with the regulations of the underlying zoning district, the regulations in this Section shall prevail:
1. Proposed development within the ENT-O District shall be subject to the development standards, design
principles and review criteria contained within § 155.503.8.E, F and G.
2. Given the Town’s goal of creating an environment for a mix of businesses, no single “big box” retail
establishment (defined as merchandise sales as sole or primary activity in excess of 70,000 square feet)
shall be allowed. Hotels/conference centers and movie theatres are exempted from this limitation.
3. Residential to commercial ratios: no more than 600 dwelling units are to receive construction permits until
at least 40,000 square feet of commercial space is under construction or completed within the District.
4. Commercial to residential ratios: no more than 120,000 square feet of commercial space is to receive
construction permits until at least 240 dwelling units are under construction or completed within the
district.
5. Right-of-way width for the future Independence Pointe Parkway through the district is to be planned and
reserved during the subdivision process for 140-foot width in order to accommodate multi-modal travel,
including automobiles, pedestrians, bicyclists, on-street parking and future public transit/fixed guideway, as
well as right-of-way amenity features.
6. Transportation networks and connectivity proposed as part of development in the district shall comply with
the locational, dimensional, and design requirements as specified in:
a. Town of Matthews Entertainment District Small Area Plan (2014)
b. Town of Matthews Comprehensive Transportation Plan (2013)
c. Charlotte Regional Transportation Planning Organization Comprehensive Transportation Plan
(2018)
d. Charlotte Area Transit System 2030 Transit Corridor System Plan (as updated)
e. Charlotte Area Transit System design and engineering studies for the Silver Line light rail
In any instance where the above-referenced requirements may be seen to conflict, the more stringent
requirement shall be applied to proposed land development.
D. SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL PROCESS.
All development and other site improvement activity in the ENT-O District is subject to submittal and approval
of a site plan from the Town Planning & Development Department as outlined in §155.504.2.B.5. Any
substantial deviation from a previously approved site plan must be resubmitted for review and approval by the
Town Planning & Development Department in accordance with these requirements.
1. In addition to the above, site plans submitted for development within the ENT-O District shall contain the
following:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 89
a. Landscaping Plan. It is the intent of the Overlay Districts to the greatest extent possible retain
existing vegetation on development sites at the time of development. Landscaping plan to consist
of:
i. Vegetation survey as outlined at §155.606.8. The canopy drip line of all large-maturing trees
at least eight inches (8”) DBH, and all dogwoods, redbuds and American hollies at least four
feet (4’) high shall be delineated and determined to be “protected”. A brief assessment of the
above inventoried trees, indicating major deformity, disease, and or damage may be included.
Where groves of the protected trees exist that will not be removed or disturbed, it is permitted
to label the grove as such on the plan drawing, stating the approximate number of protected
trees and species mix, without specifying data of each individual tree.
ii. Locations, species, and size of all protected trees proposed for removal shall be shown in
outline form using a dashed line for the canopy drip line. Reasons for removing protected
trees shall be stated on the Landscaping Plan.
iii. Locations, dimensions, and square footage of required buffer strips and parking lot
landscaping.
iv. Details of required landscaping, showing species, dimensions, and spacing of planted
materials and the use and protection of existing vegetation.
v. Proposed timeline for landscaping.
b. Adequate sight triangles and sight distance. At all points of egress from off-street parking areas
and other vehicular site access points to public roads as well as at corners where public roads
intersect, unobstructed visibility shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of
Mecklenburg County LUESA and the regulations adopted by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation, in “Subdivision Roads: Minimum Construction Standards” (May 1, 1983) and any
subsequent amendments, or the regulations adopted by the Town of Matthews, whichever are the
greater. This section applies both in instances where both site access/driveways intersect with
public roads, and where two public roads intersect with one another.
c. Site access control. The design of an efficient, attractive, and safe transportation network as part
of proposed development is essential both to the development’s success and the larger
community’s continued viability. Periodically the goal of moving vehicular traffic quickly and
efficiently to, from, and through a development site can work at cross-purposes to providing safe
and reasonable site access to motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists, or to other goals the
development intends to achieve. Major roadways and public transit fixed guideways (both
existing and planned) may serve the greater area’s transportation needs well, but without careful
planning this may come at the expense of the quality of the proposed development.
For the purpose of this section, the term “site access control” refers to techniques intended to
minimize traffic interference associated with development site driveway access or transit line
crossings. The following provisions are intended to create a balance among all site users by
achieving reasonable site access control to and from these roadways and guideways:
i. When a development site borders or is bisected by an existing or proposed thoroughfare or
proposed public transit fixed guideway, the development shall provide at least one vehicular
site access point to a public street other than to that thoroughfare (or guideway), unless
compliance is not reasonably practicable. Full movement access to and from the
thoroughfare cannot be guaranteed. Primary or exclusive site access should not be provided
which crosses the proposed fixed guideway.
ii. When a development site contains in excess of 500 feet (500’) of frontage on a thoroughfare,
proposed driveways shall be no closer than 500 feet (500’) from one another.
iii. When a development has less than 500 feet (500’) of frontage on a thoroughfare, one
driveway shall be allowed onto the thoroughfare if the primary transportation network plans
for the area would in that manner be satisfied.
iv. Whenever possible, a minimum distance of 200 feet (200’) should be maintained between
adjacent driveways, both within the development site and between the site and adjacent
properties (shared driveways between adjoining parcels is encouraged, and should be used to
the greatest extent possible).
v. Ingress/egress to/from corner and reverse frontage lots adjacent to thoroughfares shall be
limited to the street with the more minor roadway classification.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 90
2. SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS AS PART OF A ZONING APPLICATION. When any land disturbing
activity is proposed that requires a change in zoning district or revisions of previously approved zoning
conditions, that property shall complete the necessary zoning actions as outlined at § 155.401, prior to
receiving site plan approval to comply with the ENT-O. If the zoning documents include sufficient
information as will be needed for the ENT-O site plan compliance, as listed in § 155.504.3.D., then the
Planning & Development Department may undertake a concurrent review of the ENT-O compliance
documents while the zoning application is being considered, and may be able to approve the Overlay
compliance as soon as the zoning action is approved. The ENT-O site plan review may also be submitted to
begin at any time after the zoning application has been successfully approved.
3. SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS NOT REQUIRING ZONING ACTION. When land disturbing activity is
proposed that is in compliance with the current zoning designation on the parcel(s) and therefore does not
need any further zoning action, then the site plan documents as listed at § 155.504.3.D shall be submitted to
the Planning & Development Department for ENT-O compliance at such time as the applicant has them
ready for review.
E. Overlay Compliance Plan. Since the ENT-O District originated from development and adoption of a Small
Area Plan that contain a series of development goals, guidelines, and expectations, submittal of an Overlay
Compliance Plan is required. This Compliance Plan is to be prepared by applicants of proposed development
and is intended to provide a detailed description of how the development proposal intends to address any
applicable goals, principles, or implementation action items for the development site and its environment
contained within the applicable Small Area Plan, (or other relevant Town of Matthews or Mecklenburg County
adopted planning policies). The Compliance Plan shall be submitted together with the proposed development
Site Plan to the Planning & Development Department and is subject to review by the Planning & Development
Director. (Ord No. 2434, Passed 9-9-19)
155.505. Tables of Allowed Uses
Use of a building, structure or land shall be allowed only in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes specified
in the following Tables of Allowed Uses. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in
the Tables. If a use is listed for one or more districts as an allowed use, then it is only allowed in that or those districts,
and shall not be allowed within any district which does not indicate it is allowed.
While most land uses will be assumed to be eligible to be located within one or more zoning districts within the Town
limits, some land uses may not be listed on these tables. Occasionally a new land use category may become viable,
or a new combination of activities prompts a new land use type designation, and amendments may be made to this
Title to incorporate new land use categories as the need arises. When a specific use category is not clearly and directly
related to a listed use category, and therefore cannot be determined to be considered essentially the same as a listed
use, then it is not allowed in the Town without amendment to this Chapter. The Zoning Administrator will interpret
whether a land use category fits within a listed category. Criteria for interpretations on land uses are given at
155.203.C.
Some land use activities have been determined by the Town to not be appropriate for overall community public health
and safety, or may create adverse environmental impacts to surrounding properties, such as hazardous waste
incinerators. Some unlisted uses have been determined to be injurious or not beneficial to the Town’s economic
viability, such as billboards that detract from the visual aesthetics of the community. Some uses may be of a density
or intensity of development, create a level of noise, lights, odors, or vibrations, or generate inappropriate amounts of
traffic that would not be consistent with the land use policies, long range visions, and community values for the Town.
A principal use listed in the Tables in any district denoted by the letter “P” is permitted by right provided all other
requirements of state law, this Title, and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the Town of Matthews
have been satisfied. A principal use listed in the Tables of Allowed Uses in any district denoted by the letters “ PC”
is an allowed use with prescribed conditions and is only allowed subject to the provisions of § 155.506. An accessory
use listed in the Tables of Allowed Uses in any district denoted by the letters “Acc” is allowed only when a permitted
principal use exists on the same property, and shall not be allowed without the accompanying permitted use. A use
of building, structure or land not indicated by either “P”, “PC”, or “Acc” is not allowed in that district. [formerly
known as § 153.052]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC
P P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
P P
P
P P
P P
P P
PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P
P
ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES: TRADITIONAL AND PARALLEL TRADITIONAL DISTRICTS 155.505.1
USES BY GROUPING
RESIDENTIAL USES
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Accessory apartment, subject to § 155.506.9
Accessory residential use and structure clearly incidental to the permitted principal
residential use
Propane storage or other home fuel storage, accessory to a permitted principal use or
building, subject to the Fire Pevention Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
Cottage Cluster Housing Development, subject to § 155.506.22
Dormitory for senior high and post secondary school operated by and located on the
principal site of the institution served.
Home-based business, subject to § 155.506.1
Children’s home, foster care facility and similar non-profit institution providing domiciliary
care for children
Private stable, subject to § 155.506.12
Dwelling, one-family detached
Dwelling, two-family/duplex
Dwelling, multi-family, single building on a lot
Dwelling, zero-lot line
Group Home, family care home, and sheltered household subject to § 155.506.3
Dwelling, one-family attached
Dwelling, one-family detached with multiple full kitchens subject to § 155.506.9
Dwelling, manufactured home
Dwelling, multi-family, multiple building complex
Medium density ecological development subject to § 155.506.23
Manufactured home park office or service building for recreational facilities, meeting room
for residents, and similar uses
Monastery, convent, and similar group housing for individuals of a religious order
Equestrian-oriented subdivision, subject to § 155.506.2
Manufactured home park
Limited food and beverage sales in neighborhood common facility, subject to § 155.506.14
Room renting and boarding, subject to § 155.506.5
Table 505.1- 1
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
Adult care home, subject to § 155.506.3
Police Station, subject to § 155.506.7
Adult care home
Assisted living facility
Fire and/or EMS station, police station
Public library
College and university with stadium
Church and place of worship with less than 400 seating capacity and/or with programs of up
to 100 persons operated on a daily (weekday) basis, subject to § 155.506.7
Heliport, medically related
Laboratory and research facility, medical, dental or optical when part of hospital complex
Medical, dental, optical office and clinic when part of hospital complex
Hospital
College and university without stadium
Adult day care facility
Church and place of worship without size restrictions
Continuing care retirement community, subject to § 155.506.16
Cultural Community Center, subject to § 155.506.07
Fire and/or EMS station, subject to § 155.506.7
Arboretum, subject to § 155.506.7
Assisted living, subject to § 155.506.3
Cemetery, mausoleum, and columbarium, subject to § 155.506.13
Subdivision sales office, subject to § 155.506.21
Trailer, recreational, and overnight camping vehicle stored unoccupied on a lot behind the
established setback and not within 10 feet of street side corner
Swimming pool for one dwelling behind principal residential structure
RESIDENTIAL USES
INSTITUTIONAL & GOVERNMENTAL USES
Table 505.1- 2
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC PC
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC PC PC
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
Contractor's office without accessory storage
General and professional office
Laboratory and research facility, medical , dental or optical
Office with display of sample merchandise to wholesalers and retailers when the samples
are only visible within the building and no sales, inventory or delivery of merchandise from
building
School, elementary, middle, and senior high, public and private, less than 100 student
capacity, subject to § 155.506.7
Spa, massage service
Alcohol and alcoholic beverage, wine, and beer production and sales, subject to §
155.506.45
Adult use, subject to § 155.506.46
Barber shop, beauty salon, nail salon, and similar personal service
OFFICE & SERVICE USES
Civic, fraternal, and social club
Child day care facility, subject to § 155.506.6
Animal grooming facility, subject to § 155.506.42
Medical, dental, optical office and clinic
Telephone exchange
Musuem and art gallery operated on a noncommercial basis
INSTITUTIONAL & GOVERNMENTAL USES
Bank, credit union, and similar financial service
School, elementary, middle, and senior high, public and private
Auction house
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Armory for meetings and training of military organizations
Bakery, retail including manufacturing of goods for sale on the premises only
Ballroom, banquet or meeting/catering hall
Skilled Nursing Care Facility, subjet to § 155.506.17
Table 505.1- 3
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC
Exterminator, pest control
Car wash
Boat and watercraft sales, new and used
Brewpub, subject to § 155.506.45
Bed and breakfast establishment, subject to § 155.506.4
Commercial use in multifamily and office buildings, subject to § 155.506.31
Coin operated laundry
Brewery
Florist shop
Copy, printing and photo processing
Call center
Building material storage and wholesale and retail sales without outside storage
Building material storage and wholesale and retail sales with outside storage
Gas station with convenience store, subject to § 155.506.49
Gas pump without convenience store
Greenhouse, commercial, without retail sales
Communications tower and antenna, subject to § 155.506.41
Crematorium, when located on same lot as a cemetery or funeral home, subject to
155.506.13
Crematorium, stand alone, subject to 155.506.13
Commercial school and school providing adult training in any of the arts, sciences, trades, or
professions, without retail sales of merchandise
Drive-up service window, subject to § 155.506.33
Installation of tires sold within an enclosed building of at least 145,000 sq. ft. with internal
storage only, limited to 7,250 sq. ft.
Farmers' market, subject to § 155.506.43
Funeral home
Installation and servicing of accessory equipment (i.e. audio, security, navigational, etc.) for
vehicles sold within an enclosed building with internal storage only
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Hotels, subject to § 155.506.32
Hotel, Extended Stay, subject to § 155.506.32
Heliport
Commercial or catering kitchen, without on-site customer/client food service
Table 505.1- 4
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
Nursery, commercial, with or without greenhouse
Parking lot and parking garage/structure
Live work unit, subject to § 155.506.10
Motor vehicle service facility limited to oil change, tire rotation and replacement, and
similar minor maintenance service, not over 3 service bays and no overnight vehicle storage
Outdoor equipment and machinery, sales and repair
Outdoor sales in conjuction with a permanent business, subject to § 155.506.36
Motor vehicle, passenger, and motorcycle, new and used, sales and rental
Motor vehicle, commercial or recreational, new and used, sales and rental
Internet sweepstakes, or adult gaming facility § 155.506.50
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment not to exceed 4,500 sq ft gross floor area
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment not to exceed 10,000 sq ft gross floor area
Manufactured home sales
Live work unit
Mini storage facility
Musuem or art gallery
Mobile vendor, subject to § 155.506.43
Motorcycle safety training course, subject to § 155.506.18
Motor vehicle repair garage including engine overhaul, body and paint shop and similar
operations
Pet cemetery, including any accessory structure
Microbrewery, subject to § 155.506.45
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Radio and television station
Pushcart vending, subject to § 155.506.43
Post Office
Kennel, animal day care, subject to § 155.506.42
Kennel, commercial, subject to § 155.506.42
Professional, financial, personnal and recreational service not otherwise listed
Repair and servicing of any article the sale of which is permitted in the district, except as
otherwise listed
Table 505.1- 5
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
Selling from a semitruck without a cab, subject to § 155.506.36
Secondhand goods, retail sales, unless otherwise listed
Restaurant, lounge and nightclub without drive-thru or drive-in service
Upholstering in a workroom setting not to exceed 1,500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Utility trailer, not exceed a loading capacity of 500 cubic feet, sales and rental
Studio for gymnast, artist, designer, photographer, musician, sculptor, and similar
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Sign printing
Veterinary clinic or hospital, subject to § 155.506.42
Towing operation with vehicle storage only within an enclosed structure
Retail sales, general merchandise, unless otherwise listed
Social gathering, seminar, reception, which is ancilliary to the principal permitted use and on
property desginated historic by the Town
Solar collector installation, subject to § 155.506.48
Secondhand goods, retail sales without outside storage, unless otherwise listed
Repair and servicing, indoors only, of any article the sale of which is permitted in the district,
except as otherwise listed
Towing operation with vehicle storage yard
Restaurant with drive-thru or drive-in service
Specialty sales establishment with substantial on-site assembly, processing, packaging,
and/or distribution, and processes sales for off-site customers, subject to § 155.506.39
Table 505.1- 6
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC
P P
PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC
Archery or firearms range, indoor only, subject to § 155.506.47
Amusement, commercial outdoors, including miniature golf, golf course, golf driving range,
ride, slide, waterparks, paintball course and similar commercial enterprise requiring physical
dexterity, except as regulated elsewhere, subject to § 155.506.40
Community recreation center, fitness/health center, gymnasium, YMCA, and similar use
with multiple physically involved activities, primarily indoor, can take place concurrently
Stadium, and other outdoor assembly facility where primary use involves both spectator
and performer
Skateboard facility, subject to § 155.506.40
Ice or roller rink
Swimming pool, single neighborhood, below Junior Olympic size, no outside membership,
subject to § 155.506.8
Riding stable, commercial, subject to § 155.506.35
Park, predominately passive use, subject to § 155.506.8
Park and playground, not otherwise listed
Athletic or sports fields, ballfields, in a concentration of three or more, and similar indoor or
outdoor physical recreation facility intended for use by teams of participants
RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Indoor commercial recreation not otherwise listed
Park and playground operated on a noncommercial basis for the purposes of public
recreation, subject to § 155.506.8
Swimming pool, as a stand alone facility, indoor or outdoor, or outdoor as part of a
recreational facility, public or private
Golf course operated on a noncommercial basis, subject to § 155.506.8
Country club, swimming club, community recreation center, and tennis or racket club
operated on a noncommercial membership basis, subject to § 155.506.8
Bowling alley
Arcade, game room
Swimming pool, any size, accessory to multi-family residential use, not within 100 feet of
property line
Table 505.1- 7
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
Tennis and racket club and associated swimming facility, indoor and/or outdoor, with golf
practice facility, subject to § 155.506.15
Outside storage, except as otherwise listed
Manufacturing, heavy, which may include the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into new items, or the fabrication and/or the assembly of
component parts, or other industrial processing, bulk storage, and handling of products
primarily from extracted or raw materials, any aspect of which has potential to produce
noise, dust, glare, odors, vibration, smoke or steam, fire hazard, or other noxious emission
beyond the property lines except as otherwise listed
Manufacturing, light, which may include the assembly or processing of predominently
previously prepared materials into finished products or parts and the packaging of such
materials, all contained within an entirely enclosed building and no detectable noise, dust,
glare, odors, vibration, smoke or steam, fire hazard, or other noxious emission shall exit the
building except as otherwise listed
Bottling and canning works for nonalcoholic beverages including distribution
Bakery and baking plant including manufacturing, wholesale and retail
Blacksmith shop
Bus and transit vehicle repair and storage
Contractor's facility with storage yard
Manufacturing, processing, assembling of components into completed craft or custom
made items in facilities not exceeding 3,000 sq. ft.
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment greater than 10,000 sq ft gross floor area
INDUSTRIAL & MANUFACTURING USES
Theater, housed within an enclosed structure
Tennis and racket sports courts, indoor or outdoor
Theater, outdoor stage facility
RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Tennis and racket club, commercial, indoor or outdoor
Mail order facility
Distilling or manufacturing of alcohol and alcoholic beverage, subject to § 155.506.45
Theater, drive-in
Table 505.1- 8
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
Recycled material, collection, processing and packaging within an enclosed structure
Recycled material, collection, processing and packaging
Quarry, subject to § 155.506.38
Sign manufacturing
Metal product fabricating, processing, and manufacturing, and machine shop without blast
furnace or drop forge
Farm, either in conjunction with or separate from a dwelling, which may conduct retail sales
of products produced on the premises
On-site demolition disposal site, subject to § 155.506.37
Farm, urban, subject to § 155.506.19
Warehouse, distribution facility within enclosed building
Auction sale of real and personal property located on site for the purpose of liquidating
assets, subject to § 155.506.43.
Accessory use, clearly incidental to the principal permitted use or structure on the lot
Garage sale, yard sale, and similar, subject to § 155.506.43
Wholesale sales with or without retail sales
Community Garden
Metal product fabricating, processing, and manufacturing, and machine shop including the
use of a blast furnace or drop forge
Packing shed, fruit and vegetable
On-site demolition disposal site, accepting off-site material, subject to § 155.506.37
Truck Terminal
INDUSTRIAL & MANUFACTURING USES
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Electric and gas substation, sewage treatment plant and control house, pump and lift
station, water storage tank, well lot and similar use, subject to § 155.506.11
Donation Drop-Off Facility
Table 505.1- 9
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
Vending machine, located outside the required setback
Vending machine, immediately adjacent to building, under overhang only
Temporary, self-contained storage unit, subject to § 155.506.20
Temporary building and storage of materials in conjunction with construction of a building
on a lot where construction is taking place or on adjacent lots, the temporary use to be
terminated upon completion of construction, issuance of Certificate of Occupancy, or
invalidation of building permit (see also § 155.506.43.C.4)
Sidewalk sale, end of season sale, clearance sale, subject to § 155.506.43
Temporary use for business purpose, subject to § 155.506.43
Short term temporary use or festival of civic or nonprofit nature
Transit station (bus, rail, etc.)
Roadside stand, permanent
Parking for uses permitted within the district
Propane storage or other fuel storage, accessory to a permitted principal use or building,
subject to the Fire Pevention Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
Railroad right-of-way
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Public utility transmission and distribution lines
Utility equipment stand, meter, box, and backflow preventer for single or groups of parcels
Transit stop shelter, subject to § 155.506.34
(Am. Ord 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord 2059, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord. 2083, passed 5-11-15; Am. Ord 2141, passed 4-11-16; Am. Ord 2188, passed 6-12-17; Am. Ord 2388, passed 5-13-
19; Am. Ord 2461, passed 12-9-19)
Table 505.1- 10
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P
P P P P P
P
P P
P
P P
P P
P P
PC PC PC PC
P
USES BY GROUPING
RESIDENTIAL USES
Accessory apartment, subject to § 155.506.9
Accessory residential use and structure clearly incidental to the
permitted principal residential use
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Dwelling, two-family/duplex
Dwelling, manufactured home
Dwelling, multi-family, single building on a lot
Monastery, convent, and similar group housing for individuals of a
religious order
Private stable, subject to § 155.506.12
Group Home, family care home, and sheltered household, subject to
§ 155.506.3
Home-based business, subject to § 155.506.1
Limited food and beverage sales in neighborhood common facility,
subject to § 155.506.14
Manufactured home park
Manufactured home park office or service building for recreational
facilities, meeting room for residents, and similar uses
Medium density ecological development, subject to § 155.506.23
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES: TRADITIONAL AND PARALLEL TRADITIONAL DISTRICTS 155.505.2
Dwelling, multi-family, multiple building complex
Dwelling, zero-lot line
Equestrian-oriented subdivision, subject to § 155.506.2
Children’s home, foster care facility and similar non-profit institution
providing domiciliary care for children
Cottage Cluster Housing Development, subject to § 155.506.22
Dormitory for senior high and post secondary school operated by
and located on the principal site of the institution served.
Dwelling, one-family attached
Dwelling, one-family detached
Dwelling, one-family detached with multiple full kitchens subject to
§ 155.506.9
Table 505.2- 1
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC
ACC ACC
ACC ACC
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC
P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P
PC
P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P
P
P P
RESIDENTIAL USES
Propane storage or other home fuel storage, accessory to a
permitted principal use or building, subject to the Fire Pevention
Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
Room renting and boarding, subject to § 155.506.5
Subdivision sales office, subject to § 155.506.21
Swimming pool for one dwelling behind principal residential
structure
Cemetery, mausoleum, and columbarium, subject to § 155.506.13
Church and place of worship with less than 400 seating capacity
and/or with programs of up to 100 persons operated on a daily
(weekday) basis, subject to § 155.506.7
Church and place of worship without size restrictions
College and university without stadium
Trailer, recreational, and overnight camping vehicle stored
unoccupied on a lot behind the established setback and not within
10 feet of street side corner
INSTITUTIONAL & GOVERNMENTAL USES
Adult care home, subject to § 155.506.3
Adult day care facility
Adult care home
Assisted living facility
Assisted living, subject to § 155.506.3
Arboretum, subject to § 155.506.7
College and university with stadium
Continuing care retirement community, subject to § 155.506.16
Cultural Community Center, subject to § 155.506.07
Fire and/or EMS station, subject to § 155.506.7
Heliport, medically related
Hospital
Fire and/or EMS station, police station
Table 505.2- 2
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P
P P
PC
P P P P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
ACC P P P P P P
ACC P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC
Laboratory and research facility, medical, dental or optical when
part of hospital complex
Medical, dental, optical office and clinic when part of hospital
complex
Police Station, subject to § 155.506.7
Public library
School, elementary, middle, and senior high, public and private
OFFICE & SERVICE USES
School, elementary, middle, and senior high, public and private, less
than 100 student capacity, subject to § 155.506.7
Skilled Nursing Facility, subject to § 155.506.17
INSTITUTIONAL & GOVERNMENTAL USES
Laboratory and research facility, medical , dental or optical
Medical, dental, optical office and clinic
Musuem and art gallery operated on a noncommercial basis
Office with display of sample merchandise to wholesalers and
retailers when the samples are only visible within the building and
no sales, inventory or delivery of merchandise from building
Spa, massage service
Telephone exchange
Bank, credit union, and similar financial service
Barber shop, beauty salon, nail salon, and similar personal service
Child day care facility, subject to § 155.506.6
Civic, fraternal, and social club
Contractor's office without accessory storage
General and professional office
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Adult use, subject to § 155.506.46
Alcohol and alcoholic beverage, wine, and beer production and
sales, subject to § 155.506.45
Animal grooming facility, subject to § 155.506.42
Table 505.2- 3
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P P
P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC PC
P
P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
P
P P P
P
P P P P
P P P P P P P P
P P P P
PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P
PC PC
ACC P P P P P P
P P P
PC PC
ACC ACC ACC
Bakery, retail including manufacturing of goods for sale on the
premises only
Ballroom, banquet or meeting/catering hall
Bed and breakfast establishment, subject to § 155.506.4
Boat and watercraft sales, new and used
Brewery
Brewpub, subject to § 155.506.45
Armory for meetings and training of military organizations
Auction house
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Commercial use in multifamily and office buildings, subject to §
155.506.31
Communications tower and antenna, subject to § 155.506.41
Copy, printing and photo processing
Drive-up service window, subject to § 155.506.33
Exterminator, pest control
Farmers' market, subject to § 155.506.43
Building material storage and wholesale and retail sales without
outside storage
Building material storage and wholesale and retail sales with outside
storage
Call center
Car wash
Coin operated laundry
Commercial school and school providing adult training in any of the
arts, sciences, trades, or professions, without retail sales of
merchandise
Crematorium, when located on same lot as a cemetery or funeral
home, subject to 155.506.13
Crematorium, stand alone, or on an adjacent parcel to a cemetery or
funeral home only when such parcel is commercially or industrially
zoned, subject to 155.506.13
Commercial or catering kitchen, without on-site customer/client
food service
Florist shop
Funeral home
Gas station with convenience store, subject to § 155.506.49
Gas pump without convenience store
Table 505.2- 4
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P P P
P P P P
PC PC PC PC
PC PC
P
PC PC
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC
ACC P P P P P
P P
PC
P P P
P
PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
P P P P
P P P
P P
P P
PC
P P P P P P
P P P P P
Heliport
Installation of tires sold within an enclosed building of at least
145,000 sq. ft. with internal storage only, limited to 7,250 sq. ft.
Installation and servicing of accessory equipment (i.e. audio,
security, navigational, etc.) for vehicles sold within an enclosed
building with internal storage only
Internet sweepstakes, or adult gaming facility § 155.506.50
Kennel, animal day care, subject to § 155.506.42
Kennel, commercial, subject to § 155.506.42
Greenhouse, commercial, without retail sales
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Hotels, subject to § 155.506.32
Hotel, Extended Stay, subject to § 155.506.32
Mobile vendor, subject to § 155.506.43
Motor vehicle service facility limited to oil change, tire rotation and
replacement, and similar minor maintenance service, all activity
taking place within the building, not over 3 service bays and no
overnight vehicle storage
Motor vehicle, passenger, and motorcycle, new and used, sales and
rental
Motor vehicle, commercial or recreational, new and used, sales and
rental
Motorcycle safety training course, subject to § 155.506.18
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment not to exceed 4,500 sq ft
gross floor area
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment not to exceed 10,000 sq ft
gross floor area
Live work unit, subject to § 155.506.10
Manufactured home sales
Microbrewery, subject to § 155.506.45
Mini storage facility
Live work unit
Motor vehicle repair garage including engine overhaul, body and
paint shop and similar operations
Musuem or art gallery
Nursery, commercial, with or without greenhouse
Table 505.2- 5
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
Pet cemetery, including any accessory structure P P P
ACC P P P P P P
P P P P P P
P
P P P
P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P
P
P P P P P
P P P P P P
P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
P P P
ACC ACC ACC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC
PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
Specialty sales establishment with substantial on-site assembly,
processing, packaging, and/or distribution, and processes sales for
off-site customers, subject to § 155.506.39
Professional, financial, personnal and recreational service not
otherwise listed
Pushcart vending, subject to § 155.506.43
Radio and television station
Repair and servicing of any article the sale of which is permitted in
the district, except as otherwise listed
Repair and servicing, indoors only, of any article the sale of which is
permitted in the district, except as otherwise listed
Restaurant, lounge and nightclub without drive-thru or drive-in
service
Outdoor equipment and machinery, sales and repair
Outdoor sales in conjuction with a permanent business, subject to §
155.506.36
Parking lot and parking garage/structure
Post Office
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Social gathering, seminar, reception, which is ancilliary to the
principal permitted use and on property desginated historic by the
Town
Solar collector installation, subject to § 155.506.48
Studio for gymnast, artist, designer, photographer, musician,
sculptor, and similar
Restaurant with drive-thru or drive-in service
Retail sales, general merchandise, unless otherwise listed
Secondhand goods, retail sales without outside storage, unless
otherwise listed
Secondhand goods, retail sales, unless otherwise listed
Selling from a semitruck without a cab, subject to § 155.506.36
Sign printing
Table 505.2- 6
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P P
P
P P P P P P
P P P
PC PC PC PC PC
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
PC PC
PC PC
ACC P P P P P
P P P
P P
P P P P P
PC
PC
P
P
PC
PC
Towing operation with vehicle storage only within an enclosed
structure
Towing operation with vehicle storage yard
Upholstering in a workroom setting not to exceed 1,500 sq. ft. of
gross floor area
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Arcade, game room
Athletic or sports fields, ballfields, in a concentration of three or
more, and similar indoor or outdoor physical recreation facility
intended for use by teams of participants
Bowling alley
Community recreation center, fitness/health center, gymnasium,
YMCA, and similar use with multiple physically involved activities,
primarily indoor, can take place concurrently
Country club, swimming club, community recreation center, and
tennis or racket club operated on a noncommercial membership
basis, subject to § 155.506.8
Golf course operated on a noncommercial basis, subject to §
155.506.8
Utility trailer, not exceed a loading capacity of 500 cubic feet, sales
and rental
Veterinary clinic or hospital, subject to § 155.506.42
RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Amusement, commercial outdoors, including miniature golf, golf
course, golf driving range, ride, slide, waterpark, paintball course
and similar commercial enterprise requiring physical dexterity,
except as regulated elsewhere, subject to § 155.506.40
Archery or firearms range, indoor only, subject to § 155.506.47
Ice or roller rink
Indoor commercial recreation not otherwise listed
Park and playground operated on a noncommercial basis for the
purposes of public recreation, subject to § 155.506.8
Park, predominately passive use, subject to §155.506.8
Table 505.2- 7
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P P P P P P P
PC
PC PC
PC
P
ACC ACC
PP
PC
ACC P P
ACC P
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
PC PC
P P
P
P P P
Swimming pool, as a stand alone facility, indoor or outdoor, or
outdoor as part of a recreational facility, public or private
Tennis and racket club, commercial, indoor or outdoor
Tennis and racket club and associated swimming facility, indoor
and/or outdoor, with golf practice facility, subject to § 155.506.15
Theater, drive-in
Riding stable, commercial, subject to § 155.506.35
Skateboard facility, subject to § 155.506.40
Swimming pool, any size, accessory to multi-family residential use,
not within 100 feet of property line
Tennis and racket sports courts, indoor or outdoor
RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Stadium, and other outdoor assembly facility where primary use
involves both spectator and performer
Swimming pool, single neighborhood, below Junior Olympic size, no
outside membership, subject to § 155.506.8
Theater, housed within an enclosed structure
Theater, outdoor stage facility
INDUSTRIAL & MANUFACTURING USES
Bakery and baking plant including manufacturing, wholesale and
retail
Blacksmith shop
Bottling and canning works for nonalcoholic beverage including
distribution
Bus and transit vehicle repair and storage
Contractor's facility with storage yard
Distilling or manufacturing of alcohol and alcoholic beverage,
subject to § 155.506.45
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment greater than 10,000 sq ft
gross floor area
Outside storage, except as otherwise listed
Mail order facility
Park and playground, not otherwise listed
Table 505.2- 8
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
P P P
P
P P
P P
P
P P
PC
P P
P
P P
P
P P P
P P
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P P P P P
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
Community Garden
INDUSTRIAL & MANUFACTURING USES
Packing shed, fruit and vegetable
Quarry, subject to § 155.506.38
Recycled material, collection, processing and packaging within an
enclosed structure
Recycled material, collection, processing and packaging
Sign manufacturing
Warehouse, distribution facility within enclosed building
Manufacturing, processing, assembling of components into
completed craft or custom made items in facilities not exceeding
3,000 sq. ft.
Manufacturing, heavy, which may include the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials or substances into new items,
or the fabrication and/or the assembly of component parts, or other
industrial processing, bulk storage, and handling of products
primarily from extracted or raw materials, any aspect of which has
potential to produce noise, dust, glare, odors, vibration, smoke or
steam, fire hazard, or other noxious emission beyond the property
lines except as otherwise listed
Manufacturing, light, which may include the assembly or processing
of predominently previously prepared materials into finished
products or parts and the packaging of such materials, all contained
within an entirely enclosed building and no detectable noise, dust,
glare, odors, vibration, smoke or steam, fire hazard, or other noxious
emission shall exit the building except as otherwise listed
Metal product fabricating, processing, and manufacturing, and
machine shop without blast furnace or drop forge
Metal product fabricating, processing, and manufacturing, and
machine shop including the use of a blast furnace or drop forge
Truck Terminal
Donation Drop-Off Facility
Wholesale sales with or without retail sales
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Auction sale of real and personal property located on site for the
purpose of liquidating assets, subject to § 155.506.43.
Accessory use, clearly incidental to the principal permitted use or
structure on the lot
Table 505.2- 9
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P
P P P P P P
(Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord 2059, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord. 2083, passed 5-11-15; Am. Ord 2141, passed 4-11-16; Am. Ord 2188, passed 6-12-17; Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17; Am. Ord
2388, passed 5-13-19; Am. Ord 2461, passed 12-9-19)
Garage sale, yard sale, and similar, subject to § 155.506.43
Farm, urban, subject to § 155.506.19
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Vending machine, immediately adjacent to building under overhang
only
Temporary use for business purpose, subject to § 155.506.43
Transit stop shelter, subject to § 155.506.34
Transit station (bus, rail, etc.)
Utility equipment stand, meter, box, and backflow preventer for
single or groups of parcels
Vending machine, located outside the required setback
Railroad right-of-way
Roadside stand, permanent
Short term temporary use or festival of civic or nonprofit nature,
subject to § 155.506.44
Temporary building and storage of materials in conjunction with
construction of a building on a lot where construction is taking place
or on adjacent lots, the temporary use to be terminated upon
completion of construction, issuance of Certificate of Occupancy, or
invalidation of building permit (see also § 155.506.43.C.4)
Temporary, self-contained storage unit, subject to § 155.506.20
Electric and gas substation, sewage treatment plant and control
house, pump and lift station, water storage tank, well lot and similar
use, subject to § 155.506.11
On-site demolition disposal site, subject to § 155.506.37
On-site demolition disposal site, accepting off-site material, subject
to § 155.506.37
Parking for uses permitted within the district
Propane storage or other fuel storage, accessory to a permitted
principal use or building, subject to the Fire Pevention Code of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters
Public utility transmission and distribution lines
Sidewalk sale, end of season sale, clearance sale, subject to §
155.506.43
Farm, either in conjunction with or separate from a dwelling, which
may conduct retail sales of products produced on the premises
Table 505.2- 10
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P
PC PC PC
P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P
PC PC
P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P Monastery, convent, and similar group housing for individuals of a
religious order
Private stable, subject to § 155.506.12
Group Home, family care home, and sheltered household, subject to
§ 155.506.3
Home-based business, subject to § 155.506.1
Limited food and beverage sales in neighborhood common facilities,
subject to § 155.506.14
Manufactured home park
Manufactured home park office or service building for recreational
facilities, meeting room for residents, and similar uses
Medium density ecological development subject to § 155.506.23
TABLE OF ALLOWED USES: CONDITIONAL-ONLY DISTRICTS 155.505.3
Dwelling, multi-family, multiple building complex
Dwelling, zero-lot line
Equestrian-oriented subdivision, subject to § 155.506.2
Children’s home, foster care facility and similar non-profit institution
providing domiciliary care for children
Cottage Cluster Housing Development, subject to § 155.506.22
Dormitory for senior high and post secondary schools operated by
and located on the principal site of the institution served.
Dwelling, one-family attached
Dwelling, one-family detached
Dwelling, one-family detached with multiple full kitchens subject to §
155.506.9
USES BY GROUPING
RESIDENTIAL USES
Accessory apartment, subject to § 155.506.9
Accessory residential use and structure clearly incidental to the
permitted principal residential use
CONDITIONAL-ONLY
Dwelling, two-family/duplex
Dwelling, manufactured home
Dwelling, multi-family, single building on a lot
Table 505.3- 1
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P
PC PC
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC
PC PC
P P P
P P P P
P P
PC P P P
PC PC
P P P P P P
P P P P
P P
P P
P P
Propane storage or other home fuel storage, accessory to a
permitted principal use or building, subject to the Fire Pevention
Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
Room renting and boarding, subject to § 155.506.5
Subdivision sales office, subject to § 155.506.21
Swimming pool for one dwelling behind principal residential
structure
RESIDENTIAL USES
Assisted living, subject to § 155.506.3
Cemetery, mausoleum, and columbarium, subject to § 155.506.13
Church and place of worship with less than 400 seating capacity
and/or with programs of up to 100 persons operated on a daily
(weekday) basis, subject to § 155.506.7
Church and place of worship without size restrictions
College and university without stadium
Trailer, recreational, and overnight camping vehicle stored
unoccupied on a lot behind the established setback and not within 10
feet of street side corner
INSTITUTIONAL & GOVERNMENTAL USES
Adult care home, subject to § 155.506.3
Adult care facility
Adult day care facility
Assisted living facility
Arboretum, subject to § 155.506.7
Laboratory and research facility, medical, dental or optical when part
of hospital complex
Medical, dental, optical office and clinic when part of hospital
complex
College and university with stadium
Continuing care retirement community, subject to § 155.506.16
Cultural Community Center, subject to § 155.506.07
Fire and/or EMS station, subject to § 155.506.7
Heliport, medically related
Hospital
Fire and/or EMS station, police station
Table 505.3- 2
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC PC
P P P P P P
PC PC
P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
P P P P P P
P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC
Police Station, subject to § 155.506.7
Public library
School, elementary, middle, and senior high, public and private
OFFICE & SERVICE USES
School, elementary, middle, and senior high, public and private, less
than 100 student capacity, subject to § 155.506.7
INSTITUTIONAL & GOVERNMENTAL USES
Skilled Nursing Facility, subject to § 155.506.17
Laboratory and research facility, medical , dental or optical
Medical, dental, optical office and clinic
Musuem and art gallery operated on a noncommercial basis
Office with display of sample merchandise to wholesalers and
retailers when the samples are only visible within the building and no
sales, inventory or delivery of merchandise from building
Spa and massage service
Telephone exchange
Bank, credit union, and similar financial service
Barber shop, beauty salon, nail salon, and similar personal service
Child day care facility, subject to § 155.506.6
Civic, fraternal, and social club
Contractor's office without accessory storage
General and professional office
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Adult use, subject to § 155.506.46
Alcohol and alcoholic beverage, wine, and beer production and sales,
subject to § 155.506.45
Animal grooming facility, subject to § 155.506.42
Table 505.3- 3
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
P P P
P P P
P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC
P P P P
PC PC PC PC
P P P
P P P P
P P P
P P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P
P P
PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P
PC PC PC
P P P P P P
P P P
PC PC
Bakery, retail including manufacturing of goods for sale on the
premises only
Ballroom, banquet or meeting/catering hall
Bed and breakfast establishment, subject to § 155.506.4
Boat and watercraft sales, new and used
Brewery
Brewpub, subject to § 155.506.45
Armory for meetings and training of military organizations
Auction house
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Commercial use in multifamily and office buildings, subject to §
155.506.31
Communications tower and antenna, subject to § 155.506.41
Copy, printing and photo processing
Drive-up service window, subject to § 155.506.33
Exterminator, pest control
Farmers' market, subject to § 155.506.43
Building material storage and wholesale and retail sales without
outside storage
Building material storage and wholesale and retail sales with outside
storage
Call center
Car wash
Coin operated laundry
Commercial school and school providing adult training in any of the
arts, sciences, trades, or professions, without retail sales of
merchandise
Crematorium, when located on same lot as a cemetery or funeral
home, subject to 155.506.13
Crematorium, stand alone, or on an adjacent parcel to a cemetery or
funeral home only when such parcel is commercially or industrially
zoned, subject to 155.506.13
Commercial or catering kitchen, without on-site customer/client
food service
Florist shop
Funeral home
Gas station with convenience store, subject to § 155.506.49
Gas pump without convenience store
Table 505.3- 4
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
P P
P P
PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC
P
P
PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P
P P P P
PC PC
P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
P P P
P P P P P
P P P P
Heliport
Installation of tires sold within an enclosed building of at least
145,000 sq. ft. with internal storage only, limited to 7,250 sq. ft.
Installation and servicing of accessory equipment (i.e. audio, security,
navigational, etc.) for vehicles sold within an enclosed building with
internal storage only
Internet sweepstakes, or adult gaming facility § 155.506.50
Kennel, animal day care, subject to § 155.506.42
Kennel, commercial, subject to § 155.506.42
Greenhouse, commercial, without retail sales
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Musuem or art gallery
Nursery, commercial with or without greenhouse
Mobile vendor, subject to § 155.506.43
Hotels, subject to § 155.506.32
Motor vehicle service facility limited to oil change, tire rotation and
replacement, and similar minor maintenance service, all activity
taking place within the building, not over 3 service bays and no
overnight vehicle storage
Motor vehicle, passenger, and motorcycle, new and used, sales and
rental
Motor vehicle, commercial or recreational, new and used, sales and
rental
Motorcycle safety training course, subject to § 155.506.18
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment not to exceed 4,500 sq ft
gross floor area
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment not to exceed 10,000 sq ft
gross floor area
Live work unit, subject to § 155.506.10
Manufactured home sales
Microbrewery, subject to § 155.506.45
Mini storage facility
Live work unit
Hotel, Extended Stay, subject to § 155.506.32
Motor vehicle repair garage including engine overhaul, body and
paint shop and similar operations
Table 505.3- 5
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC PC PC PC
P P P P P
P P
P P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC PC
P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P P
P P P P P P P
P P P P
P P P
PC PC PC
P P P P
P
ACC ACC ACC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC/PC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P P P P
Outdoor equipment and machinery, sales and repair
Outdoor sales in conjuction with a permanent business, subject to §
155.506.36
Parking lot and parking garage/structure
Post Office
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Pet cemetery, including any accessory structure
Restaurant with drive-thru or drive-in service
Retail sales, general merchandise, unless otherwise listed
Secondhand goods, retail sales without ouside storage, unless
otherwise listed
Secondhand goods, retail sales, unless otherwise listed
Selling from a semitruck without a cab, subject to § 155.506.36
Sign printing
Specialty sales establishment with substantial on-site assembly,
processing, packaging, and/or distribution, and processes sales for
off-site customers, subject to § 155.506.39
Professional, financial, personnal and recreational service not
otherwise listed
Pushcart vending, subject to § 155.506.43
Radio and television station
Repair and servicing of any article the sale of which is permitted in
the district, except as otherwise listed
Repair and servicing, indoors only, of any article the sale of which is
permitted in the district, except as otherwise listed
Restaurant, lounge and nightclub without drive-thru or drive-in
service
Social gathering, seminar, reception, which is ancilliary to the
principal permitted use and on property desginated historic by the
Town
Solar collector installation, subject to § 155.506.48
Studio for gymnast, artist, designer, photographer, musician,
sculptor, and similar
Table 505.3- 6
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC
PC PC
P P P P P
P P P
P P P P
P P P P P
PC PC
PC PC
P P P P
P P P P
PC PC
PC PC
P P P P P P
GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES
Utility trailer, not exceed a loading capacity of 500 cubic feet, sales
and rental
RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Amusement, commercial outdoors, including miniature golf, golf
course, golf driving range, ride, slide, waterpark, paintball course and
similar commercial enterprise requiring physical dexterity, except as
regulated elsewhere, subject to § 155.506.40
Archery or firearms range, indoor only, subject to § 155.506.47
Veterinary clinic or hospital, subject to § 155.506.42
Towing operation with vehicle storage only within an enclosed
structure
Towing operation with vehicle storage yard
Upholstering in a workroom setting not to exceed 1,500 sq. ft. of
gross floor area
Ice or roller rink
Indoor commercial recreation not otherwise listed
Park and playground operated on a noncommercial basis for the
purposes of public recreation, subject to § 155.506.8
Park, predominately passive use, subject to § 155.506.8
Park and playground, not otherwise listed
Arcade, game room
Athletic or sports fields, ballfields, in a concentration of three or
more, and similar indoor or outdoor physical recreation facility
intended for use by teams of participants
Bowling alley
Community recreation center, fitness/health center, gymnasium,
YMCA, and similar use with multiple physically involved activities,
primarily indoor, can take place concurrently
Country club, swimming club, community recreation center, and
tennis or racket club operated on a noncommercial membership
basis, subject to § 155.506.8
Golf course operated on a noncommercial basis, subject to §
155.506.8
Table 505.3- 7
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC
PC
P
PC PC
P P P P P
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P
P P P P P P
P
P P P P
P ACC P
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
P
P P P
Riding stable, commercial, subject to § 155.506.35
Skateboard facility, subject to § 155.506.40
Swimming pool, any size, accessory to multi-family residential use,
not within 100 feet of property line
RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Theater, housed within an enclosed structure
Theater, outdoor stage facility
INDUSTRIAL & MANUFACTURING USES
Bakery and baking plant including manufacturing, wholesale and
retail
Blacksmith shop
Bottling and canning works for nonalcoholic beverage including
distribution
Stadium, and other outdoor assembly facility where primary use
involves both spectator and performer
Swimming pool, single neighborhood, below Junior Olympic size, no
outside membership, subject to § 155.506.8
Swimming pool, as a stand alone facility, indoor or outdoor, or
outdoor as part of a recreational facility, public or private
Tennis and racket club and associated swimming facility, indoor
and/or outdoor, with golf practice facility, subject to § 155.506.15
Theater, drive-in
Tennis and racket club, commercial, indoor or outdoor
Tennis and racket sports courts, indoor or outdoor
Manufacturing, processing, assembling of components into
completed craft or custom made items in facilities not exceeding
3,000 sq. ft.
Bus and transit vehicle repair and storage
Contractor's facility with storage yard
Distilling or manufacturing of alcohol and alcoholic beverage, subject
to § 155.506.45
Laundry and dry cleaning establishment greater than 10,000 sq ft
gross floor area
Outside storage, except as otherwise listed
Mail order facility
Table 505.3- 8
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
P P P
P P
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P P P P P
ACC ACC ACC ACC
Sign manufacturing
Warehouse, distribution facility within enclosed building
Manufacturing, heavy, which may include the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials or substances into new items,
or the fabrication and/or the assembly of component parts, or other
industrial processing, bulk storage, and handling of products
primarily from extracted or raw materials, any aspect of which has
potential to produce noise, dust, glare, odors, vibration, smoke or
steam, fire hazard, or other noxious emission beyond the property
lines except as otherwise listed
Manufacturing, light, which may include the assembly or processing
of predominently previously prepared materials into finished
products or parts and the packaging of such materials, all contained
within an entirely enclosed building and no detectable noise, dust,
glare, odors, vibration, smoke or steam, fire hazard, or other noxious
emission shall exit the building except as otherwise listed
Metal product fabricating, processing, and manufacturing, and
machine shop without blast furnace or drop forge
Metal product fabricating, processing, and manufacturing, and
machine shop including the use of a blast furnace or drop forge
Truck Terminal
INDUSTRIAL & MANUFACTURING USES
Packing shed, fruit and vegetable
Quarry, subject to § 155.506.38
Recycled material, collection, processing and packaging within an
enclosed structure
Recycled material, collection, processing and packaging
Wholesale sales with or without retail sales
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Auction sale of real and personal property located on site for the
purpose of liquidating assets, subject to § 155.506.43.
Accessory use, clearly incidental to the principal permitted use or
structure on the lot
Donation Drop-Off Facility
Community Garden
Table 505.3- 9
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
R-VS CrC SRN C-MF MUD TS B-1SCD ENT AU
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
PC PC PC PC PC
PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
P P P P
ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC ACC
P P P
P P P P P
(Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord. 2083, passed 5-11-15; Am. Ord 2141, passed 4-11-16; Am. Ord 2188, passed 6-12-17; Am. Ord 2388, passed 5-13-19; Am. Ord
2461, passed 12-9-19)
On-site demolition disposal site, subject to § 155.506.37
On-site demolition disposal site, accepting off-site material, subject
to § 155.506.37
Vending machine, immediately adjacent to builidng, under overhang
only
Temporary use for business purpose, subject to § 155.506.43
Transit stop shelter, subject to § 155.506.34
Transit station (bus, rail, etc.)
Utility equipment stand, meter, box, and backflow preventer for
single or groups of parcels
Vending machine, located outside the required setback
Railroad right-of-way
Roadside stand, permanent
Short term temporary use or festival of civic or nonprofit nature,
subject to § 155.506.44
Temporary building and storage of materials in conjunction with
construction of a building on a lot where construction is taking place
or on adjacent lots, the temporary use to be terminated upon
completion of construction, issuance of Certificate of Occupancy, or
invalidation of building permit (see also § 155.506.43.C.4)
Temporary, self-contained storage unit, subject to § 155.506.20
Sidewalk sale, end of season sale, clearance sale, subject to §
155.506.43
Parking for uses permitted within the district
Propane storage or other fuel storage, accessory to a permitted
principal use or building, subject to the Fire Pevention Code of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters
Public utility transmission and distribution lines
Farm, either in conjunction with or separate from a dwelling, which
may conduct retail sales of products produced on the premises
Farm, urban, subject to § 155.506.19
Garage sale, yard sale, and similar, subject to § 155.506.43
MISCELLANEOUS USES
Electric and gas substation, sewage treatment plant and control
house, pump and lift station, water storage tank, well lot and similar
use, subject to § 155.506.11
Table 505.3- 10
P - Permitted by Right
PC - Allowed under prescribed conditions as further outlined in § 155.506
ACC - Allowed as an accessory use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 91
155.506. Prescribed Conditions for Certain Uses and Supplementary Regulations
In order to carry out the recommendations of the Matthews Land Use Plan and the purposes and provisions of this
Title, certain specified uses are allowed in some or all of the zoning districts described in § 155.501 of this Title only
upon meeting certain prescribed conditions or when receiving site plan, elevation plan or conditional zoning approval
by the Town. These uses shall be subject to all of the applicable conditions and restrictions provided here.
155.506.1 Home-Based Businesses
A. Home-based businesses are a necessary and desirable part of the development of a community, but if left
unchecked can have a deleterious effect on the value, use and enjoyment of adjoining property and the
neighborhood. It is necessary to establish performance standards to measure the appropriateness of the many
diverse home-based businesses in Matthews’ neighborhoods. It is the intent of this section to:
1. Ensure the compatibility of home-based businesses with other uses permitted in residential and other
zoning districts;
2. Maintain and preserve the essential character of residential neighborhoods;
3. Promote the efficient use of public services and facilities by assuring that services are provided to
the residential population for which they were planned and constructed, rather than provided to
commercial uses; and,
4. Prevent the generation of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood.
Home-based businesses shall be required to meet the standards listed here when located within the R-20, R-
15, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R-15MF, R-12MF, R-VS, CrC, SRN, MUD, TS, and ENT districts.
B. STANDARDS
In addition to all of the use limitations applicable in the district in which a home-based business is located,
no home-based business shall be established, altered or enlarged in any district unless such home-based
business complies with the following performance standards:
1. SCALE. The home-based business must be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling
and must not change the essential residential character of the dwelling.
2. FLOOR AREA LIMITATION. Use of the dwelling for this purpose must be limited to twenty five
percent (25%) of one floor of the principal dwelling or fifty percent (50%) of one floor of an
accessory building. Any separate building shall be accessory only to the individual dwelling unit
where the home-based business is located (not in a communal structure).
3. OUTDOOR STORAGE PROHIBITED. No outside storage may be used in connection with the homebased
business.
4. EQUIPMENT. Machinery that causes noises or other interference in radio, television, or digital
reception is prohibited. Additionally, no equipment or process shall be employed that will cause
noise, vibration, odor, glare, or electrical or communication interference detectable to the normal
senses off the lot, in the case of detached dwelling units, or outside the dwelling unit, in the case of
attached dwelling units. Household equipment and furniture, such as computers, ovens, shelving,
and counters may be used in connection with a legally established home based business.
5. NO EXTERIOR EVIDENCE. Internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the
dwelling will not be permitted. There shall be no activity, structure, or other exterior evidence that
the dwelling unit is being used for any nonresidential purpose in order to conduct the home-based
business.
6. EMPLOYEES. Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home-based business.
7. DISPLAYS. No display of products may be visible from the street.
8. USE OF VEHICLES. Only passenger vehicles or one (1) mid-range commercial vehicle as defined in
§155.103.C. may be used in conjunction with a home-based business and must comply with §
155.607.1.C.14.f.
9. CLIENTS/CUSTOMERS ON-SITE LIMITED. Services provided for any home-based business must be
limited to no more than two (2) clients at one (1) time. In the event of a time overlap between
scheduled appointments, additional clients may be permitted on the premises. Direct sales of
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 92
products from the dwelling unit are prohibited, but a person may pick-up an order placed earlier.
10. WHOLESALING. No wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted unless sales are
conducted entirely by mail, telephone, and internet or by appointment.
11. DELIVERIES. The business does not involve the receipt, shipment, delivery (except by mail or
package delivery service) or storage of merchandise on or from the premises.
12. TRAFFIC AND PARKING IMPACT. The home-based business shall not have an adverse effect on the
neighborhood through the congestion of Town streets. The home-based business shall not require
more vehicle parking space than exists on the residential driveway on the property, or on assigned
parking spaces serving the dwelling unit.
C. PARTICULAR HOME-BASED BUSINESSES PROHIBITED
Prohibited home-based businesses include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Adult-oriented businesses
2. Antique shops
3. Appliance repair
4. Art galleries
5. Barber shops and beauty shops
6. Cabinetry making
7. Catering
8. Production of food and drink items identified by the NC Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Services as high risk products
9. Food vendors
10. Funeral homes
11. Kennels, day care or commercial, animal grooming, or veterinary clinics
12. Mechanical equipment repair
13. Medical or dental offices, clinics or hospitals
14. Motor vehicle body shops and repair shops
15. Motor vehicle sales
16. Restaurants
17. Tourist homes and lodging houses (but excluding bed and breakfast inns)
18. Trucking
19. Warehousing
20. Welding
('72 Code, § 3102) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 875, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 877, passed 5-9-94)
Ord No. 1532; passed 1-8-07) [formerly known as § 153.166]
155.506.2 Equestrian-Oriented Subdivisions.
A. Equestrian-oriented subdivisions are residential developments which are designed with particular emphasis
placed on equestrian activities and which provide those facilities as non-profit community stables, riding
rings, pastures and riding trails. In addition, private stables may be located on individual residential lots.
Equestrian-oriented subdivisions are permitted in the R-20 and R-15 districts.
B. STANDARDS
1. All buildings and structures related to the care of horses and to the operation of the riding facilities
must be located at least one hundred feet (100’) from any residential property line at the perimeter
of the development.
2. Sites for community riding stables and similar facilities will be subject to the normal lot and yard
requirements of the zoning district.
3. Private stables for less than four (4) horses on residential lots must be located in accordance with
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 93
the requirements for private stables at 155.506.12. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-11-17)
4. Generally, riding trails should be located in the interior of the development and should not extend
along adjoining residential property lines. Where a proposed trail is to be located along the exterior
property line of the project, the trail must be a minimum of thirty feet (30’) wide with adequate
fencing provided to confine all equestrian activities to the project.
5. All stables and riding areas must be maintained according to the standards and requirements of the
responsible County agency.
6. An equestrian-oriented subdivision may be established through the submission of the subdivision
plans. The Board of Commissioners will approve the plans in accordance with provisions of this
Title, and the additional standards listed below.
a. Lots that will have private stables must be designated, and the general area in which those
stables may be located must be indicated.
b. All proposed community riding facilities, including community stables, riding rings,
pastures, and riding trails must be indicated on the plans. A written statement describing
the proposed means of ownership and proposed program for maintenance of these facilities
and a copy of the proposed maintenance program must be included. A copy of the proposed
maintenance program will be kept on file at the Mecklenburg County Land Use And
Environmental Service Agency office. [formerly known as § 153.094]
155.506.3 Residential Care Facilities Within A Single-Family Environment.
A. Group homes, family care homes, adult care homes, stand-alone assisted living facilities, and sheltered
households within a single-family detached dwelling unit are types of residential living environments
specifically focused on providing care and support to persons with temporary or permanent physical, mental,
or emotional limitations. When offered in a home setting at the scale of a single household, intermingled
among other single-family dwellings, these uses may be allowed in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-15MF, R-
12MF, R-VS, CrC, SRN, and MUD districts. Care facilities may also be located in several other districts as
a use by right, or within other buildings and in association with other permitted uses, when meeting all
applicable licensing standards.
B. STANDARDS
1. Each residential care facility shall be conducted within a single-family detached dwelling. All
residents and any staff who provide around-the-clock care shall have adequate sleeping, food
preparation, eating, and toilet facilities within the principal dwelling unit.
2. In order to limit potential negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, such as substantial
additional traffic or parking, each facility shall have a minimum separation of eight hundred feet
(800’) in a straight line distance between nearest points of separate care home properties. All
facilities must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local licensing requirements and health
regulations.
3. Office space within the facility for staff not providing care or services to the residents of the facility,
such as administrative or financial aspects of the management company, shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
4. Group homes and family care homes shall not exceed six (6) residents needing care, plus an
attending care-giver. Additional on-site staff may be at the facility to provide services directly
related to the residents.
5. Assisted living, adult care facilities, and sheltered households shall not exceed six (6) bedrooms for
use by residents, with a maximum of two persons per bedroom (i.e., one individual person, one
couple, a mother and child), and may also provide one (1) bedroom for a resident care-giver
individual or couple.
155.506.4 Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
A. Bed and breakfast establishments provide for overnight and short-term lodging with one or more meals solely
for the occupants of the leased sleeping quarters, as allowed by state statute. These establishments fall into
two (2) categories based on their size and zoning category. Bed and Breakfast Guest Homes, with up to six
(6) rooms dedicated to guests for overnight lodging within a single-family detached dwelling, are permitted
in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-VS, and CrC Districts. Bed and Breakfast Inns are allowed in the R-15MF,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 94
R-12MF, O, HUC, and B-1 Districts.
B. STANDARDS.
1. BED AND BREAKFAST GUEST HOMES. Bed and breakfast guest homes in the allowed residential
districts must meet all lot size, setback, yard, height and open space requirements of the district in
which they are located. The principal use of the structure is the single-family dwelling, and the bed
and breakfast guest home is a secondary function within the principal house structure. For this
reason, the facility must be owner-occupied and managed, with no employees other than resident
family members permitted. Breakfast or other meals may be provided but only to overnight guests.
No group functions, such as wedding receptions or banquets shall be allowed. New additions to the
structure in order to accommodate more guest rooms are not permitted. No substantial modifications
to the exterior of the structure shall be allowed, except for repair and maintenance. Exterior
alterations required by North Carolina Building Code, such as fire escapes, handicap ramps,
doorways, etc., shall be in keeping with the exterior architectural character of the structure and the
residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. No separate exterior doorways for individual
guest rooms shall be permitted unless the separate doorway was part of the original architecture of
the house.
2. BED AND BREAKFAST INNS. Bed and breakfast inns in any permitted district shall be the permanent
residence of the manager of the establishment, and no more than one non-resident employee is
permitted in association with the inn. Breakfast or other meals may be provided but only to
overnight guests. Exterior alterations required by North Carolina Building Code, such as fire
escapes, handicap ramps, doorways, etc., shall be in keeping with the exterior architectural character
of the structure. Guest rooms may be located within the principal house structure or in accessory
structures already existing on the property. Additions to increase the number of available guest
rooms may only be made to the principal house structure.
a. SOCIAL EVENTS. In Bed and Breakfast Inns, any social event such as a wedding, reception,
luncheon, or similar function, and which is not a function for the personal use of the
resident manager, may be allowed if sufficient off-street or satellite parking is provided
and documented in the required parking plan. Off-site parking, as described in § 155.607
may be used. The number of functions shall not exceed twenty-four (24) events a year nor
more than four (4) events in a month.
b. ACCESSORY COMMERCIAL USES. In Bed and Breakfast Inns in the HUC or B-1 Districts
only, related commercial uses such as a tea room or antique or gift shop may be located on
the same lot. The area available for such a related commercial use shall be limited to ten
percent (10%) of the floor area of the principal structure, but does not need to be within the
principal structure. These related commercial uses may be open to the general public when
additional parking spaces are provided for this use, as required in § 155.607.
3. GUEST ROOMS. Individual guest rooms in any Bed and Breakfast establishment shall not be
equipped with cooking facilities.
4. The manager of any Bed and Breakfast establishment shall keep a current guest register including
names, permanent addresses, dates of occupancy, and motor vehicle license number of all guests.
5. PARKING PLAN REQUIRED. A parking plan must be provided for any Bed and Breakfast
establishment showing minimum parking spaces for the permanent dwelling(s), plus one (1)
additional parking space per guest room. The required parking spaces shall not be between the
established front setback (front of the house) and the street, or within five feet (5’) on an interior
side or rear yard lot line or ten feet (10’) of a street side lot line on a corner lot. Fence, wall or
landscape screening as described in § 155.606.5 shall be provided when the adjacent property is
residential zoned or used. Parking for guests shall be accessed by the same driveway as that serving
the permanent residence. [formerly known as § 153.169]
155.506.5 Room Renting and Boarding.
A. Room renting is permitted in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-15MF, R-12MF, R-VS, CrC, and O districts, as
provided below.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Room renting is permitted in all above-identified districts only within a one (1) family detached,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 95
one (1) family attached, or a two-family/duplex dwelling. No more than four (4) roomers per
dwelling unit shall be allowed.
2. Room renting is permitted in multi-family dwelling units in districts which allow multi-family units.
No more than two (2) roomers per dwelling unit shall be allowed.
3. Room renting shall not be allowed within an accessory apartment. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
4. The maximum number of roomers may be required to be reduced so that the entire housekeeping
unit does not exceed the permitted number of unrelated individuals.
5. A common use kitchen with shared cooking facilities for all occupants of the dwelling will be
permitted. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
6. One (1) additional parking space shall be provided on the same lot for each two (2) rooms available
to roomers.
7. The required additional parking spaces shall not be between the established front setback (front of
dwelling) and the street, or within five feet (5’) on an interior side or rear lot line, or within ten feet
(10’) of a streetside side yard on a corner lot. [formerly § 153.177]
155.506.6 Child Care Homes and Child Day Care Facilities.
A. Child day care homes with up to eight (8) children and located within the provider’s home may be established
in the R-20, R-15, R-12, and R-9 districts. Child day care homes and child day care facilities, whether part
of or separate from a dwelling, and where the capacity of children served is based on size of the facility, may
be established in the R-15MF, R-12MF, R/I, O, HUC, B-1, SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT districts. Child
day care facilities with separate standards may be allowed in the CrC district.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Child day care homes and facilities are required to be registered and licensed with the state in
accordance with G.S. § 110-101.
2. An off-street drop-off/pick-up-area shall be provided. For child day care homes, a residential
driveway is acceptable for this purpose.
3. For child care homes in detached single-family dwellings, no structural or decorative alteration that
will affect the single-family character of the existing residential structure or be incompatible with
surrounding residences is permitted.
4. For child day care homes, at least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play space per child
must be provided. For child day care facilities licensed for six (6) to forty five (45) children, there
shall be a minimum of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet of outdoor play area. For
child day care facilities licensed for forty six (46) or more children, there shall be a minimum of one
hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area for at least one-half (1/2) of the total number of
children for which the center is licensed. Maximum number of children allowed on the outdoor
play area at any one time shall be one (1) per one hundred (100) square feet of actual outdoor play
area.
5. Outdoor space must be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and may not include driveways,
parking areas or land otherwise unsuited for children's play space and may not be in the required
setback.
6. Yard and height requirements will be the same as those required for structures in the district in which
it is located. In districts or locations without minimum yard requirements, or where the child care
facility is part of a multiple use or multiple building setting, then a minimum land area dedicated to
the child day care facility shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
7. Separate provisions for child day care facilities in the CrC District are outlined at § 155.503.2.C.8.
[formerly known as § 153.181]
155.506.7 Institutional Uses In Residential Settings.
A. Some nonresidential uses are of a character and geographical need that they can be located within a residential
neighborhood without causing significant disturbance to the quality of life. These types of institutional or
governmental/public services may include: arboretum; fire and/or EMS stations and police stations; churches
and places of worship under four hundred (400) seating capacity; and K-12 schools under one hundred (100)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 96
students. These uses may be allowed in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R-VS, and CrC districts when
meeting the following provisions. A cultural community center may be allowed in the R-20, R-15, R-12, and
R-9 districts when meeting the standards listed below. In the R/I district, churches and places of worship may
be allowed at various sizes when certain dimensional criteria are met, as described here. (Am. Ord. 2141,
passed 4-11-16)
B. STANDARDS.
1. Arboretum may be publicly or privately maintained to either display certain landscape species or to
protect certain living species or biological environments, and shall be a minimum of (1) acre in size.
When general public access is intended, an arboretum shall have one (1) or more defined pedestrian
entrances from a public street. Where public access is not desired, all road frontage shall include a
planted hedge row or decorative fence. A decorative fence, if used, shall be wood or wood-look
picket, wrought iron or simulated iron, brick wall, or similar feature that is no higher than four feet
(4’) and not chain link.
2. Fire and/or EMS stations and police stations, due to their shift work schedule, the number of
employees and citizens who may visit the site, larger vehicle size and or volume of traffic throughout
a twenty four (24) hour day, use of sirens for emergency response, and speed of exiting vehicles,
are generally not compatible with tranquility of a residential neighborhood environment.
a. They shall only be allowed in the listed residential districts when they front directly on a
Class IV or higher street and have their main entrance and exit on that thoroughfare street.
b. There shall be twenty feet (20’) of landscape screening between any parking area and any
non-streetside property when it is residentially zoned or used.
c. Exterior lighting shall comply with the provisions in § 155.609.
d. Any scheduled activities that are open to the public or employee/volunteer training
exercises shall be held between the hours of 8:00 AM and 9:00 PM. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed
6-12-17)
3. Churches and places of worship may be divided into categories based on seating capacity or daily
activity, when located within the listed residential districts.
a. Up to fifty (50) seating capacity and/or up to three thousand (3,000) square feet gross floor
area:
i. Minimum land area shall be one (1) acre and minimum lot width shall be eighty
feet (80’). The minimum front setback for any building shall be the same as for
the underlying zoning district, and all side and rear yards shall be a minimum of
fifty feet (50’) for any building. Maximum height shall be the same as the
underlying zoning district.
ii. No parking or outdoor accessory uses shall be allowed within the required front
setback, or within twenty feet (20’) of any non-streetside property line. All
parking areas and outdoor accessory uses shall be screened from exterior side and
rear property lines with twenty feet (20’) of landscape screening. No fence shall
be placed within the first twenty feet (20’) of land area along exterior property
lines.
iii. Exterior lighting shall comply with the provisions in § 155.609. Lighting of
outdoor accessory uses, such as ballfields, shall not be lighted between 10:00 PM
and 8:00 AM.
iv. Any scheduled activities that include use of land outside the building shall not
take place earlier than 8:00 AM or later than 10:00 PM.
b. Under four hundred (400) seating capacity and/or less than forty (40) daily attendees, but
not meeting qualifications of subsection above:
i. Minimum land area shall be two (2) acres and minimum lot width shall be two
hundred feet (200’). The minimum front setback for any building shall be the
same as for the underlying zoning district, and all side and rear yards shall be a
minimum of fifty feet (50’) for any building. Maximum height shall be the same
as the underlying zoning district; however, the principal building’s height may be
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 97
increased up to sixty feet (60’) provided the side and rear yards are increased one
foot (1’) for each foot or fraction of a foot in added height.
ii. No parking shall be allowed within fifty feet (50’) of the front property line, or
within twenty feet (20’) of any non-streetside property line.
iii. All non-streetside property lines shall have twenty feet (20’) of landscape
screening. No fence shall be placed within the first twenty feet (20’) of land area
along exterior property lines.
iv. Exterior lighting shall comply with the provisions in § 155.609. Lighting of
outdoor accessory uses, such as ballfields, shall not be lighted between 10:00 PM
and 8:00 AM.
v. Any scheduled activities that include use of land outside the building shall not
take place earlier than 8:00 AM or later than 10:00 PM.
vi. Any facility with an assembly room of over two hundred (200) seating capacity,
or any facility which operates every weekday throughout the year and has forty
(40) or more persons (child or adult) regularly in attendance, shall be located on
a Class IV or higher street and shall have its main entrance and exit on that
thoroughfare street.
vii. Typical accessory uses to places of worship are permitted. These may include,
but are not limited to day care centers, day nurseries, pre-schools, family life
centers, church offices excluding district or regional administrative offices,
gymnasium, book or video library, ballfields, and basketball courts. Accessory
uses within an enclosed structure may be within the principal building or in an
accessory structure. Outdoor accessory uses shall not be located within the
required setback or the outer twenty feet (20’) of a required side or rear yard.
viii. The CrC district has separate criteria for places of worship in this size category at
§ 155.503.2.
4. Churches and places of worship in the R/I district are allowed at different capacities when adhering
to these dimensional standards:
a. Facilities without any common assembly areas, or facilities which would include one or
more assembly rooms, any one of which will seat or accommodate less than one thousand
(1,000) persons shall have a lot area a minimum of two (2) acres and a lot width a minimum
of two hundred feet (200’).
b. Facilities which would include one (1) or more assembly rooms, any of which will seat or
accommodate more than one thousand (1,000) persons shall have a lot area a minimum of
ten (10) acres and a lot width a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250’).
5. Elementary, middle, and senior high schools, with a capacity of less than one hundred (100)
students:
a. Minimum lot area shall be two and one-half (2 ½) acres. The minimum front setback for
any building shall be the same as for the underlying zoning district, and all side and rear
yards shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50’) for any building. Minimum lot width shall be
two hundred feet (200’). Maximum height shall be the same as the underlying district.
b. No parking shall be allowed within fifty feet (50’) of the front property line, or within
twenty feet (20’) of any non-streetside property line.
c. All non-streetside property lines shall have twenty feet (20’) of landscape screening. No
fence shall be placed within the first twenty feet (20’) of land area along exterior property
lines.
d. Exterior lighting shall comply with the provisions in § 155.609. Lighting of outdoor
accessory uses, such as ballfields, shall not be lighted between 10:00 PM and 8:00 AM.
e. Any scheduled activities that include use of land outside the building shall not take place
earlier than 8:00 AM or later than 10:00 PM.
f. A home school, regulated at NCGS 115C, Article 39, as a nonpublic school where the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 98
parents or legal guardians determine the scope of academic instruction for children residing
within the residence, is exempt from any of the criteria listed in this subsection §
155.506.7.B.5.
6. A cultural community center may be operated by a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization
when offering educational opportunities on specific cultural topics and viewing of cultural artifacts
on a predetermined schedule.
a. When adjacent to single-family uses, a cultural community center shall provide landscape
screening on non-streetside lot boundaries.
b. Any on-site parking and vehicle maneuvering areas shall not be placed within twenty feet
(20’) of an exterior property line or within the required front setback.
c. Exterior lighting shall comply with §155.609.
d. Any activities that are open to the public shall take place between the hours of 8:00 AM
and 10:00 PM.
(Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
155.506.8 Recreational Uses In or Adjacent to Residential Settings.
A. Some recreational facilities near residential settings improve the quality of life for the neighborhood, but may
cause unintended impacts if specific elements of use are not regulated. Parks and playgrounds operated on a
noncommercial basis for purposes of public recreation are often located within or near the residents they are
intended to serve. Golf courses, country clubs, swimming clubs, community recreation centers, and tennis
or racket clubs may also be located in or beside residential neighborhoods. Swimming pools may be placed
within a neighborhood or housing development, for use and enjoyment by residents. Predominately passive
parks have the least potential for negative effects. These uses may be allowed in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9,
R-MH, R-VS, CrC and R/I districts when meeting the following provisions.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Parks and playgrounds operated on a noncommercial basis for the purposes of public recreation may
include a pocket park or playground at least one tenth (0.1) acre in size to neighborhood and
community parks without permanent spectator seating facilities.
a. When a park or playground has any area improved as one or more sports ballfield (i.e.,
softball, rugby), court (i.e., basketball, tennis), rink (i.e., skating, skateboarding), water
feature (i.e., swimming pool, fountain, splash pad), or track (i.e., running, bicycle, cart)
then there shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) of landscape buffer screen
between the closest point of that improvement and any exterior property line.
b. Any lighting included within any park or playground shall conform to the standards of §
155.609, and shall not be illuminated before 8:00 AM or after 10:00 PM.
c. When any team sports activities are held at a park, no amplified sound system is allowed.
d. On-street parking may be used where existing near a park or playground. Where off-street
parking is provided, it shall not be located within fifty feet (50’) of any property line and
there shall be twenty feet (20’) of landscape screening between the parking area and any
non-streetside property line when it is residentially zoned or used.
2. Golf courses, country clubs, swimming clubs, community recreation centers and tennis or racket
clubs operated on a noncommercial membership basis are generally larger, more intensively utilized
recreational facilities needing additional buffering.
a. Any buildings must meet the setback and yard requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
b. Structures associated with open air uses or swimming pools, any area improved as one (1)
or more sports ballfield (i.e., softball, rugby), court (i.e., basketball, tennis), rink (i.e.,
skating, skateboarding), water feature (i.e., swimming pool, fountain, splash pad), track
(i.e., running, bicycle, cart), or golf course shall have a minimum of one hundred feet (100’)
of landscape buffer screen between the closest point of that improvement and any exterior
property line.
c. Any lighting included within any listed recreational facility shall conform to the standards
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 99
of § 155.609, and shall not be illuminated before 8:00 AM or after 10:00 PM.
d. No amplified sound system is allowed outside any building.
e. Off-street parking shall be provided to meet the standards given in § 155.607. Parking shall
not be located within fifty feet (50’) of any property line and there shall be twenty feet
(20’) of landscape screening between the parking area and any non-streetside property line
when it is residentially zoned or used. [formerly known as § 153.186]
3. Swimming pools may be located within a single neighborhood or housing complex as a private
amenity and for exclusive use by the residents. Such pools shall be less than Junior Olympic size
and shall not sell outside memberships. Pools, adjacent decks, and any structures associated with
the swimming pool shall have a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) of landscape buffer screen
between the closest point of that improvement and any exterior property line.
4. Predominately passive parks are publicly owned parcels of any size which are left in a natural state,
and may have minimal improvements such as but not limited to greenway or nature trails, scattered
fitness stations, fishing or observation piers, identification signs of flora and fauna, and benches.
No additional screening is required along outer perimeters unless there is no existing natural or
planted landscaping between any man-made improvements and adjacent property, and then ten feet
(10’) of evergreen shrubs and trees shall be planted along the open boundary.
155.506.9 Accessory Apartments and Single-Family Dwellings with Multiple Kitchens.
A. An accessory apartment is a second and subordinate dwelling on the same parcel of land as a single-family
dwelling. It may be located within the same building as the principal dwelling or may be in a separate
building. A single-family dwelling generally has one (1) full appliance kitchen. Accessory apartments and
homes with multiple kitchens may be allowed in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-VS, and CrC districts. (Am.
Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
B. STANDARDS.
1. The maximum floor area of an accessory apartment shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross
floor area of the principal dwelling unit on the lot. Under no circumstances may the accessory
apartment be greater than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
2. A single-family dwelling may have more than one (1) full kitchen within the principal residential
structure and/or an accessory building when full interior access exists between all living areas, such
that no division of space would create a physically separate dwelling unit (duplex or accessory
apartment), and the building(s) is/are clearly designed for use by a single household. [formerly
153.054(C )(20 and 21)]
155.506.10 Live Work Units.
A. Live work units are intended to be located within a transitioning neighborhood where a mix of residential
and light nonresidential uses are desired, and in areas where mixed use is proposed. These uses when located
within the O, R-VS, or SRN districts shall meet the following provisions.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The work area use shall be located on the first (ground) floor only and shall occupy less than fifty
percent (50%) of the total area of the live work unit.
2. Up to two (2) nonresident employees may be allowed in the work portion of the live/work unit when
additional parking spaces are provided as required at § 155.607.
3. Live work units shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet in gross floor area. The
residential and nonresidential portions may be side-by-side or stacked, and are not required to have
a solid wall separation between them. Live work units shall be designed and constructed to meet
all applicable building codes. [formerly known as § 153.194]
155.506.11 Electric and Gas Substations, Sewer treatment Plants, Water Storage Tanks, Well
Lots, and other similar Utility Structures.
A. Electric and gas substations, sewer treatment plants and similar utility structures other than wireless or digital
communications equipment may be required to be located within and near neighborhoods. The design of
buildings, structures, and facilities on the site shall conform as closely as possible to the character of the area
or neighborhood, so these facilities or structures will not adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 100
or value of nearby properties. To limit potential negative impacts, the standards listed here shall be applied
to these uses within any zoning district.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Lots which will be used for utility structures or improvements but which have the potential in the
future to be converted to another use shall conform to the minimum area for the district in which
they are located. Any parcel created for a utility use and later has that use abandoned and removed
shall not be eligible as a buildable lot unless it can meet dimensional standards of the zoning district
in which it is located.
2. Unclimbable fences or comparable safety devices shall be installed and maintained in order to make
the facility inaccessible to the public. Any fence or enclosure of equipment, facilities, stockpile,
parking or other improvement, other than a building, shall be screened with landscape plant material
on the side facing exterior property boundaries according to the provisions of § 155.606.
3. Sewage treatment plants, control houses, pump and lift stations, water storage tanks, well lots with
community wells, and similar uses must be designed, constructed, and operated to have the least
negative impacts on the health, safety, and general welfare of the surrounding community.
[formerly known as § 153.183]
155.506.12 Private Stables.
A. Structures, pasture areas, corrals, and other enclosed areas for the keeping of horses on single-family sites
may be permitted in and near residential areas when provisions are followed to limit any inappropriate health
or safety impacts to surrounding properties. Private stables may be allowed in the R-20, R-15, R-12, and R-
9 districts as an accessory use to a residence when the following standards are in place. Separate provisions
for Equestrian-Oriented Subdivisions control stables within them, and are at § 155.506.2.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre.
2. Maximum number of horses is one (1) horse per acre.
3. All buildings and structures for the keeping and maintenance of animals, equipment, or manure, and
all manure piles, pits, or bins shall be located at least one hundred feet (100’) from any lot line.
4. There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment related to training or maintenance of horses.
5. No such use shall be operated for commercial purposes.
6. All stables and riding areas must be maintained according to the requirements and standards of the
County Health Department. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14) [formerly known as § 153.187]
155.506.13 Cemeteries, Mausoleums, Columbarium, and Crematorium.
A. Private or public cemeteries, as a stand-alone use or in association with a place of worship, may be permitted
in or near residential neighborhoods, in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R/I, CrC, O, R-VS, SRN, and C-MF
districts, when meeting the following criteria.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Tombstones, monuments, and open wall columbarium must be located at least twenty five feet (25’)
from any side or rear lot line which adjoins lots in a residential area and at least ten feet (10’) from
any side or rear lot line which adjoins all other properties. In any case, they must be at least forty
feet (40’) from any street right-of-way.
2. Buildings for the maintenance, management, rent, or sale of cemetery lots, burial or remembrance
sites, mausoleums, crypts, and columbarium within enclosed structures must be located at least one
hundred feet (100’) from any lot lines which adjoin lots in a residential area. Otherwise any such
buildings must conform to the requirements for principal uses in the district where they are located.
[formerly known as § 153.189]
C. CREMATORIUM.
1. Crematorium are allowed per NCGS 90-210.123 (a) and (b) on the same lot as a funeral home or
cemetery, or on a parcel adjacent to a cemetery or funeral home use.
2. When on the same lot as a cemetery in any of the districts listed above at 155.506.13.A.., the
crematorium shall be a minimum of four hundred feet (400’) from any adjacent residential dwelling
unit.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 101
3. When a cemetery is on property zoned one of the districts listed in 155.402.13.A. above, a
crematorium may be located on an adjacent parcel zoned as a commercial or industrial district of B-
1, B-3, B-D, B-H, I-1, I-2, or B-1SCD.
4. Crematorium may be allowed in association with a cemetery or funeral home or as a stand-alone
use in other districts as listed in the Tables of Allowed Uses at 155.505. (Am. Ord. 2188, passed 11-
14-16)
155.506.14 Limited Food and Beverage Sales in Neighborhood Common Facilities.
A. Recreational and similar club facilities for enjoyment and use by residents and their guests may be allowed
as accessory uses within single-family subdivisions, multi-family developments, mixed style residential
developments, and the residential portions of mixed use projects. These facilities may include assembly and
social areas, fitness facilities, and a minimal kitchen preparation area. In addition, these facilities may include
the retail sale of food and beverages as allowed here in any zoning district where such residential uses are
permitted.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The sale of food and beverages may be only to residents and registered guests and may not be open
to the general public.
2. An up-to-date register of all resident members must be maintained on the premises and must include
the name of the guest, the name and address of the sponsoring member, and the date of entry.
3. Each individual member may sponsor no more than four (4) guests at any one time and must
accompany guests to the club facility.
4. The sale of any food or beverage within the club facility must conform to all applicable laws of the
state pertaining to the licensing and dispensing of food and beverages. [formerly known as §
153.176]
155.506.15 Commercial Indoor and /or Outdoor Tennis and Racket Clubs and Associated
Swimming Pools.
A. Indoor and/or outdoor tennis and racket clubs and associated swimming clubs and swimming facilities,
operated on a commercial basis may be allowed in the R/I district.
B. STANDARDS.
1. These facilities shall not have permanent spectator viewing facilities.
2. They shall have no more than ten (10) courts total.
3. The pool(s) shall not exceed three thousand nine hundred thirty six (3,936) square feet in water
surface.
4. Membership is restricted to no more than three hundred (300) for tennis and no more than three
hundred (300) for swimming.
5. Pool operation shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 AM to 8:00 PM.
6. No pool shall be within one hundred feet (100’) of any adjoining property line, measured from the
pool edge or decking exterior adjacent to the pool, whichever would produce the greater distance.
7. No pool shall be within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of any residentially zoned or used property
line, measured from the pool edge or decking exterior adjacent to the pool, whichever would produce
the greater distance.
8. A landscaped or constructed border that is one hundred percent (100%) opaque to a height of six
feet (6’) shall be installed between the pool and adjacent residential property.
C. STANDARDS FOR ALLOWED ACCESSORY USES.
1. A tennis pro shop may be an accessory use when:
a. It does not exceed in size a total of five hundred (500) square feet in heated space.
b. It is a part of a single structure, and up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) heated square
feet is available for use by club members for recreational and social purposes, and not for
the general public.
c. Within this maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet all locker and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 102
shower rooms, exercise rooms, social areas and rest rooms shall be the only permitted uses.
d. The maximum total heated area of the accessory structure shall not exceed two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
2. Golf practice facilities, including driving ranges, practice greens and sand traps may be accessory
uses. The golf practice area may have its own enclosed building with commercial uses, such as
cafeteria, snack bar, and sundries shop, when such uses do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
building’s gross floor area. [formerly § 153.056(B)(15, 19) and (C)(5,7)]
155.506.16 Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRC).
A. A Continuing Care Retirement Community is a planned residential development for senior citizens seeking
a secure living environment among their peers, where they are not dependent on themselves for daily
necessities. These developments may be located within the R/I district subject to the criteria listed here.
B. STANDARDS
1. A continuing care retirement community may include up to twenty (20) independent living units per
gross acre and up to five (5) assisted living units per gross acre along with skilled nursing facilities,
community buildings and ancillary services.
2. The lot upon which a CCRC is located must have frontage upon a Class IV or higher street and the
main entrance must be from this thoroughfare.
3. All building forming a part of a CCRC site shall be compatible in appearance and quality through
the use of similar building materials, colors, architectural features and styles.
4. Signage shall comply with the provisions of § 155.608 and landscaping shall comply with the
requirements of § 155.606.
5. The total floor area devoted to accessory uses shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total
floor area on the site. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in any structure so
long as such uses are ancillary to the CCRC’s use (i.e. meaning they may be used by the residents,
employees, business invitees, and guests of the facility but shall not be open to or marketed for use
by those outside the community):
a. Medical and dental offices and medical and dental laboratories.
b. Health and allied services.
c. Healthcare facilities, medical offices and ancillary services.
d. Photographic studios, including commercial photography.
e. Health club, fitness center, physical therapy and spas.
f. Banks.
g. Retirement community management and maintenance facilities and marketing centers.
h. Eating and drinking places, pubs and taverns, retail bakeries, cafeteria services, candy, nut
and confectionary stores and miscellaneous food stores.
i. Educational services, libraries, book and stationary stores, news dealers and newsstands.
j. Men’s and women’s clothing and/or accessory stores, shoe stores, miscellaneous apparel
and accessory stores.
k. Miscellaneous general merchandise stores, pharmacies, florists, gift, novelty, and souvenir
shops, and camera and photographic supply stores.
l. Pressing, alterations, garment repair and custom tailors.
m. Barbershops and beauty shops.
n. Indoor and outdoor swimming pools, putting greens, parks and open space, bowling,
billiards and pool.
o. Places of worship.
p. Motion picture theaters, dance halls and studios, dance schools, theaters and auditoriums.
q. Radio and television production and broadcasting facilities.
r. Woodshops and arts and crafts studios.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 103
6. Streets located within the interior of a CCRC may be either public or private. In the event the
community is accessed by private streets, such access may be limited by means of a gate or other
device subject to the Town ordinance on gated accessways. In addition, all private streets shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for private streets adopted by the Town
of Matthews.
7. The minimum lot area for a CCRC shall be five (5) acres. The minimum front setback, side yard
and rear yard shall be fifty feet (50’). The maximum building height within a CCRC shall be sixty
feet (60’).
8. A temporary marketing/sales center may be located in a modular or manufactured structure, or site
built, so long as all applicable building codes are followed, and the structure is removed from the
site no later than one (1) month after the date on which the first Certificate of Occupancy for any
building constructed on the site is issued. Alternately, permanent marketing/sales centers may be
allowed as long as they meet the parking requirements of the UDO and are architecturally consistent
with other components of the CCRC. [formerly 153.195; 153.056(B)(23)] (Ord. 2038, passed 9-8-
14)
155.506.17 Skilled Care (Nursing Home) Facility.
A. A skilled care facility may range in size from a single household in a detached house to a large congregate
care facility with multiple wings or floors devoted to different patient needs, and may be conducted in
association with assisted living or independent senior living housing. When provided as an individual use or
with assisted living beds, a skilled care facility may be located within the R/I, O, B-1, B-3, B-H, CrC, SRN,
C-MF, MUD, and TS districts and shall adhere to the qualifications listed below.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The minimum lot size for a skilled care facility in the R/I district is two (2) acres, unless the facility
has one (1) or more assembly rooms which can accommodate more than one thousand (1,000)
persons, which would require a minimum land area of ten (10) acres..
2. The minimum lot area for a skilled care facility in the O, B-1, B-3, or B-H districts is nine thousand
(9,000) square feet for the first five (5) residents plus two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
for each additional five (5) residents or fraction of five (5).
3. Specific standards are given for skilled care facilities in the CrC district at § 155.503.2.C.8.c.
4. Skilled care facilities in the SRN, C-MF, MUD, and TS districts serving up to thirty (30) individuals
shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of secured outdoor recreation space for
each resident. Facilities within these districts with a capacity of over thirty (30) residents shall have
a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of secured outdoor recreation space for each resident.
[formerly known as § 153.182]
155.506.18 Motorcycle Safety Training Course.
A. A Motorcycle safety training course may be allowed in the R/I district under these criteria.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The motorcycle safety training course shall be operated under the supervision of the North Carolina
Motorcycle Safety Education Program in conjunction with a Post Secondary Educational Facility.
2. The overall dimensions shall be no greater than three hundred feet (300’) by two hundred feet (200’)
for the purposes of motorcycle safety awareness and certification. [formerly 153.056(B)(20)]
155.506.19 Urban Farms.
A. An urban farm providing space for the growing and harvesting of consumable food products by an individual
or other community members, and may be allowed in any zoning district except I-2 and AU when meeting
the qualifications listed below.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Accessory uses and structures may include, but are not limited to storage sheds for equipment,
workspace for preparing starts to be planted or sorting harvested items, greenhouse or hoop house
structures, enclosures for hydroponics or aquaponics and similar alternative forms of farming,
gazebos or picnic shelters, benches, and solar or wind power generation equipment for farm use
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 104
only that do not exceed thirty five feet (35’) in height.
2. In addition to cultivation of products in the ground or a soilless medium, the keeping of bees or fowl
may be an accessory use. Any animals on-site, whether temporary or permanent, shall be subject
to the Matthews Animal Control Ordinance.
3. Manure, fertilizer, or composting bins and piles shall be placed a minimum of thirty feet (30’) from
any exterior property line, and maintained to prevent excessive smells, and to not attract insects or
animals.
4. Fencing around the perimeter of growing areas is exempt from the fence height limits for the
underlying district, when the additional height is to deter deer or other wildlife.
5. No cultivation or disturbance of ground cover shall take place within any FEMA floodplain.
6. When off-street parking is provided, it shall not be within ten feet (10’) of any exterior property line.
7. When an urban farm is operated as a communal project, such as a community garden or
neighborhood effort, some community benefit shall be identified as being met, such as a sensory
garden for children, or a portion of harvested products will go to a local food distribution provider
or food bank, or classes will be offered to the public on elements of organic farming. Anticipated
dates and times of public access/public programs shall be provided to adjacent property owners each
year.
8. An urban farm may be an accessory use on a parcel of land containing a separate principal use, or
may be the principal use on a property. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14)
155.506.20 Temporary Portable Storage Containers.
A. A portable storage container is a temporary, self-contained storage structure, not including trailers for office
or business use, which is designed and intended to be picked up and moved to various locations on demand.
This unit maybe allowed in any zoning district, except the B-D and AU districts, under the conditions outlined
here.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Prior to placement, the property and/or business owners providing the storage unit at a specific site
are required to register it with the Town Planning office, showing a scale drawing of its placement
in relation to driveways, any existing buildings, fences, or landscaping, street rights-of-way, and
any neighboring drives or street intersections within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of the proposed
placement location.
2. When used in conjunction with a single-family dwelling, a portable storage unit shall not be placed
within the required front setback for more than thirty (30) days.
3. When used in conjunction with any other use, a portable storage unit shall not be placed within the
required front setback.
4. Maximum time a temporary storage unit shall be placed on a parcel with any other use is ninety (90)
days.
5. The temporary registration shall indicate drop-off and removal dates. [formerly § 153.054.D.6]
155.506.21 Subdivision or Residential Development Sales Office
A. New housing developments may have a temporary sales office from which to meet with prospective
occupants in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R15MF, R-12MF, R-VS, CrC, SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, and
ENT districts.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The sales office may be located within a subdivision being offered for sale by the same
developer/builder as is responsible for the new housing. When located on a lot within a subdivision,
the sales office shall conform to the front setback, side and rear yard requirements of the underlying
district.
2. The sales office may be located on the sale parcel as, or on a parcel immediately adjacent to, a new
housing development site in housing development sites other than new subdivisions. A sales office
may be located within a freestanding building which is intended to be temporary, a unit within a
multi-family building, a community building within the development, or a model home.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 105
3. A sales office other than a model home shall be terminated at the completion of the sale of seventy
five percent (75%) of the total number of homes and/or lots within the development, and any
improvements related solely for the sale office shall be removed from the site.
4. When a model home is used as a sales office, it may continue to be used as a sales facility until the
last home is sold. [formerly 153.054(B)(6)]
155.506.22 Cottage Cluster Housing Development.
A. A Cottage Cluster Housing Development may be developed within the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-15MF, R-
12MF, R-VS, CrC, and SRN districts when meeting the following prescribed conditions and when the
property owner voluntarily seeks Parallel Traditional or Conditional-Only zoning with site plan approval by
the Board of Commissioners. The cottage cluster housing development concept is intended to fill a niche in
the Matthews residential market and for that reason this style is intended to fit within established singlefamily
zoning district classifications as an alternative use of land through infill or redevelopment. It is also
intended to allow flexible new design of neighborhoods in other residential districts. As small dwelling units,
the cottages are anticipated to appeal to one (1) and two (2) person adult households which reduce the
potential intensity of use within the general surrounding residential area. These developments are designed
to provide residents with privacy and personal space of a detached house, significantly reduced outdoor
maintenance responsibilities, and the opportunity for community interaction within a contained set of closely
spaced dwelling units. Each cottage cluster housing development must have its own architectural theme or
set of unifying design elements which shall govern individual house units and common buildings, accessory
structures and common spaces. Individual cottages may be located on separate platted lots, or on undivided,
commonly-owned land. Common land may be designed in one (1) or more parcels per overall development
site, and different locations may have different amenities. Owners and residents within the development
share the use and maintenance responsibilities of common land, including parking, driveways, storage areas,
mail and utility installations, and other improvements. Generally a minimum and maximum number of
houses per cluster will be assigned to each single-family zoning district, and a maximum total land area and
minimum spacing between development sites shall be designated so a cottage cluster housing development
complements but does not dominate the surrounding single-family neighborhoods.
B. STANDARDS.
1. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
a. Minimum/Maximum land area for a cottage cluster housing development:
R-20, R-15 1 acre/4 acres
R-12, R-9, R-VS, CrC, SRN ½ acre/6 acres
b. Minimum exterior boundary front setbacks, side and rear yards (for the overall cottage
cluster housing development)
District Front setback (1) Corner side yard (2) Interior side yard Rear yard
R-20 50 20 12 20
R-15 45 20 10 20
R-12 40 15 10 15
R-9 35 15 10 15
CrC 30 15 10 15
R-VS, SRN 25 15 10 15
(1) Front setback may be reduced up to ½ the distance given in the table for the district, to allow for the preservation
of an existing tree, when the site plan shows the tree canopy and tree root protection zone will not be disturbed
during or following development.
(2) Corner side yard on a public street.
c. Minimum/Maximum number of dwelling units:
Per individual cluster Overall development
½ to 1 Ac 1 to 2 Ac Over 2 Ac
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 106
R-20 4 to 8 NA 4 to 10 5 per acre
R-15 6 to 12 NA 10 to 12 6 per acre
R-12 6 to 14 6 10 to 12 7 per acre
R-9 6 to 14 6 10 to 16 7 per acre
CrC 6 to 14 6 10 to 16 7 per acre
R-VS, SRN 6 to 14 6 12 to 18 7 per acre
d. Maximum gross floor area, heated and enclosed, per dwelling unit:
R-20, R-15 1400 sq ft
R-12, R-9, R-VS, CrC, SRN 1200 sq ft
e. Maximum land coverage (footprint) per dwelling unit with more than one (1) habitable
level of heated enclosed space only:
R-20, R-15 900 sq ft
R-12, R-9, R-VS, CrC, SRN 750 sq ft
f. Minimum distance between separate cottage cluster housing developments:
R-20, R-15 1000’
R-12, R-9, R-VS, CrC, SRN 600’
Cottage cluster housing developments shall be separated from each other by the given
minimum distance to promote housing-type diversity, to reduce potential cumulative
impacts, and to help protect the existing neighborhood character. Where the intervening
land between two (2) sites for cottage cluster developments is a combination of R-20 or R-
15 and another eligible district, then the minimum spacing requirement shall be eight
hundred feet (800’).
g. Maximum height of dwelling units, common buildings, and accessory structures: twenty
eight feet (28’)
h. LOT SIZE FOR INDIVIDUAL COTTAGES. Because this community design concept focuses
intently on shared space, individual platted lots are generally not anticipated, and therefore
no minimum lot sizes are established. If individual lots are included in a proposal, they
should, at a minimum, include the footprint of the dwelling and the private use space for
front porch/patio and landscape area explained in § 155.506.22.B.2 below.
2. CRITERIA FOR EACH SEPARATE GROUP OR CLUSTER OF DWELLING UNITS:
a. Minimum separation between dwelling units ten feet (10’)
b. Private use space is required adjacent to each dwelling, which must include a covered front
porch/patio and may include a landscape area, low fencing or hedge, and similar features
which may be visible from other dwelling units in the cluster but clearly designed to be for
the use of the residents of that particular dwelling only. A covered porch shall be raised at
least 18 inches from the average finished grade at the front of the house. When a covered
at-grade patio is designed in place of a raised porch, then the patio shall be surrounded by
a decorative fence and gate accessed from the adjacent common space, or the patio and any
contiguous landscaped area shall be raised above the finished grade level of the adjacent
common space, Minimum and maximum areas shall be:
i. A covered porch or patio shall extend at least six feet (6’) from the front wall
(heated area) of the house, and shall include at least forty eight (48) sq ft.
ii. The minimum combined private use space, including a porch or patio, landscaped
ground, and walkway access from the adjacent common space shall be one
hundred forty (140) sq ft.
3. CRITERIA FOR COMMON SPACE WITHIN OR ADJACENT TO EACH GROUP OF DWELLING UNITS:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 107
a. A minimum of four hundred (400) sq ft of land area shall be designed as common space
per dwelling unit within each separate cluster of houses. This common space shall be
intended as a semi-private “yard” for the adjacent or surrounding houses, and will generally
include a walkway from the exterior of the overall site or from parking areas to front
entrances of the dwelling units.
b. Each common space may have amenities and improvements in keeping with any set of
design details for the overall development, such as but not limited to fencing, entrance
features to the common area, trees and decorative plants, benches, lighting fixtures, and
patterned pavements.
c. Each group of dwellings shall have at least one-half (½) of the units directly adjacent to
their associated common space, and all dwellings shall be visible directly from the common
space.
4. PARKING WITHIN A COTTAGE CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT:
a. Parking spaces for this style of housing development shall include resident and guest
spaces, and may be provided in garage or carport structures, as part of other common
buildings, or uncovered. The amount of required parking shall be based on gross floor area
of dwellings. Often the design of the overall development will provide parking spaces
separated from individual dwellings, which will be accessed by walkways through the
common space to front entrances of the individual dwellings.
b. Minimum/Maximum parking for dwelling units:
GFA less than 750 sq ft 1 min/1.5 max plus 1 min/2 max visitor space(s) per ea 2 du’s
GFA between 750 and 900 sq ft 1.5 min/2 max plus 1.5 min/2.5 max visitor space(s)
per ea 2 du’s
GFA greater than 900 sq ft 2 min/3 max plus 1.75 min/3 max visitor space(s) per ea 2
du’s
c. Designated parking spaces shall be in close proximity to individual dwellings, and may be
placed at the rear of individual units, or may be located elsewhere on the overall site.
Parking shall not be located within the required front setback of the overall site. Unenclosed
parking for more than 3 vehicles shall not be visible from any off-site public street, and
shall be screened from view by landscaping, structures, or similar methods.
d. At least two (2) bicycle parking spaces shall be provided within a cottage cluster housing
development.
5. DESIGN STANDARDS. The following design standards are intended to ensure that cottage cluster
housing developments create a clear and distinct identity for their immediate development while
fitting into an established residential neighborhood. Smaller footprints and proportions typical of
cottages ensure the houses do not overwhelm the site. They include pedestrian amenities and take
advantage of existing natural features on the site including topography and vegetation.
a. PUBLIC UTILITIES. All cottage cluster housing units shall be connected to public water and
sanitary sewer services, and shall incorporate storm water detention and water quality
techniques as required elsewhere in this code. Each development site may utilize master
or individual meters for water.
b. EXISTING STRUCTURES ON SITE. When a parcel of land to be developed as a cottage cluster
housing development includes an existing structure, it may remain and be incorporated into
the overall layout, when the extent of any nonconformity is not increased. Any existing
dwelling unit intended to remain as a single-family dwelling shall be included in the
maximum permitted density and shall be located within a group of dwellings. An existing
dwelling may be converted to a common building and be located adjacent to a cluster of
dwellings or separate from other structures. Any existing accessory building or structure,
such as a garage, storage shed, or swimming pool, may remain when located outside of any
required setbacks and yards and meets the overall development’s design theme.
c. ROOF LINES AND BUILDING HEIGHT. Because building separation is less than in a typical
single-family subdivision configuration, the design of the overall development must create
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 108
an adequate opportunity for each unit to receive sunlight and have a sense of privacy. The
pitch of roof lines, skylights, roof decks, and a variety of one (1), one and one-half (1 ½),
and two (2) story house plans within each group of dwellings are methods that may be used
to accomplish this. No more than three (3) houses may be located immediately adjacent to
each other with the same building height. Minimum roof pitch shall generally be no less
than 4:1, and flat or shed roofs shall generally be used only over covered porches or patios
or outside access storage closets.
d. EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS. Exterior walls of dwelling units and common buildings
shall utilize complementary materials. No more than three (3) materials (excluding
windows, doors, and trim) shall be used per individual building and they shall generally be
carried around all sides of the structure. Preferred materials include masonry, horizontal
wood siding, cementicious siding, blocks or panels, and stucco/simulated stucco. Roof
eaves are encouraged to create a sense of dimension and to provide shade from summer
sun. Gutters or other methods of diverting rain water to the ground away from door
entranceways shall be incorporated into the dwelling architectural elements.
e. FACADES FACING INTERIOR COMMON SPACE. Each dwelling unit shall have a covered
raised porch or at-grade patio, generally oriented toward the common space for the separate
cluster of homes. Where a door entry to a dwelling faces a common space and is not
accessed via the porch or patio, then that doorway shall have its own overhang or weather
protection a minimum of five feet (5’) wide in length and width. An open air deck or patio
may also be included adjacent to a dwelling facing any common land area, whether in the
private use portion of the fenced area between house and common space, or at a side or
rear door access to a dwelling adjacent to common area used for parking, public services
and utilities, or other community purposes. Bay or bow windows and building modulation
with a depth measuring at least four feet (4’), when appropriate to the overall design
concept for the housing cluster, are acceptable architectural elements facing a common
space.
f. FACADES FACING ADJACENT DWELLINGS. In order to provide a sense of separation between
closely spaced dwelling units, window and door placement should be designed so that
openings in one house are not directly opposite any from the adjacent dwelling. Clerestory
windows, translucent materials, stained glass, glass blocks, and skylights are examples of
architectural elements that may be used to accomplish a sense of privacy for each dwelling
unit.
g. FACADES FACING EXTERIOR PUBLIC STREETS. Where dwelling units or common buildings
will face or be close enough to an exterior public street such that at least one half of the
building will be visible from off-site, then that or those building facades shall include
elevation elements such as windows, doors, porches, and changes in exterior materials.
The intent is to avoid blank walls or facades that appear to “turn their backs” to the street,
and instead have facades that give a welcoming appearance to off-site observers. Bay or
bow windows and building modulation with a depth measuring at least four feet (4’) , when
appropriate to the overall design concept for the housing cluster, are acceptable
architectural elements facing an exterior public street. No garage doors or exterior storage
closets shall be visible from a public street.
h. GROUND SPACES AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS BETWEEN DWELLING UNITS. The open land
between dwellings in a group used as pedestrian access to one or more dwellings shall
remain generally clear of obstructions for passage of people and delivery of goods. These
spaces shall be designed and maintained to provide a clearly delineated pedestrian
passageway at least five feet (5’) in width. The use of sturdy, flat materials for safe
pedestrian movement may include paver stones, pervious pavement, compacted gravel, or
similar types of ground surfaces that minimize standing storm water. This walkway area
shall be free from any pools of standing water, shall not contain any fences or landscaping
materials greater than three feet (3’) in height, and shall not incorporate other potential
obstructions to pedestrians. Outside of the pedestrian pathway area other plant species,
garden arbors, benches, low lighting, fountains, window planter boxes, and similar
structures are allowed. (Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 109
i. COMMON BUILDINGS, SHARED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES. Common buildings
may be included in a cottage cluster housing development and available for the shared use
of all residents, and shall be consistent with the overall development’s architectural design
details. Common buildings may include shared kitchen, recreation and meeting facilities,
and may include one dwelling unit, up to seven hundred fifty (750) gross square feet,
available for use by residents’ occasional guests. Common buildings may also include
storage space for individual resident use or for shared community use. Separate structures
may be erected on the overall site for storage or utilities, not to exceed five percent (5%)
in gross floor area of the combined gross floor area of all dwellings. Where the community
focus of a cottage cluster housing development involves a specific hobby or activity to be
shared by all residents, such as farming or making pottery, then any accessory structures
necessary to accommodate those activities (such as a tool shed or craft building with kiln)
shall be consistent with the overall development’s architectural design details, and shall
not exceed ten percent (10%) in gross floor area of the combined gross floor area of all
dwellings. Open air parking for more than three (3) vehicles shall not be visible from an
exterior public street. Carports and enclosed garage structures for one or more vehicles
shall include design elements consistent with the overall architectural theme of the cottage
cluster housing development. Any structure sheltering vehicles shall not have open ends
or garage doors visible from an exterior public street. All common and accessory structures
shall comply with building code separation requirements.
j. ENERGY EFFICIENT DESIGN ELEMENTS. The overall development is encouraged to include
elements such as solar orientation of buildings, protection and preservation of existing tree
canopy, use of pervious pavement materials and rain gardens. Homes within each cottage
cluster housing development are encouraged to incorporate energy efficient design
elements, such as provision of shade structural elements for south- or west-facing windows,
natural lighting options, light colored or reflective roofing materials, low-E glazing and
high-performing wall/ceiling insulation, operable windows aligned to create air flow
through the interior of buildings, use of energy conserving plumbing and HVAC
equipment.
k. INTERNAL CIRCULATION. Clear hard surface passageways shall be provided for vehicular
and non-vehicular movement throughout the cottage cluster housing development site.
Generally, vehicular access to the overall site shall be limited to no more than one (1)
entrance and one (1) exit (one-way pairing), or two (2) two-way access points onto adjacent
public streets. Vehicular passageways may be in the form of public streets or alleys, private
streets, or private driveways. All connections to exterior public streets and all internal
public or private streets or alleys shall be constructed to the standards given in the
Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual. Parking and service use areas
shall be accessed from the primary internal vehicular passageway. Provisions for service
areas such as mail receptacles, and trash and recycling pick-up, shall be designed so they
do not impede free traffic flow or obstruct visibility on exterior public streets or at curb
cuts onto public streets. Pedestrian access connecting to exterior public streets/sidewalks,
internal parking areas, common spaces, and all buildings within the overall site shall be
provided for use by residents, guests, and service/delivery providers. Pedestrian use
pathways shall be at least five feet (5’) in width, and free from any potential obstructions.
The use of sturdy, flat materials for safe pedestrian movement may include paver stones,
pervious pavement, compacted gravel, or similar types of ground surfaces that minimize
standing storm water. Bicycle use facilities may be separate or incorporated into the
vehicular or pedestrian passageways.
l. LANDSCAPING. Preservation or existing trees is encouraged during the design of a cottage
cluster housing development. Placement of circulation passageways and buildings should
take advantage of the environmental and aesthetic benefits of existing trees. New trees and
other landscaping can be added to assist in separating different use areas from each other,
such as parking from pedestrian-use common areas, and common areas from individual
dwellings. Where a common area is dedicated to cultivation of crops, no trees are required.
6. SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF COTTAGE CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS. The property
owner(s) shall sign an application for a Parallel Traditional or Conditional-Only zoning designation
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 110
for a cottage cluster housing development, and may assign in writing any of the design, presentation,
and construction responsibilities to an agent. During the zoning action process, the applicant shall
hold a community meeting for property owners and residents within two hundred feet (200’) of the
site to inform them of the proposed development and to receive feedback from them. A copy of the
letter announcing date, time, location, and purpose of the community meeting, the mailing list
(names, mailing addresses, and property tax ID number), a list of attendees, minutes of the meeting,
and a summary of changes considered or made as a result of the meeting shall be provided as
established for zoning applications. The submission documents should, at a minimum, include: a
statement explaining the overall architectural theme or set of design criteria being utilized to create
a coordinated community within the site, which will complement the immediate surrounding
neighborhood; an explanation of any topographical or environmental features distinctive to the site;
a vegetation survey; a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the overall site, with proposed
improvements and building locations; a statement of the number of dwelling units, each dwelling’s
maximum gross floor area, number of provided parking spaces, and identification of any service
areas, special use common areas or common buildings, and whether any guest quarters are included
within any common building; building elevations, renderings, or schematics to show overall
architectural character; a landscape plan and exterior illumination plan; and any other details that
will explain the proposed development.
7. As part of the zoning approval process, the site plan and elevation plans shall go through the staff
review and recommendation process as any other conditional zoning action that is not an early
designation. Staff reports and recommendations shall be provided to the Board of Commissioners
and the site plans/elevation plans shall be approved as part of the conditional zoning action.
155.506.23 Medium Density Ecological Developments.
A. A medium density ecological development is a planned residential community that intentionally includes
opportunities for wildlife to intermingle with built structures. This type of development is specifically
designed for the CrC district, and may also be allowed in the R-VS, SRN, C-MF, MUD, and ENT districts.
The requirements here are to promote innovative solutions to increasing wildlife habitat and improving the
natural environment by designating areas of a development for that purpose. To compensate for the loss of
land to development this measure increases housing density while requiring a greater amount of natural open
space. That open space shall be rehabilitated to support wildlife habitats through using native plants and
restoring natural features. Various techniques are required and others are allowed to create significant
environmental improvements.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Allowable density is a maximum of ten (10) units per acre.
2. Minimum site area for development is one and one-half (1 1/2) acres.
3. Maximum site area for development is twenty (20) acres.
4. Development shall be attached townhomes, attached single-family homes in a duplex, triplex or
quadplex format or condominiums in a clustered format and shall exclude single-family detached
homes.
5. Dwelling units may be individually owned with no conveyance of property with ownership,
therefore individual units shall be exempt from all lot size requirements.
6. Structures shall be limited to two (2) stories.
7. The combined footprint of all structures on the site shall equal no more than thirty five percent
(35%) of the total site area.
8. Maximum roof height shall not exceed twenty eight feet (28’).
9. Units shall present a consistent style or appearance while allowing for individual features so that
one unit can be distinguished from another as seen from the adjoining street.
10. Any combination of innovative, durable, and sustainable, materials may be used. They shall have
a life span under normal use of greater than twenty (20) years, and shall resist burning, deformation
due to heat and deterioration due to UV exposure.
C. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 111
1. WILDLIFE HABITAT REQUIREMENTS.
a. Provide, restore or preserve wildlife habitat on at least twenty three percent (23%) of the
site with a contiguous area no less than thirty feet (30’) in any direction. Includes wildlife
food sources including fruit bearing trees, shrubs, tall grasses and ground covers in the
habitat area.
b. Provide a transitional natural area of shrubs, grasses and fruit bearing plants between
ground cover areas and natural habitat areas on at least seven percent (7%) of the site area.
c. Provide ground covers, excluding grass on the remainder of the unbuilt and unpaved
portions of the site that is not in the public right-of-way.
d. These areas for wildlife habitat shall have a permanent easement, recorded at the
Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds granting the public perpetual use of the area as a
wildlife habitat.
e. Exclude grass based lawns from the development except in enclosed courtyards or the
public right-of-way.
f. Protection of existing vegetation is encouraged.
g. Compliance with current tree preservation and restoration ordinances is required.
h. Predominant use of native plant species is required.
i. Use of invasive non-native plant species is prohibited.
j. Use naturally based storm water management systems including rain gardens, constructed
wetlands, drainage swales and retention ponds with marsh like edge conditions of at least
eighteen feet (18’) in continuous width for fifty percent (50%) of the pond perimeter.
2. PARKING AND PAVING REQUIREMENTS.
a. Provide paved walks to access dwellings at private or public rights-of-way.
b. Paving within the wildlife habitat area must be porous.
c. Each unit shall have at least one (1) enclosed parking space.
d. Garage frontage per dwelling unit may be no more than fourteen feet (14’) of continuous
frontage. Two-car garages may have side entries. Frontage breaks, which may be porches,
entries, the main structure or other structures, must be no less than the width of the garage.
The front of the garage may not extend beyond the face of the main dwelling and should
be further from the street than porches and courtyards.
e. Each unit may have no more than one (1) open parking space in drives or other areas
adjacent to or in front of the dwelling unit.
f. Total parking for the development must equal at least two (2) units per dwelling from all
sources including enclosed, adjacent open, street parking and open shared parking.
3. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS & USES.
a. Dwelling units may not have accessory structures, other than detached courtyard walls, at
the front or street side of the unit.
b. The development may have an accessory structure(s) for offices, maintenance, equipment,
pump houses, pool houses and one assembly or meeting space of sufficient size to
accommodate no less than fifty percent (50%)of the residents, which meeting space may
be open or enclosed. The combination of all accessory structures may not total more than
fifteen percent (15%) of the built footprint of the total built structures on the site.
c. Accessory uses common to residential developments including pools, tennis courts, ball
fields, recreational spaces and similar uses are allowed. Paved area in this section may be
no more than four percent (4%) of the site.
4. ADDITIONAL COMPLIANCE ITEMS.
a. Submit documentation identifying selected additional compliance items and demonstrating
compliance with the selected items.
b. At least ten (10) of the following nineteen (19) items are required for compliance.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 112
c. Compliance with sixteen (16) of the nineteen (19) additional compliance items in this
section shall allow an additional two (2) units per acre of unit density for a total of twelve
(12) units per acre.
i. WILDLIFE HABITAT AREAS.
• Provide public access for wildlife observation of the wildlife habitat area
• Provide porously paved walking paths or porously paved sitting areas
with sitting walls or similar structures for wildlife observation.
• Provide access from dwelling units to wildlife habitat area.
• Preserve existing trees in wildlife habitat or transitional areas.
• Provide water sources for wildlife use. May be periodically available
depending on rainfall.
• Provide open area links no less than thirty feet (30’) wide to adjacent
habitat or undeveloped land that may be potential habitat including areas
across street right of way or easements no more than one hundred feet
(100’) wide.
ii. SITE CONTEXT ISSUES.
• Connect to adjacent off site natural storm water management systems.
• Complement adjacent development with social, parking or habitat
support.
• Provide balconies, porches or courtyards at the street side or front of each
dwelling unit within fifteen feet (15’) horizontally from pedestrian right
of way to encourage social interactions. Balconies, porches or courtyards
must have a minimum depth of six feet (6’). Where porch or courtyard
walls in excess of four feet (4’) high are used, they must have openings
totaling a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the total wall area.
Courtyard walls may have a maximum height of nine feet (9’) including
gabled and arched forms. Courtyard walls must be masonry or have a
masonry substrate. Walkway openings adjacent to a defining wall may
be counted as opening area. Openings in a wall, to be counted under this
provision, must be a minimum of twelve inches (12”) high by twelve
inches (12”) wide.
• Set front yard setbacks to a minimum of five feet (5’) measured from
outermost porch, courtyard or balcony walls to property line.
• Structures shall use only cistern or rain barrel based systems for
irrigation of landscaped areas.
• Structures shall use green roof systems as an additional storm water
management system.
• Area lighting within the site, provided by or at the request of the
developer, whether free standing or structure mounted shall use “dark
sky” compliant fixtures.
iii. PARKING AND PAVING.
• At least seventy five percent (75%) of all new paving on the site shall
use permeable paving systems.
• Site paving for vehicle access limited to a maximum of fifteen percent
(15%) of total site area
• Encourage on-street parking where sufficient width and accommodation
has been provided on new streets or sufficient width and accommodation
is present on existing public streets.
• Provide shared, landscaped, visitor off-street parking.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 113
• Maximum space devoted to parking lots may not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of total site. No single parking lot may exceed twelve percent
(12%) of site. Multiple parking lots are encouraged to share access
drives and vehicle circulation.
• Drain parking areas into available rain garden or constructed wetlandsstyle
storm water management system.[formerly § 153.067]
155.506.24 [RESERVED]
155.506.25 [RESERVED]
155.506.26 [RESERVED]
155.506.27 [RESERVED]
155.506.28 [RESERVED]
155.506.29 [RESERVED]
155.506.30 [RESERVED]
155.506.31 Commercial uses in Multi-Family and Office Buildings.
A. Some commercial uses may be allowed in multi-family buildings and office buildings in the R-15MF, R-
12MF, and O districts when conforming to the criteria listed here.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Allowable commercial uses may be located only in a multi-family building having a minimum of
fifty (50) dwelling units or an office building having a minimum of thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet of office space.
2. Gross floor area used for commercial purposes will be limited to twenty five (25) square feet per
apartment in a multi-family building and ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area used for office or
laboratory purposes in an office building.
3. Public entry to commercial facilities must be from interior of building with no direct public entrance
from street or outside of building permitted.
4. No merchandise or merchandise display window may be visible from outside the building.
5. No business or identification sign pertaining to commercial uses may be visible from outside the
building. [formerly known as § 153.168]
155.506.32 Hotels and Extended Stay Hotels
A. Hotels are allowed in the HUC, ENT, TS, MUD, B-1, B-3, B-H and B-1 (SCD) districts subject to the
standards below. Extended Stay Hotels are allowed in the B-3, B-H, MUD, TS, and B-1 (SCD) Districts
subject to the standards listed below.
B. Standards.
1. Primary exterior wall materials, which shall cover at least fifty (50%) of each façade,
excluding any glazed areas, shall consist of brick, other masonry, or native stone (or
synthetic equivalent)
2. Daily housekeeping shall be included within the standard room rate.
3. Rooms shall be accessed via secure interior corridors.
4. A minimum of 1,500 square feet of publicly accessible lobby space shall be provided for
use by visitors and guests.
5. A minimum of 1,500 square feet of interior meeting space, amenity space or a combination
thereof, is required. Amenity space may include a swimming pool, fitness center, business
center or other on-site area provided for guest use. In the ENT District, a minimum of 1,500
square feet of meeting space shall be provided.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 114
6. No guest shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same hotel
establishment for more than thirty consecutive (30) days.
7. No guest shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same extended
stay hotel establishment for more than sixty (60) consecutive days.
8. No outside storage or permanent vehicular or equipment parking is allowed.
C. Applicability. All new or expanded hotels and extended stay hotels shall adhere to the above standards.
Expansion is defined as an increase of more than 10% of the existing number of guest rooms currently
provided by the establishment. [formerly known as § 153.173] (Am. Ord. 2461, passed 12-9-19)
155.506.33. Drive-In Service Windows.
A. Drive-in service windows are permitted as an accessory part of a principal facility or operation such as a dry
cleaning establishment, bank, or pharmacy, in the Nonresidential Traditional zoning districts, except not in
the HUC district, and the B-1SCD, MUD, TS, and ENT. This category specifically does not include drivethrough
lanes and windows for restaurants or prepared food establishments.
B. STANDARDS.
1. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the building, driveway locations and internal circulation for all
modes of transportation, and queuing spaces shall be submitted for Board of Commissioners review
and approval for a new development site, or an Administrative Amendment, if a change to an
existing developed lot is proposed.
2. Prior to any action on a request for drive-in service window, the Town Engineer shall submit a report
regarding his/her findings that the drive-in window and its associated operational characteristics will
not create a traffic hazard with respect to traffic congestion, the adequacy and safety of entry and
exit points, or the on-site vehicular circulation pattern. [formerly known as § 153.178]
155.506.34 Transit Stop Shelters.
A. Transit stop shelters may be constructed and maintained by the Town or an authorized transit agency in any
district as allowed by the provisions listed below.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Shelters may be located in any street right-of-way or within the required setback of property which
adjoins a street. They may not be within thirty five feet (35’) of an intersection or located so that
they might obstruct the vision of drivers on the street. Only governmental signs are permitted in
association with a transit stop shelter.
2. A building permit will be issued for a transit stop shelter only after the following conditions are met:
a. The plan has been approved by the Board of Commissioners regarding the location and
integration of the shelter with the surrounding properties and its impact on nearby uses.
b. A transit stop shelter may be removed if the Board of Commissioners or transit agency
determines that it no longer serves the best interests of the public. [formerly known as §
153.184]
155.506.35 Commercial Riding Stables.
A. Structures, pastures, corrals, and other enclosed areas for the keeping of horses may be allowed in the R/I
and ENT Districts in accordance with the following requirements.
B. STANDARDS.
1. All buildings and structures for the keeping and maintenance of animals, equipment, or manure, and
all manure piles, pits or bins shall be located at least one hundred feet (100’) from any lot line.
2. All trails shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20’) from any property line.
3. All stables and riding areas must be maintained according to the standards and requirements of the
Mecklenburg County Health Department.
4. Lighting of training fields, trails, and parking lots shall meet the standards of § 155.609. Lighting
of outdoor facilities shall not be lighted between 10:00 PM and 8:00 AM. [formerly known as §
153.192]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 115
155.506.36 Outdoor Sales In Conjunction With A Permanent Business.
A. Outdoor sales of goods in conjunction with a permanent business may be allowed in the HUC, B-1, B-3, BD,
B-H, I-1, I-2, MUD, TS, ENT and B-1SCD Districts with specific criteria being met.
B. STANDARDS.
1. All outdoor display and sales shall be operated and maintained as a part of, under the same
ownership as, and on the same parcel of land as the principal use which includes a retail element.
Outdoor sales shall not exceed the normal business hours of the principal establishment.
2. There must be a clearly defined physical access way from the outdoor sales area to a customer
entrance of the principal use.
3. All sight triangles, required parking spaces, driveway accesses, internal driveway aisles and
vehicular circulation paths, pedestrian walks must remain unobstructed by outdoor display,
landscaping, signs, vehicular parking, or any other items that relate to the outdoor sales activity.
4. Where outdoor sales take place on a multi-tenant property, the outdoor sales area shall be physically
located only adjacent to the business to which it is connected, and shall not block access to any other
tenant on the multi-tenant parcel.
5. No goods, signs, or other items that are a part of the outdoor sales activity shall be attached to the
principal building’s wall surface.
6. The occasional or intermittent sale of goods from a semi-truck trailer without a cab, or from a
temporary greenhouse or tent, for a short-term sale shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days
during a calendar year. Any semi-truck, temporary greenhouse, or tent used as a part of outdoor
sales shall not be located within any required front setback, any required parking, any driveway or
any internal vehicular or pedestrian circulation areas. (Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14) [formerly
known as § 153.193]
155.506.37 On-Site Demolition Disposal Sites.
A. On-site demolition disposal sites may be allowed under specific conditions in all zoning districts except the
R-MH, HUC, TS, and AU districts. Demolition disposal locations which receive materials from off-site may
be allowed in the B-1, B-3, B-D, B-H, I-1, and I-2 districts only.
B. STANDARDS FOR ON-SITE DEMOLITION DISPOSAL.
1. Each on-site demolition disposal site shall be required to obtain a disposal site permit from the
Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection (MCDEP) prior to obtaining zoning
clearance to begin use of the disposal site.
2. All requirements of MCDEP shall be followed, including adequate notice to MCDEP for
inspections, certification of disposal area being at least the minimum depth above the seasonal high
water table, temporary and permanent erosion control, proof of adequate separation from any
residential or community wells, and proper compaction/final covering of disposal site following
inspection.
3. In addition to MCDEP requirements, on-site disposal locations shall be a minimum of twenty five
feet (25’) from any existing residential structure, or to a required front, side or rear building setback
or yard line on a lot being created at the time of, or following the closure of the disposal site.
C. STANDARDS FOR DEMOLITION DISPOSAL SITES RECEIVING FILL MATERIALS FROM OTHER LOCATIONS.
1. Each demolition disposal site shall be required to obtain a disposal site permit from the Mecklenburg
County Department of Environmental Protection (MCDEP) prior to obtaining zoning clearance to
begin use of the disposal site.
2. All requirements of MCDEP and the state shall be followed, including adequate notice of MCDEP
for inspection, certification of disposal area being at least the minimum depth above the seasonal
high water table, temporary and permanent erosion control, proof of adequate separation from any
residential or community wells, and proper compaction/final covering of disposal site following
inspection.
3. Demolition disposal sites shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) from any residential zone.
4. Any parcel or lot which contains any part of any such disposal site must have notification of its
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 116
existence and extent of the site recorded as a part of the deed for the lot or parcel, even if no
subdivision is required for the sale or development of the property.
5. No filling of any type will occur in any portion of a regulatory flood plain, including both the
floodway and the floodway fringe area.
6. A demolition disposal site shall be an accessory use only and shall not be in use for more than twenty
four (24) months. [formerly known as § 153.190]
155.506.38 Quarries.
A. Quarries may be established in I-2 Industrial Districts subject to all state provisions and to the additional
requirements listed below.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The quarry and all its buildings, pits, and processing equipment must be effectively screened from
the view of any adjoining property in a residential district in accordance with the provisions of §
155.606.
2. Dimensional requirements for quarries are specified below:
Required Minimum Distance from Adjacent Property That is Zoned
Nonresidential Industrial
Mixed Use
To any building 100 feet 20 feet
To any crushing of rock,
processing of stone, gravel, 300 feet 200 feet
or other material
To any blasting 400 feet 400 feet
(Ord. 1282, passed 1-13-03)
3. During operation of the quarry and after termination of quarrying operations at that site, the
following safety features must be maintained:
a. ROCK QUARRIES.
i. From the edge of the pit, an area twenty feet (20’) wide must be maintained free
of any soil cover.
ii. From a point twenty feet (20’) from the edge of the pit, the soil cover, if less than
twenty feet (20’) deep, must be graded back to a slope of one foot vertical or less,
to one foot horizontal from the rock level to the top of the soil cover.
iii. If the soil cover to be stripped away exceeds twenty feet (20’) in depth, a ditch
eight feet (8’) wide and three feet (3’) deep at least ten feet (10’) back from the
edge of the cut may be substituted for the back sloping. If the pit has reached its
maximum expansion in any direction, however, the permanent fence, as described
in § 155.506.38.B.4 below, in connection with termination of quarrying
operations, will suffice instead of the backsloping or ditch in that particular area.
iv. All dense underbrush must be removed from the soil cover for a distance of one
hundred feet (100’) from the edge of the pit.
b. GRAVEL QUARRIES AND SAND QUARRIES. When the pit exceeds a depth of twenty feet (20’)
from the surface of the ground, all dense underbrush must be removed from the soil cover
for a distance of one hundred feet (100’) from the edge of the pit.
4. FENCE REQUIRED. Upon termination of quarry operations at any pit that exceeds a depth of twenty
feet (20’) from the surface of the ground, either the pit must be backfilled to the slope of one foot
(1’) vertical, or less, to one foot (1’) horizontal from the bottom of the pit to the surface of the
ground, or an unclimbable fence must be erected and maintained around the pit. The fence must be
a minimum of six feet (6’) high and constructed of wire mesh in rectangular shapes, and the sizes
of the rectangles may not exceed two inches (2”) by four inches (4”). ('72 Code, § 3117) (Ord. 477,
passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 875, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord. 877, passed 5-9-94) [formerly known as §
153.179]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 117
155.506.39 Specialty Sales Establishments with Related Activities.
A specialty sales establishment is one that predominately sells one type or group of merchandise, such as a bakery,
butcher shop, confectionery, jewelry, handcrafts, gift basket, apparel, or similar item and which also incorporates
related processing or assembly on-site. Such uses may, in addition: process sales through avenues other than in-store
point-of-sale contact; include substantial on-site processing, assembly, and/or packaging of materials into final
product; and/or provide off-site distribution, in the HUC, B-1, B-3, B-H, I-1, C-MF, MUD, TS, B-1SCD, and ENT
districts when adhering to the standards given here.
Retail establishments specializing in, or limited to, one type or group of merchandise with very limited to no on-site
processing or assembly of materials to create the final product for sale (i.e., no baking or meat cutting of food items,
no assembling of several elements into a final jewelry piece or gift basket, no sewing into final garments) shall be
considered general merchandise retail. (Am. Ord. 2038, passed 5-11-15)
A. A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area, or one hundred fifty (150) square feet,
whichever is less, shall be provided for on-site retail sales to customers and this area shall be open for business
at least twenty five percent (25%) of the time each week the business facility is operating.
B. Office space for accepting mail, phone, on-line, or similar orders shall not exceed the space of the customer
retail area.
C. Where on-site processing or assembly may take place during retail store operations, visibility of some portion
of the processing or assembly activity is encouraged to be provided from the retail sales floor area where
practicable in order to create a unique experience for the customers. A written explanation for not providing
visibility of any merchandise preparation area shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall sign
and maintain it on file. [formerly § 153.196]
155.506.40 Outdoor Commercial Amusements.
A. Outdoor commercial amusements, such as miniature golf, rides, slides, sports training and practice facilities,
golf driving ranges, paintball course, water parks, cycle or skate tracks, skateboarding parks, and similar
operations which involve use of individual physical movement and dexterity rather than purely mechanical
means to propel customers or to accomplish the activities for which each amusement is designed. This
category specifically excludes any firearms ranges, or any use of firearms. Because these uses may attract
large numbers of users at a single time, or may generate noises, lights, traffic, and other effects that could
interfere with enjoyment of the outdoors on adjacent properties, these uses may be allowed only when
provisions to protect the transfer of off-site impacts into surrounding residential locations. These uses may
be located within the B-H, I-1, and ENT districts.
B. STANDARDS.
1. All land improved for such uses, as well as any buildings and structures related to the uses, must be
at least two hundred feet (200’) from any property that is residentially zoned or used. This two
hundred foot (200’) separation requirement does not include parking or passive open space, and
may include landscape screening.
2. Parking shall not be closer than twenty feet (20’) to any non-streetside exterior property line when
any dwelling units are on the adjacent parcel. Landscape screening as outlined in § 155.606 shall
apply.
3. Exterior lighting shall conform to the provisions of § 155.609. When any dwelling units exist on
an adjacent parcel, any exterior lighting at a height greater than twenty feet (20’) and located within
fifty feet (50’) of the property line with the residential use, shall not remain lighted after 10:00 PM
or be turned on before 8:00 AM.
4. When any dwelling units exist on an adjacent parcel, no outdoor amusement use activity shall be
conducted or allowed to take place after 10:00 PM or before 8:00 AM for any portion of the site at
or less than fifty feet (50’) from the property line shared with residential use.
5. The Town Noise Ordinance shall be met by any outdoor commercial amusement use.
6. Entrance to and exit from the outdoor commercial amusement facility shall be by way of a Class V
or higher public street.
7. The fairway portions of a driving range or golf school, yardage markers, distance flag markers,
bunkers, or fairways, where such improvements in such areas are limited solely to the passage of,
or the placement of, golf balls within such area, or the collection of golf balls by hand or by
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 118
mechanical devices, must be located at least fifty feet (50’) from any property line where any
dwelling units are located. Driving tees, putting, greens, practice sand traps, or other similar
accessory uses shall remain subject to the two hundred foot (200’) minimum distance. ('72 Code, §
3132) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 877, passed 5-9-94) (Ord. 1281, passed 5-13-02)
[formerly known as § 153.188]
155.506.41 Communications Facilities.
A. The purpose of this section is to: meet requirements of Telecommunications Act of 1996; direct the location
of tall communications facilities where they have been determined to be least disruptive of existing or
developing land use character, specifically to commercial road corridors; protect residential areas and land
uses from potential adverse impacts of communications facilities; preserve the low building profile and
character of the downtown; protect land values of adjacent and nearby properties; minimize adverse visual
impacts of any wireless facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques; accommodate the growing need for communications facilities; promote and
encourage shared use/collocation of existing and new communications facilities as a primary option rather
than construction of additional single-use facilities; encourage the use of concealment techniques in
providing support and height for antennas; protect public safety as it may be impacted by construction, wind
damage, electric shock, unauthorized access to facilities, structural damage on non-tower supporting
structures, monitoring visitor traffic, lighting for visibility to hospital, traffic, police, or other helicopter or
private aircraft, and related considerations. A communications antenna is considered a principal use or a
secondary principal use on any site, except when it is either incidental to a business use on the same lot and
used by that business for its operational communications. They are permitted as a secondary principal use in
residential districts (R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R-VS, and CrC) where a permitted nonresidential
principal use exists.
B. SITING HIERARCHY PREFERENCES
The following list indicates the Town’s preferences for communications facility locations, in descending
order of preference:
• Antenna mounted on/in an existing stealth (concealed) structure or building
• Antenna mounted on/in an existing building/structure
• Antenna mounted on an existing utility or light pole
• Collocation on existing communications tower
• New freestanding stealth structure
• Slick stick
• New non-stealth monopole
These preferences are intended as guidance for development of an application for communication facilities.
C. STANDARDS FOR COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
1. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. Antennas may be located in stealth applications on supporting structures
which are or will be the principal use or a permitted accessory structure to the principal use of the
site in any residential district, and shall not be more than eighty feet (80’) in overall height (antenna
and supporting structure). Where structures which existed as of June 9, 1997 exceed eighty feet
(80’) in height, such as electric transmission towers, these structures may also be used for antenna
locations. When an existing stealth structure is used, communications antennas may not increase
the stealth structure’s height by more than twenty feet (20’) per antenna, up to forty feet (40’)
additional in height, and only when such location shall not require the antenna to be lighted.
2. MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICTS. Antennas may be located on buildings or in stealth applications on
supporting structures in the R-15MF, R-12MF, SRN, and C-MF districts, and shall not be more than
eighty feet (80’) in overall height (antenna and supporting structure). Where structures which
existed as of June 9, 1997 exceed eighty feet (80’) in height, such as electric transmission towers,
these structures may also be used for antenna locations. Because these districts typically have multistory
construction, location of antennas on building walls and rooftops is the preferred application.
Maximum heights are given in the table below.
3. MIXED USE AND NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. Antennas may be located on towers or other
supporting structures in the R/I district (except as given in table below), and all mixed use or
nonresidential districts except the HUC and AU districts up to the overall heights listed below.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 119
4. DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT. Only antennas, Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS), and Small
Cell Sites may be installed in the Downtown Overlay District, including the HUC district.
Communication towers are not permitted in the Downtown Overlay District. See § 155.506.41.D
below for location requirements.
5. TABLE OF MAXIMUM TOWER HEIGHT IN VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS
Maximum Communications Tower Height (feet) in Multi-Family, Mixed Use and
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
District Adjacent to any residential
Zoning District
When no residential district is adjacent
Non-Stealth Stealth 1 user/2 users/3 users/Trunked Public Safety
R-15MF, R-12MF, SRN,
C-MF
Not permitted 80* 80*/ 100/ 120/ not permitted
R/I Not permitted 80*/*** 80*/ 100 / 120 / not permitted
0 50 80* 100*/ 120 / 140 / not permitted
B-1, B-1SCD, B-D 50 80* 120*/ 140 / 160 / not permitted
B-H 60 80* 180*/ 200 / 220 / 400**
B-3, MUD, TS, ENT 60 80* 180*/ 200 / 220 / not permitted
I-1 60 80*/*** 180*/ 200 / 220 / not permitted
I-2 60 80* 200*/ 220 / 240 / 400 **
(Ord. 919, passed 4-28-97; Am Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16; Am Ord. 2483, passed 3/9/20)
Note: Communications towers are not permitted in Downtown Overlay per § 155.506.41.C.4.
* Where there are existing nonresidential structures that exceed the above-given height limit (such as electric
transmission towers), then these structures may also be used for antenna locations. These limits may be
increased by twenty feet (20’) for each additional user collocating on the stealth structure up to an
additional forty feet (40’), and only when such location will not require the antenna to be lighted.
**(1)There are no residential zoning districts within one thousand foot (1,000’) radius of the proposed tower
site, or are across a controlled access right-of-way from any residential district. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-
11-16)
(2) The owner//developer and/or lessee of the proposed tower must possess a license (see Form FCC 574
or replacement Form FCC 600), to operate a Trunked Public Safety and Special Emergency Radio Services
system in accordance with FCC Regulations Part 90, Subpart B and C, 90.15 and 90.33 respectively, and
such tower will be used by licensee for the operation of a Trunked Public Safety and Special Emergency
Radio Services system.
(3) Location of non-Public Safety system antennas for collocators shall not be restricted to two hundred
forty feet (240’) or less, but such collocation antennas shall be located below the principal Public Safety
system antennas.
(4) The proposed tower is designed to allow collocation by at least two users and applicant for the tower
provides written documentation that a collocating provider has/can lease space.
*** When utilizing a stealth tower application, the above given height limits may be increased up to an
additional 40’ at the time of initial construction. Photo simulations must be provided. Said simulations must
show all exterior edges of the property. Additional documentation such as coverage maps may also be
provided. Site plan to be reviewed and approved by Town Board. (Ord. 1965, passed 9-9-13; Ord. 2025A,
passed 6-9-14)
6. DISTANCE SEPARATIONS BETWEEN COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS. Communications Towers shall be
spaced from each other by the minimum radius as given below:
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT MINIMUM DISTANCE
tower under 80 feet to tower under 80 feet 1,200 feet
tower under 200 feet to tower under 200 feet 1,800 feet
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 120
tower over 200 feet to tower under 200 feet 2,200 feet
tower under 200 feet to tower over 200 feet 2,200feet
tower over 200 feet to tower over 200 feet 2,500 feet
tower over 240 feet to tower over 240 feet 15,000 feet*
*This limit may be decreased with approval by the Board of Commissioners per
§ 155.506.41.C.7 below. (Ord. 919, passed 4-28-97)
7. MINIMUM LOT AREAS FOR COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS. Different types of communications towers
are allowed in different zoning districts. In the R-15MF, R-12MF, SRN, C-MF, R/I and O districts,
only monopole towers are permitted. Lattice towers may be permitted in mixed use and
nonresidential districts where communications towers are allowed. Guyed towers may be allowed
only in the I-2 District. Towers requiring guy wires are discouraged due to the extensive footprint
necessary for the overall installation. A tower and its related equipment (including guy wire ground
connections) must be located on a separate lot or leased portion of a larger lot and must meet setback
and yard requirements of the appropriate district. Where a lattice or guyed tower is requested, the
applicant must provide documentation, including site plan, from an engineer outlining why a
monopole is not possible. Minimum lot size for communications towers shall be as follows:
Lattice 150 feet x 150 feet
Monopole 100 feet x 100 feet
Guyed 350 feet x 350 feet
8. REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.
a. When a communications tower (not a stealth or concealed structure) is requested, the
following landscape screening requirements shall apply:
i. A one hundred percent (100%) opaque wall or fence six feet (6’) or higher around
tower, related equipment structure(s), and parking, plus a minimum of two (2)
rows of evergreen shrubs, planted in staggered fashion, ten feet (10’) on center in
each row, with initial plant height of three feet (3’); or
ii. A non-opaque fence or wall, six feet (6’) or higher around tower, related
equipment structure(s), and parking, plus a minimum of three (3) rows of
evergreen trees and shrubs planted in staggered fashion so that the plant materials
create a fifty percent (50%) opaque screen, six feet (6’) high, at time of planting.
Trees shall be minimum six feet (6’) tall and shrubs shall be three feet (3’) tall at
time of initial planting. The combination of trees and shrubs shall be expected to
create a one hundred percent (100%) opaque screen, six feet (6’) tall, within three
(3) growing seasons. The required plant material shall be located between the
required fence or wall and the lot or lease lines. Vehicular entrance gate openings
shall not be directly visible from any public street, or the gates shall be one
hundred percent (100%) opaque from the ground up a minimum of six feet (6’).
iii. All trees and shrubs must be from Matthews Approved Tree and Shrub List
located in § 155.606.14.
b. When a stealth application is employed which does not totally conceal wiring or related
equipment at the ground level, such as an electric transmission tower, then the following
landscape screening requirements shall apply:
i. A one hundred percent (100%) opaque wall or fence, six feet (6’) or higher around
ground level equipment, structure(s), and parking, plus a minimum of two (2)
rows of evergreen shrubs, planted in staggered fashion, ten feet (10’) on center in
each row, with initial plant height of three feet (3’); or
ii. A non-opaque fence or wall, six feet (6’) or higher around ground level
equipment, structure(s), and parking, plus a minimum of three (3) rows of trees
and evergreen shrubs planted in staggered fashion so that the plant materials
create a fifty percent (50%) opaque screen three feet (3’) high and twenty five
percent (25%) opaque screen six feet (6’) high at time of planting. Trees shall be
minimum six feet (6’) tall and shrubs shall be three feet (3’) tall at time of initial
planting. When located within the easement for electric transmission towers,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 121
landscaping plans shall also meet the utility company’s requirements.
iii. All trees and shrubs must be from Matthews Approved Tree and Shrub List
located in § 155.606.14.
9. SETBACK FROM STREETS AND PROPERTY LINES. Communications towers are not allowed in the
Downtown Overlay. Other than the Highway Overlay District, any communications tower up to
eighty feet (80’) in height shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) from any public
street. Any communications tower between eighty feet (80’) and one hundred twenty feet (120’) in
height shall be set back a minimum of one hundred twenty five feet (125’) from any public street.
Any communications tower over one hundred twenty (120’) feet in height shall be set back a
minimum of one hundred seventy five feet (175’) from any public street. Where antennas are
located in a stealth application, they shall be set back a minimum of forty feet (40’) from any public
street. In each case, distance shall be measured from edge of right-of-way to the tower, the related
equipment, or the guy wire ground connection, whichever is the closest.
10. REMOVAL OF TOWERS, ANTENNAS, AND EQUIPMENT. Whenever a tower, or its antennas, and/or
related equipment cease to be in active operation, they shall be removed within one hundred twenty
(120) days of inactivation. Notification in writing to the Town Planning office of the final date of
operation shall include the anticipated date of removal of all antennas, towers, equipment, and other
structures associated with that location. Notification shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of
the last day of operation.
11. SUBMISSION OF ZONING APPLICATION. All, new or revisions to existing communications towers,
including collocations, which require approval through a zoning action, shall submit a site plan and
elevation of the proposed facility improvements as a part of the zoning application. The site plan
shall include at a minimum: construction type of the tower and related equipment storage; total
height including antenna; whether the tower will include or allow for collocation; zoning of all
adjacent lots; the nearest residential zoning in a straight-line distance when all adjacent lots are
nonresidential; lot boundaries or lease lines; all existing or proposed buildings and structures on the
lot, or on larger parcel when a leased portion; method of screening; and vehicular access. If the
request is denied or restricted, a written explanation for the denial or restriction shall be given in the
minutes of the Board of Commissioners meeting where such decision is made. (Ord. 912; passed
1/27/97)
12. So as to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of existing communications towers, the
foregoing provisions of this § 155.506.41 shall not apply to:
a. the essentially equivalent replacement of a tower that was in existence as of January 27,
1997; or
b. the placement of additional communications antennas and/or supporting or related
equipment or equipment buildings on or in the immediate vicinity of a tower that is in
existence as of January 27, 1997, provided that any additional equipment or buildings
located on the ground shall be reasonably screened from view from the public roadway.
c. increasing the existing vertical height of the structure no greater than ten percent (10%) or
the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna
not to exceed twenty feet (20’). (Ord. 920, passed 6-9-97) [formerly known as § 153.172]
D. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS FACILITIES OTHER THAN COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
Distributed Antenna System (DAS) and Small Cell Sites (SCS) are newer technology in the realm of wireless
communications. There are many advantages in the implementation of these types of wireless
communications systems. These systems can be adopted and used in residential, suburban, and urban areas
where sufficient wireless coverage is lacking. These are relatively small structures that can be easily
concealed or placed so that they are not visually obvious or prominent. DAS and Small Cell Sites may be
placed within any zoning districts. Certain criteria apply when placing DAS and Small Cell Sites within
specific districts.
These standards apply to applications on private property and Town maintained right-of-way.
1. LOCATIONS OF WIRELESS FACILITIES.
a. Adhering to the siting hierarchy in §155.506.41.B, wireless facilities are encouraged to
collocate on existing utility and street light poles whenever possible in order to reduce the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 122
proliferation of poles in right-of-way.
b. No new utility pole may be installed for the principal use of wireless facilities if a pole
exists within twenty feet (20’) of a desired location. If a pole exists within twenty feet (20’)
of the proposed location but cannot meet the height or load bearing demands for the
wireless facility installation, that existing pole can be replaced with an appropriate new
pole, not increasing in height more than ten feet (10’)
c. Along town maintained street rights-of-way where there are no existing utility poles (all
underground utilities), wireless facilities may be attached to street lights in the public rightof-
way. An encroachment agreement (permit) must be issued by the Public Works Director
before installation. Approval from the owner of the light pole must be submitted with the
easement agreement. Equipment cabinet(s) for systems placed on light poles in the rear
of private property in utility easements shall be located underground, at the base or on the
corresponding light pole.
2. WIRELESS FACILITIES STANDARDS
a. When antennas are placed on top of a building in the Downtown Overlay, wireless facilities
must be located within an equipment penthouse, or on top of a building behind the parapet
so as not to be seen from the public realm, occupied window, or occupied rooftop when
installed. Wireless facilities will be limited to three feet (3’) in height above the parapet
and must be seventy-five (75) to one hundred (100) percent concealed. Wireless facilities
cannot be visible from the public realm and must blend in with the look and design of
where they are being located.
b. Equipment cabinet(s) shall be located at the rear or non-street side of a building not visible
to pedestrians. Equipment cabinet(s) for systems placed on utility poles or street lights shall
be located underground. Equipment cabinets can be placed on the utility pole ten feet (10’)
above ground level or at the base of the corresponding utility pole or street light only when
the applicant can show proof that underground placement is not feasible. All supporting
equipment (meters, switches, ground equipment and the like) must be no more than 28
cubic feet, ten feet (10’) from back edge of sidewalk and no more than five feet (5’) in
height. Sealed drawings shall be provided indicating that the utility pole or street light can
physically accommodate the equipment.
c. Within the Highway Overlay district, wireless facilities can be placed on existing buildings
or structures including utility poles. New poles for the sole purpose of wireless facilities
shall only be placed in the existing driveway locations. Where tree clearing has occurred,
it must remain open. They may not be placed in HO buffer except for existing cleared area
of driveway or interior to the site. If wireless facilities are placed on top of an existing
building, they shall be placed within an equipment penthouse, or behind the parapet. Roof
top applications shall be limited to no more than three feet (3’) in height above the parapet,
concealed from the public realm, and must blend in with the look and design of where they
are being located.
d. Outside of overlay districts, wireless facilities may be placed on existing utility poles
located within the public right-of-way, on buildings or on other structures which can be
shown to meet structural integrity. An encroachment agreement (permit) must be issued by
the Public Works Director before installation. If wireless facilities are placed on top of an
existing building, they shall be placed within an equipment penthouse, or behind the
parapet. Roof top applications shall be limited to no more than three feet (3’) in height
above the parapet, concealed from the public realm, and must blend in with the look and
design of where they are being located.
3. COLLOCATION
The Town encourages the installation of wireless facilities on existing structures to avoid
unnecessary duplication of supporting structures (poles, towers, etc). Collocated facilities and
equipment may be separately owned and used by more than one entity.
a. All new wireless facilities that require the use of support structure shall be designed and
constructed to provide opportunity for collocation and utilize neutral host equipment
capable of use by multiple additional wireless communication providers.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 123
b. As a condition of installing a new pole or facility for wireless communication services,
the owner of a new pole shall reasonably consent to allowing future requests for
collocation by other providers of personal wireless services on reasonable terms and
conditions that do not discriminate between similarly situated providers of wireless
communication services.
c. New wireless facilities that cannot be collocated on an existing wireless facility or utility
pole must be separated by a minimum of 400 linear feet from any existing wireless facility.
E. INSTALLATIONS OF NEW POLES IN SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
1. The minimum distance of a new pole from any residential structure shall be at least 150% of the
pole height and shall not be located directly in front of any residential structure located in a single
family zoning district. The minimum setback distance shall be measured from the facility
installation to the nearest point of a single family dwelling located in a single family zoning
district.
2. Along streets and within subdivisions where there are no existing utility poles (all underground
utilities), wireless facilities may be attached to street lights in the public right-of-way. Approval
from the owner of the light pole must be submitted with the encroachment agreement (permit).
Equipment cabinet(s) for systems placed on light poles in the rear of private property in utility
easements shall be located underground.
3. New poles may not be erected in a residential area solely for wireless communication equipment
attachment unless the applicant has demonstrated it cannot reasonably provide service by:
a. Installing poles outside of the residential area;
b. Attaching equipment to existing poles within the rights-of-way;
c. Installing poles in rights-of-way not contiguous to parcels used for single family residential
purposes; or
d. Installing poles in rights-of-way contiguous to reverse frontage parcels.
4. All requests for new poles within the rights-of-way in residential neighborhoods shall be in
compliance with Matthews Utility Right-of-Way Policy:
a. At least 10 business days prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall complete
each of the following pre-submission requirements;
b. Notify all property owners within 500 feet of proposed pole installations, measured
along the public right-of-way, via a door hanger, direct mailing or other means approved
by the Town;
c. Host a community meeting not less than 30 days after initial notice to present in
reasonable detail the proposed draft plan of installation, including facility descriptions,
locations, applicable screening, and aesthetic characteristics;
d. Receive and consider for a period of 30 days after the community meeting any
community comments or proposed alternative locations and designs;
e. Host a second meeting to occur not less than 35 days after the initial community meeting
to present in reasonable detail the proposed plan of installation, including facility
descriptions, locations, relevant screening, and aesthetic characteristics.
5. An encroachment agreement (permit) must be issued by the Public Works Director before
installation of any new pole in rights-of-way.
6. New poles shall not be constructed of wood. Metal, concrete or fiber materials are appropriate.
7. Any disturbance in street rights-of-way that would require relocation of poles and associated
equipment shall be the responsibility of the communications company installing the equipment.
8. The maximum height of the pole shall be the lesser of 50 feet or the height of existing nearby
utility poles, except where in the Town's discretion, increased pole height is an acceptable
alternative to either reduce the total number of new poles or to allow installation of a pole in a
location preferred by the community. The maximum height of an antenna on top of the pole shall
be no more than six feet (6’) above the height of the pole.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 124
F. APPLICATION PROCESS FOR ALL WIRELESS FACILITIES OTHER THAN COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
Applications for wireless facilities other than communications towers will be processed for completeness
determination in accordance with G.S. 400.54(d)(3) within 30 calendar days of submission or an alternate
agreed upon time. After any deficiencies are corrected, the application will reviewed within 45 calendar
days of determination of completeness or an agreed upon time. If applicant cures identified deficiencies
within 30 calendar days and resubmits, the Town will have 30 additional calendar days to approve or deny
application.
Applications for the construction of Small Cell Sites, DAS, or a change of addition of equipment and/or
antennas for wireless communication services must submit the following information:
1. For all sites:
a. Tax and zoning map with the site identified.
b. Site development plan attached (three (3) 11”x17” plans and digital)
c. A written description and map showing the coverage area of the Provider’s existing
facilities in the general and site-specific areas that are the subject of the Application.
d. A statement of the telecommunications objectives for the proposed location: 1) whether
the proposed facility is necessary to prevent or fill a gap or capacity shortfall in the
Applicant or Provider’s service area; 2) how it is the least obtrusive means of doing so
and if not why; 3) and what are any alternative sites and identify their aesthetic impacts
while providing comparable service.
e. A statement by an authorized representative that the Applicant and/or Provider (as
applicable) holds all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the Federal
Communications Commission or any other state or federal agency with authority to
regulate telecommunications facilities that are required in order for the Applicant to
construct the proposed facility.
f. A statement by an authorized representative that the Applicant or Provider is in
compliance with all conditions required for such license and approvals.
g. Full written description of the wireless facilities shape, height, location, and other
dimensions proposed to be installed.
h. Site development plans, signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in
North Carolina, showing the proposed location of the wireless facilities and existing
structures within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed site.
i. A vertical profile and/or photo simulation of the wireless facilities, indicating the height
of the facility and antennas as well as placement of corresponding equipment
enclosures.
j. Photographs of view shed from each proposed facility location, taken in at least four
(4) directions.
k. Description of whether other overhead utilities exist within five hundred (500) feet of
the proposed wireless facility location.
l. The applicant certifies that there will be no danger of collapse, explosion, or
underground damage in the course of the project.
m. If encroachment onto private property is necessary for construction, staging,
vehicle/equipment storage, etc. activities, then the permittee is directed to contact and
obtain permission from said property owner for such encroachment.
2. For Town maintained public right-of-way locations:
a. An encroachment agreement (permit) must be submitted to the Public Works Director
and the Planning Director in accordance with the Matthews Utility in Public Right-Of-
Way Policy.
b. Written approval from the property owner of any pole or structure stating the Applicant
has permission to construct or attach antennas and/or equipment to their pole or
structure.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 125
c. The Applicant must adhere to the Town of Matthews Public Right-of-Way Policy
regarding traffic controls for construction/maintenance. Regulations when working
within the rights-of-way will be strictly enforced. Failure to comply with such
regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor violation.
3. For non right-of-way parcels and structures:
a. For placement on land outside of right-of-way, the Applicant must submit written
approval from the property owner to construct a facility on their property or attach
antennas and/or equipment to their pole or other structure.
b. For stealth wireless facilities on structures outside of right-of-way, the Applicant must
submit written approval from the property owner.
(Ord. 2280A, passed 2-12-18)
155.506.42 Veterinary Clinics, Veterinary Hospital, Animal Day Care Kennels, Commercial
Kennels, and Animal Grooming Facilities.
A. Veterinary clinics, day care kennels, and animal grooming facilities are allowed in the B-1, B-H, I-1, I-2, B-
1SCD, MUD, TS, and ENT districts with prescribed standards as given here. Veterinary hospitals and
commercial kennels are allowed in the B-D, I-1, and I-2 districts when meeting the associated standards
below.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Provisions for adequate containerized solid waste disposal shall be assured with removal no less
frequently than one (1) time a week. Any form of disposal which allows odors or fumes shall be in
violation of this requirement.
2. The drainage of all liquid by-products shall be discharged by a permitted sanitary sewer line and
shall not be disposed of by way of storm sewers.
3. Outside storage of materials, feed or waste shall not be permitted.
4. All building plans, whether for a new or existing structure, must be accompanied by a certification
by a registered architect or acoustical engineer that no sounds emitted through the business’ outside
walls or ceiling/roof of the building will exceed forty five (45) decibels.
5. All animals shall be treated, washed and fed within an enclosed building with the exception of
occasional single day special events, such as dog flea dips. No outdoor special events shall be
allowed at an animal day care kennel.
C. Additional Standards for veterinary clinics, animal day care kennels, and animal grooming facilities:
1. Each use, either individually or in a shared use setting shall be within a completely enclosed building
with no outside storage or animal areas, except for day care kennels as allowed below.
2. The boarding of animals is not permitted for day care kennels or animal grooming facilities. At
veterinary clinics, restricted boarding only is possible, and shall be limited to occasional overnight
observation, emergency and/or surgery recovery and those animals with special needs, such as
geriatric care.
3. Animal grooming may be done as a single-use establishment, within a retail pet specialty store, or
as a part of a veterinary clinic or hospital.
4. For day care kennels only, any outdoor play and exercise areas or runs shall be fenced or securely
enclosed on all sides to a minimum height of six feet (6’) and shall be located to non-streetside side
or rear yards. Perimeter landscape or screening requirements shall be placed on the exterior of all
enclosed animal use areas. [formerly known as § 153.185]
155.506.43 Temporary Uses For Business Purposes.
A. A business shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator to be a temporary use if it does not meet the
zoning and/or building code criteria for a permanent business designation and is not a short-term civic or
nonprofit temporary use allowed under the standards of § 155.506.44. A person conducts business when he
engages in business within the Town zoning jurisdiction by one (1) or more of the following: i) maintains a
business location within the Town limits, ii) solicits business, either personally or through agents, within the
Town limits, iii) picks up or delivers goods within the Town boundaries, or iv) delivers service within the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 126
Town limits.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant permanent business designation, which shall include: a
permanent structure with appropriate restroom facilities, able to receive a final Certificate of Occupancy;
designated parking spaces including handicap-accessible spaces as required by Building Code; driveway
permit; required on-site landscaping; adequate garbage/dumpster location and screening; loading/service
areas, where needed; and any other elements as the Zoning Administrator may determine to be necessary. A
person seeking a permanent business designation while operating under a temporary use permit must obtain
this designation within the stated forty five (45) day time period in order to avoid any possible temporary use
violations and subsequent enforcement by the Zoning Administrator or the Town's Code Enforcement
Officer. (Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00)
Temporary uses may be allowed in any district where that use is allowed by right as a permanent use, when
adhering to the following criteria.
B. STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES
1. Temporary uses for business purposes shall conform to the required front setback, side and rear yard
requirements of the district in which they are located.
2. These temporary uses shall apply for a temporary use permit before start of any operation. A
temporary use permit shall be valid for forty five (45) days and cannot be renewed for any time
extension. The forty five (45) day time period will begin as of the date of issuance of the temporary
use permit, or at a later date as specifically listed on the permit.
3. A valid temporary use permit must be displayed on-site as long as the temporary use is in operation.
4. After the temporary use is concluded, the property shall not be used for another temporary use for
business purposes for a period of one (1) year from the issue date of the temporary use permit. In
the case where a property is occupied by a use that constitutes a temporary use without a valid
temporary use permit, and five (5) days after a warning of violation is delivered it still remains onsite
without a valid permit, then that property shall not be eligible for another temporary use for a
period of twenty four (24) months from the issue date of the last valid temporary use permit. (Ord.
127, passed 7-10-00)
5. One (1) identification sign will be allowed for the temporary use, up to sixteen (16) square feet
maximum. The sign may be either freestanding or attached to a structure, but no portion shall extend
into the right-of-way, or into a sight triangle at intersections or driveway entrances. Such sign will
be allowed for a temporary use regardless of other existing permanent signs on the same property.
6. Hard surface parking as may be required elsewhere in this chapter shall not be required for a
temporary use, although the minimum number of parking spaces and adequate on-site vehicular
maneuvering space shall be required the same as for the use on a permanent location.
C. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN TEMPORARY USES.
1. FARMERS'MARKET. A farmers' market is an open space and/or building where agricultural products,
excluding livestock, and related items are displayed for sale to the public by multiple farmers and
individuals. The merchandise offered for sale shall predominately be fresh and locally produced
food items not commercially handled or processed, hand-made crafts and food or drink mixes, living
or freshly cut plants and flowers, and similar items with local connection. This is typically a use
which does not operate every day and every week, but may have varying hours based on the seasons.
A minimum of five (5) vendors providing merchandise for sale shall be on-site while the market is
operating. Farmers’ markets are not subject to the forty five (45) day per twelve (12) month period
or temporary use permit requirements for business-related temporary uses in § 155.506.43.A above.
Farmers’ markets may be allowed in the HUC, R/I, MUD, TS, and ENT districts.
a. A farmers’ market may be located at a permanent location devoted only to this use even
when it is not in operation, or may set up on outdoor space and/or in buildings controlled
by other uses when not within any required front setback, side or rear yards, any required
parking or interior driving aisles, any pedestrian walkways, or any storm water drainage
facilities.
b. A farmers’ market may have one (1) identification sign up to sixteen (16) square feet
maximum. A second sign of the same size on a different street frontage may be allowed
when the farmers’ market is the principal use of the property and the signs face and are
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 127
located on the two separate street frontages. Signs may be either freestanding or attached
to a structure, but no portion shall extend into the right-of-way, or into a sight triangle at
intersections or driveway entrances. A sign for the farmers’ market will be allowed
regardless of other existing permanent signs on the same property.
2. PUSHCART VENDORS. A pushcart is a vehicle which is non-motorized, is not horse-drawn, and is
designed with and has wheels for easy maneuverability by humans rather than a concession vehicle
which is designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle. Pushcart vendors are not subject to the forty
five (45) day per twelve (12) month period or temporary use permit requirements for businessrelated
temporary uses in § 155.506.43.A above. Pushcart vendors are allowed in the HUC, MUD,
TS, and ENT districts under the following prescribed conditions.
a. Pushcart food vendors are subject to the regulations set forth by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Environmental Health Department.
b. One accessory structure item, such as a freestanding table or display rack is permitted in
addition to the pushcart if it is clearly necessary in order to conduct the business.
c. Business can only be conducted from pushcarts; business may not be conducted from tents,
vehicles, concession trailers, or freestanding items (such as tables, merchandise display
racks or newsstands and the like).
d. Pushcarts may be placed at a single spot or may be maneuvered by the operator within the
allowed zoning district. Pushcarts may move across and do business upon public rights-ofway
when not blocking any vehicular access areas or parking spaces, or creating any other
public safety concerns, and when maintaining at least five feet (5’) of clear pedestrian space
around the pushcart and related freestanding items. Pushcarts may also locate on or move
over private property when operators have written permission from the property owner of
each lot to do so.
e. Prior to start of business, the operator of a pushcart shall register with the Town Planning
office. The pushcart operator shall provide a written explanation of the type of business to
be conducted (what merchandise/food to be offered), and expected dates and times of day
to be operating, and a map showing possible set-up locations or travel routes intended to
be used. This registration information shall be kept on file in the Planning office. It is the
responsibility of the pushcart operator to provide revised registration documents when the
type of merchandise, dates and times of use, and/or locations are changed.
3. MOBILE FOOD TRUCK VENDORS. A mobile food truck vendor is a food service establishment
operated from a licensed vehicle which is designed to accommodate the safe storage, processing,
and preparation of food and or beverages to distribute to customers who come to the vehicle. A
mobile food truck is expected to relocate on a frequent basis. Mobile food truck vendors are allowed
in the HUC, B-1, B-3, B-H, MUD, TS, B-1SCD, and ENT districts when meeting the following
criteria.
a. When parking to provide service to customers, a mobile food truck shall not be located
within the public right-of-way, within a required setback or sight triangle, or within any
required landscape buffer or area.
b. The operator of a mobile food truck shall register his/her vehicle and proposed stopping
locations with the Town Planning office. Required items for a complete registration
include: written and signed permission from the property owner or leasing/management
agent for each location where the truck may locate; a site plan drawing of each location
indicating where on the property the truck may park while serving customers, and showing
how safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation will be achieved; proposed hours of operation
at each location; food truck operator’s name, address, and phone contact information; the
name, address, and phone contact of the commissary or commercial kitchen where the food
truck will return to be cleaned and restocked. A signed registration shall be valid for a
calendar year and must be renewed annually between December 1 and January 15.
Registration requests may be submitted at any time, and shall only be valid for the
remainder of that calendar year.
c. Trash receptacles must be provided for customers and shall be located no further than ten
feet (10’) from the food truck. Separate receptacles for garbage and recycled items are
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 128
required when any products are available for purchases that include recyclable containers
or packaging. The food truck operator is responsible for removing all trash, litter and refuse
from the site daily, including promptly collecting waste improperly discarded by
customers.
d. A food truck may be located at any registered location between the hours of 8:00 AM and
9:00 PM. A food truck shall not remain on a registered site overnight.
e. A mobile food truck shall not locate on any required minimum parking spaces within four
hundred feet (400’) of the customer door for any business on the registered site. No
separate parking will generally be required for a food truck, although additional parking
may be required at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator when parking congestion is
observed at that location. If sufficient parking cannot be provided for the existing
permanent business(es) and the mobile food truck on a specific site or at a specific time of
day, then the food truck’s registration will be revoked or modified by the Zoning
Administrator for that location.
f. All applicable local and state regulations shall be met.
g. If a mobile food truck is issued a notice of violation for one or more registered locations,
and the violation is not resolved within ten (10) calendar days, then the registration shall
be revoked for that or those locations for the remainder of the calendar year. If a mobile
food truck is issued a notice of violation at an unregistered location, and does not come
into compliance within ten (10) calendar days, then that food truck shall not be eligible for
a registration within Matthews for the remainder of that calendar year.
h. When mobile food vendors are participants of a special event within the Town allowed
under Section § 155.506.44 below, and the event has received permission to conduct
activities within specific public right-of-way, then mobile food truck vendors may be
located within that designated public right-of-way, may operate during the hours the event
is open to the public, and may remain parked there overnight for the duration of the special
event.
4. CONTRACTORS’ OFFICES, EQUIPMENT SHEDS, AND TRAILERS. When a property is undergoing new
development, renovation, remodeling, or redevelopment, temporary structures for contractor use
may be allowed on the same site, only for the duration of the construction project while building
permits are in effect. No such office, shed or trailer shall contain sleeping accommodations or
cooking facilities. All construction related structures shall be removed from the site upon lapse of
building permits or issuance of the last Certificate of Occupancy.
5. SIDEWALK SALES, END OF SEASON SALES, CLEARANCE SALES. Sporadic and seasonal sales, when
conducted on the same lot and within close proximity to the associated permanent business public
entrance, may take place for a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days and not more than
three (3) times in a calendar year. Merchandise shall not block any required parking spaces or
vehicular drive aisle, or any pedestrian walkway.
6. GARAGE SALES, RUMMAGE OR YARD SALES. Garage, rummage or yard sales, when conducted on
the site of a residential dwelling or on private property in a residential area may take place on the
same parcel up to three (3) consecutive days for a total of up to ten (10) days in a calendar year.
Garage, rummage or yard sales may be held on a nonresidential property except in the AU district
by the owner/occupant of the parcel or may be conducted by other person(s) with the consent of the
property owner, for up to three (3) consecutive days. Garage, rummage or yard sales conducted by
any and all parties on any nonresidential property shall not exceed a total of ten (10) days in any
calendar year. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14) [formerly known as § 153.191(A through F)]
7. AUCTION OR ESTATE SALES. Auctions or estate sales of real and personal property located on the
site of a residential dwelling or business establishment for the purpose of liquidating assets of that
household or business establishment may take place on a parcel one time for up to three (3)
consecutive days in any calendar year. A nonresident auctioneer or sales coordinator may be present
to conduct the sale, but the items offered shall come from the site and its owners or heirs of owners
or business operators.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 129
155.506.44 Short-term Temporary Uses and Festivals of Civic or Nonprofit Nature.
A. A short-term temporary use which is of a civic or nonprofit nature, or a festival of local, national, or historic
significance hosted and coordinated by public or nonprofit agencies to entertain or raise public awareness of
an issue or opportunity of general interest may take place in any zoning district when meeting prescribed
standards.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Any special event or festival of a civic or nonprofit nature shall be of seven (7) days or less duration.
2. Any such event shall meet minimum all side and rear yard requirements of the district in which they
are located, but may be located within the required front setback when the Chief of Police or
designee determines that public safety will not be adversely affected.
3. Short-term temporary uses shall apply for and receive a temporary use permit prior to the start of
operations, or shall receive authorization from the Town Board of Commissioners to hold the event
prior to the start of any activities. The starting time of a short-term temporary use shall be when
any outdoor set-up actions and/or street closings begin, and the completion of the event shall be
when all equipment and supplies are removed from the site and streets are reopened for regular use.
This time period shall not exceed seven (7) days, and no time extension is allowed.
4. Parking, screening, buffers, and similar requirements as may be required elsewhere in this Title shall
not be required for a short-term temporary use. (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 824, passed 6-
13-94) [formerly known as § 153.191(G)]
155.506.45 Alcohol and Alcoholic Beverages, Wine, and Beer.
A. The production of any beverages with alcoholic content may be accomplished at many scales, for personal
use and as a hobby, or for commercial sale, and can be allowed in different settings based on the size of the
operations. Microbreweries and brewpubs may be allowed in the HUC, B-1, B-3, B-H, I-1, I-2, B-1SCD,
MUD, TS, and ENT districts with prescribed conditions. Distilling of alcoholic beverages be permitted in
the I-1 and I-2 districts when adhering to the requirements listed here.
B. STANDARDS
1. In the HUC district a brewpub cannot exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet gross floor area. A
microbrewery in the HUC district shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet gross floor area.
2. In the B-1, B-3, I-1, B-1SCD, MUD, TS, and ENT districts, a microbrewery cannot exceed ten
thousand (10,000) square feet floor area. In the B-1, B-3, I-1, B-1SDC, MUD, TS, and ENT districts,
a brewpub cannot exceed a total of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area in size,
and the maximum gross floor area of a brewpub that may be devoted to the production or
manufacturing of beverages with alcoholic content shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3. In the HUC, MUD, TS, and ENT districts microbreweries shall have a tap room that is oriented to
the street or main pedestrian entrance of the business. A minimum of five hundred (500) square
feet shall be provided for the tap room and this area shall be open to the public for business at least
twenty five percent (25%) of the time each week the microbrewery is operating.
4. No loading or distribution activities shall take place outside the enclosed building of a microbrewery
between the hours of 9:00 PM and 7:00 AM when the microbrewery is located within five hundred
feet (500’) of any dwelling unit or institutional use in existence at the time the microbrewery receives
a Certificate of Occupancy.
5. All microbreweries and brewpubs shall comply with the Town Noise Control Ordinance, Title 92A.
[formerly 153.197]
6. The distilling of alcohol and alcoholic beverages in the I-1 district shall not exceed three thousand
(3,000) square feet gross floor area. Manufacturing facilities greater than three thousand (3,000)
square feet shall only be in the I-2 district.
7. Any distilling or manufacturing of alcohol and alcoholic beverages shall be separated by a minimum
of five hundred feet (500’) from any dwelling unit in existence at the time the manufacturing facility
receives any related building permit for construction or upfit.Within the ENT district, no minimum
separation is required between a brewpub and a dwelling unit.
8. No manufacturing of alcohol and alcoholic beverage shall produce or create any noxious smells or
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 130
odors detectable to the public from the public right-of-way. [formerly 153.198] (Ord. 1947A, passed
6-10-13; Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-17)
155.506.46 ADULT USES.
A. Adult uses may take multiple forms as further defined here, and are only allowed in the AU district when
meeting the standards given below.
1. ADULT ARCADE: shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coinoperated
or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images to persons in booths or viewing rooms where
the images so displayed depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
2. ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: shall mean a commercial establishment which as one
of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following: i) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations
that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or ii) instruments,
devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
3. ADULT CABARET: shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial establishment that
regularly features, exhibits, or displays as one of its principal business purposes: i) persons who
appear nude or semi-nude; or, ii) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or, iii) films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
4. ADULT MOTEL: shall mean a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: i) offers
accommodations to the public for any form of consideration, and provides patrons with closedcircuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as one
of its principal business purposes; or ii) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours; or iii) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
5. ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: shall mean a commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
are regularly shown as one of its principal business purposes that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
6. ADULT THEATER: shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features, exhibits, or displays, as one of its principal business
purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that expose or
depict specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
7. ESCORT AGENCY: shall mean a person or business that furnishes, or offers or advertises to furnish
escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. An escort
means a person who, for tips or any other form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a date for
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
8. NUDE MODEL STUDIO: shall mean any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of
nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
other form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by
the state or a college, community college or university supported entirely or in part by public
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure: i) that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and, ii) where in order to participate
in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and, iii) where no more
than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 131
9. SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of
wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or activities between male and female
persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.
10. Additional definitions related to this group of Adult Uses allowed in the AU district include:
a. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: shall mean human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
b. SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: shall include any of the following: i) the fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or, ii)
sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation,
or sodomy; or, iii) masturbation, actual or simulated; or, iv) excretory functions as part of
or in connection with specified anatomical areas, specified sexual activities, or nude or a
state of nudity.
c. NUDE OR A STATE OF NUDITY: shall mean i) the appearance of a human anus, male genitals,
or female genitals; or, ii) a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male
genitals, or female genitals.
d. SEMI-NUDE: shall mean a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps and devices. [formerly § 153.059(D) and (E)]
B. STANDARDS.
1. PLACEMENT AND FACILITY SIZE. As outlined at § 155.503.9, any adult use must meet certain
dimensional standards, including maximum building size and separation from other uses.
2. SUBMISSION OF ZONING APPLICATION. A request for an adult use shall be accomplished through a
change of zoning district process. Any proposed location for an adult use shall submit a site plan
and elevation of the proposed facility as a part of the zoning application. The site plan shall include
at a minimum: an explanation of how the separation and dimensional standards given at § 155.503.9
are being met including zoning of all adjacent lots, the nearest residential an institutional uses and
nearest establishment with an on-premise ABC license in a straight-line distance; all existing or
proposed buildings and structures on the lot, and all doorways leading into the buildings; driveways,
parking, and interior circulation; method of screening; and total area of the buildings.
155.506.47 Archery or Firearms Range, Indoor Only.
A. An archery or firearms range is allowed in the I-1, I-2, B-1SCD, and ENT districts when all activity is
conducted completely within an enclosed building.
B. STANDARDS.
1. The building housing this use shall be constructed so as to significantly muffle noise generated by
the firing of weapons so that no sound over 40 decibels may be heard at the property line. Sound
absorbing materials, unpainted heavy masonry walls, or other options shall be identified on the site
plan as the intended methods of noise reduction outside the range structure.
2. Structural details shall conform to the minimum design standards outlined in the latest revised
edition of the NRA Range Source Book, Section 3, Chapters 1 through 12, OSHA, military, or other
design criteria. The specific design standards being followed shall be identified on the site plan.
3. Parking areas and building entrances must be adequately lighted to prevent any shadows or dark
spaces between any parking space and the entrance doorway. Matthews Police Department may be
requested to provide recommendations on adequate safety of parking lot location, design, and
screening.
4. No mechanical or ventilation equipment shall be visible from a public right-of-way. Exhaust air
discharged from the range shall meet all state and federal requirements, and designed to separate
discharge from any air supply intakes for the same or nearby uses to prevent cross-contamination of
heavy metal-laden air.
5. No storage of lead, ammunition, firearms, gunpowder, or other hazardous or dangerous materials,
as may be identified by the Matthews Police Department, shall be stored in an accessory structure.
No cleaning or repair of guns shall be allowed within an accessory structure.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 132
155.506.48 Solar Collector Installation.
A. A solar collector is a device or structure which transforms solar radiant energy into other forms of energy. A
series of such collectors are often placed in close proximity to each other for cumulative energy production
and transmission. Such installations may be located as an accessory use, such as in a residential environment
to power household utilities or to provide heat for potable water or enclosed spaces on individual properties,
or may be concentrated on a site as a principal use primarily to generate power which is transmitted off-site.
Accessory solar collector installations for individual dwellings or personal and direct use by the occupant of
the structure are allowed in any district. Larger installations for energy generation may be allowed in most
nonresidential and mixed use districts as provided below. Design of a solar collector installation shall take
into account the existing restriction and/or potential future loss of solar access as a result of any trees,
landscaping, buildings, other structures, and topography in existence at the time the solar collector installation
received permits from Mecklenburg LUESA to be installed. Such obstructions, when off-site or part of a
previously approved landscape plan, shall not be removed or pruned at any time to increase solar access.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Accessory solar collector installations may be roof mounted or ground mounted. Roof mounted
collectors and related equipment elements shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the roof
or building upon which the collectors are installed, except piping or similar related equipment can
wrap around roof edges or be located along exterior walls when they extend no more than six inches
(6”). Roof mounted collectors may be located on the principal building or on accessory structures
on the lot. When the structure or property has historic designation, then any roof mounted collectors
shall be placed so they cannot be viewed from any adjacent public street and shall obtain a
Certificate of Appropriateness prior to installation. When supported directly by the ground, solar
collectors shall meet all required dimensional standards for setbacks and yards, and shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25’) in height when oriented at maximum tilt.Whether installed at a fixed angle or
capable of tilting to follow the sun, a solar collector installation shall not cause any solar glare to
persons on the ground, in vehicles, or inside buildings.
2. Ground mounted solar collector installations as a principal use shall have all collectors and related
equipment and components no closer to an interior (nonstreet) property line than twenty feet (20’),
and no closer than thirty feet (30’) to any public street. The installation shall be enclosed by a fence
at least six feet in height at least ten feet (10’) inside the property lines, with landscape plant
materials between the fence and the property lines on all sides. This planted area shall be a
combination of evergreen and deciduous shrubs at least three feet (3’) in height at time of initial
planting and spaced no further than ten feet (10’) on center, and shall be of varieties that will not
grow in height or width to block the sun’s rays from reaching the solar collectors. Existing trees
within ten feet (10’) of the site’s outer boundaries shall not be removed or pruned to improve the
capacity of solar collectors. Perimeter landscaping, and screening as required by § 155.606 shall
not be required in order to allow maximum solar access. Streetscape trees are required, although
they may be of a small maturing variety where larger species would restrict solar access to some
adjacent collectors.
3. When a principal use, ground mounted solar collectors and all equipment and associated devices
shall not exceed twenty five feet (25’) in height. Solar collector installations which are roof mounted
on mixed use and nonresidential buildings shall not exceed the maximum building height of the
underlying zoning district and any overlay zoning district when at full tilt. Whether installed at a
fixed angle or capable of tilting to follow the sun, a solar collector installation shall not cause any
solar glare to persons on the ground, in vehicles, or inside buildings.
4. No outside storage related to the solar collector installation shall be allowed. No signs shall be
visible off-site for the solar collector installation, except one (1) identification sign at a gated
entrance to a ground mounted facility, not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area. A wayfinding or
governmental sign may be attached to a solar collector installation, when appropriate. No noxious
fumes, odors, noise, or similar nuisance factors shall be created on-site. Any electrical wiring for
the system shall be underground except where necessary to connect to the local utility power grid
or the associated building using the generated power.
5. All solar collector installations shall comply with the state Building Code and Electrical Code.
6. The current and future owner and/or operator of a solar collector installation shall assume all risk
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 133
associated with diminished performance caused by any adjacent structure, building, or landscaping,
present or future, which may interfere with receiving maximum solar radiation, regardless of when
the adjacent structure is constructed or when landscaping is installed or grows.
7. It shall be the current and future owner and/or operator of a solar collector installation to maintain
the facility in good working order, and to remove all obsolete or unused systems within one (1) year
of cessation of operation.
8. Roof mounted or ground mounted solar collector installations as a principal use are allowed in the
Traditional Business and Industrial districts and the B-1SCD district. Roof mounted principal use
installations are allowed in the C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT districts.
155.506.49 Gas (Fueling) Station with Convenience Store.
A. A typical gas station is open to the public to purchase fuel for their vehicles, generally with several pumps
offering various grades of gasoline, diesel, or alternative fuels, and may also have on-site air pumps, car
vacuums, a car wash facility, and an enclosed retail sales area where individuals may pay for their fuel and
purchase prepared or fresh food and drink items, and miscellaneous merchandise. While fuel dispensing,
retail store, and car wash facility may be separate business enterprises, they work in tandem on the property.
When properly designed to limit incompatible aspects of the business site from adjacent parcels, these uses
may be allowed in certain nonresidential and mixed use districts, including the B-H, I-1, B-1SCD, MUD,
and ENT districts.
B. STANDARDS.
1. Buildings and structures with vertical planes of walls and windows – store, car wash, retaining wall,
etc. – shall be located at the minimum setback or maximum build-to line for at least fifty percent
(50%) of the lot width, except for corner lots. On a corner lot, these structures shall be located along
the setback or build-to lines of both streets, at least forty percent (40%) on one and at least sixty
percent (60%) on the other. Structures shall be set at an angle or out of any sight triangles at
intersections and driveway access points.
2. Vehicular access points shall be situated as far away as possible from any street intersections.
3. Whenever possible, a gas station with convenience store shall share vehicular access points with
adjacent parcels to reduce the number of curb cuts onto public streets. No more than two (2) shared
curb cuts on public streets shall be allowed for a gas station site, and these must be a minimum of
one hundred fifty feet (150’) apart when on the same street, or may be located on two different
streets. When no shared access is possible, then only one (1) access curb cut shall be allowed for
the gas station facility. Vehicular access points onto private interior driveways may be spaced no
less than forty feet (40’) apart, with no limitation on the number. Any vehicle access, whether
adjoining a public or private driving area, shall not be greater than twenty four feet (24’) in width,
unless including a center median with a safe pedestrian refuge.
4. Pedestrian pathways shall be provided from the adjacent public street’s sidewalk to the store
building, and from required on-site parking to the store building. The pedestrian circulation shall
not conflict with on-site vehicular circulation patterns.
5. One (1) queuing space shall be designed for each pump location. Queuing spaces shall not conflict
with or block on-site parking spaces or the entrance area to the site.
6. On-site circulation for tanker trucks shall be designed for forward movement only.
7. Noise-generating areas, such as vacuum stations, refrigeration motors, car wash mechanical
equipment, and air conditioners, shall not be located within forty feet (40’) of any adjacent
residential or institutional use.
8. The architectural character, lighting, signs, and landscaping of all buildings and structures
comprising business activities of a gas station with convenience store shall conform to the existing
or planned character and exterior materials found in the surrounding neighborhood.
a. When more than fifty percent (50%) of the surrounding neighborhood buildings within
four hundred feet (400’) of the gas station parcel property boundaries have some style of
pitched roof, then the gas station structures, including a car wash and canopy over the gas
pumps, shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 4:12.
b. Gas pump islands and canopy shall not be placed within twenty feet (20’) of any public
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 5 - 134
street, to allow space for street trees and other landscaping amenities.
c. Buildings shall be designed to have consistent or complementary architectural
characteristics wrap all sides. Where loading, dumpster, utility equipment, or similar areas
need to be placed outside the building, they shall be shielded from view from public streets.
Walls used as screening shall be of the same exterior materials and colors as the buildings,
and shall be high enough to completely conceal dumpsters or permanently located
equipment.
d. The canopy over gas pump islands shall be visually consistent in design features with onsite
buildings. All canopy columns or supports shall be clad with exterior materials and
colors consistent with the buildings, and this cladding shall be proportionate to the height
and scale of the canopy. Vertical edges of the canopy shall not be illuminated. A canopy
shall not exceed twenty feet (20’) in height.
e. Windows of the store building shall be transparent glass to allow unobstructed views in
and out of the building. Window signs are limited to ten percent (10%) of the total glass
area.
f. Landscaping, lighting fixtures, and other on-site elements shall be consistent and
complementary in design.
9. Attached signs may be placed on canopies and buildings in number and size as allowed by the
underlying zoning district. Because they are inter-related, all uses on the site shall be considered
one business establishment for purposes of determining allowed maximum signage. One
freestanding sign for the site shall be allowed at the size given for the zoning district.
10. No more than two (2) gas stations shall be allowed to locate at any intersection, and shall be on
different corners to allow convenient access to different flows of traffic. In all other configurations,
one gas station shall be separated from another gas station by a minimum of five hundred feet (500’),
measured in a straight line distance from nearest property edges.
155.506.50 Internet Sweepstakes or Adult Gaming Facility
A. An internet sweepstakes or adult gaming facility may be a stand-alone business or a section of space within
another commercial use which offers customers the opportunity to participate in electronic activities at patron
stations that may result in rewards of money, merchandise or services of more than negligible value (i.e., not
children’s toys or novelties), on- or off-premise or online, when any such rewards may not be legally available
to minors. Such uses are considered a principal use regardless of the area they take up within a building.
These uses may be located within the B-H and I-1 districts when meeting the standards listed here.
B. Standards.
1. Any internet sweepstakes or adult gaming facility shall not operate in the same building where any
place of worship, any public or private elementary, middle or high school, any child day care facility,
any adult day care facility, or any other internet sweepstakes or adult gaming facility is located.
2. Any internet sweepstakes or adult gaming facility shall be placed at least five hundred feet (500’)
in a straight line distance from any existing use listed in §155.506.50.B.1 immediately above.
3. Each area within a building devoted to internet sweepstakes or adult gaming shall be open and
visible, and have direct access from the front interior of the business. Entrance door(s) to the
business location shall remain unlocked while patrons are, or may be, on the premises.
4. No internet sweepstakes or adult gaming facility shall allow or condone any persons under the age
of eighteen (18) to participate in any activity at the patron stations, or to supervise operation of
equipment. (Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
(Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16; Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 1
Chapter 6. General Development Standards
155.601. General
Regulations
155.601.1 Zoning Affects Every Building and Use
No building, structure, or land may be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or part may be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all the regulations of this Title for
the district in which it is located, except as otherwise provided by this Title. ('72 Code, § 24-1009) (Ord. 477, passed
2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.036]
155.601.2 Prohibited Reduction of Yards and Lot Area
No lot existing at the time of passage of this Title may be reduced in its dimensions or area below the minimum
requirements of this Title for the district in which it is located unless specifically authorized by other provisions of
this Title. ('72 Code, § 24-1011) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.038]
155.601.3 Combination of Substandard Lots
In certain circumstances, substandard lots which have been previously recorded will be required to be combined for
zoning purposes. At any time after the adoption of this Title, if adjoining lots are in the same ownership and any of
the lots are below Title standards for lot width or lot area for the district in which it is located, that lot shall not be
eligible for development unless one or more adjoining lots are combined with the substandard parcel into one or more
lots which do meet the minimum ordinance requirements and are properly recorded. However, if the combination
results in the creation of a single lot with more than one and one-half times the width and area than is required by this
Title then it may be divided into two lots of equal width and area, and shall include a note on the recorded plat
explaining the application of this section ('72 Code, § 24-1007) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as §
153.035]
155.601.4 Encroachment of Open Space or Utility Easements Prohibited
No open area of land on a parcel which does not have, or has not been identified for, coverage by a principal or
accessory building, structure, or outdoor use may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except to conform
to yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations designated in this Title. Any land area
designated as open space on a final plat, other recorded plan document, Town approved site plan, or County approved
request for permit for some land disturbing activity shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in
conformance with all approved documents. No public utility easement for water, sanitary sewer, or storm water,
recorded in the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds may be encroached upon by any structure, although such
easement may be used for parking (but not any associated landscaping). ('72 Code, § 24-1010) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-
88) (Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00) [formerly known as § 153.037]
155.601.5. Every Lot Must Abut a Street
Except for the following, no building, structure, or use of land for any purpose may be placed on a lot which does not
abut a street:
A. A one-family detached dwelling may be constructed on a lot that does not abut a street, provided that the lot
is at least two acres in size, is provided with access to a public street by an easement at least fifteen feet (15’)
in width for the exclusive use of the single-family dwelling, and the easement is maintained in a condition
passable for emergency and service vehicles. In situations where two (2) or more one-family detached
dwelling lots have required minimum road frontage on a public street, but do not desire, or are prohibited
from having, direct vehicular access to such street from each individual lot, then, subject to Town approval
and NCDOT (if applicable), a shared driveway may be created on one or more of the lots through an easement
guaranteeing cross access usage to all affected parcels. (Ord. No. 1609-A, passed 2-11-08)
B. A one-family attached dwelling unit need not abut a street, provided that at least one unit of each dwelling
group abuts a street and provided that access to each dwelling unit is made available via either a public rightof-
way or private vehicular or pedestrian way owned by the individual unit owner in fee or in common
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 2
ownership.
C. One-family attached dwelling units need not abut a street, provided that all portions of every dwelling unit
are within four hundred feet (400’) of a public or private street that furnishes direct access to the property
and that access to each dwelling unit will be made available via either a public right-of-way or a private street
or vehicular or pedestrian way owned by the individual unit owner in fee or in common ownership. ('72
Code, § 24-1012) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88)
D. A tract of land of any size without required minimum road frontage may be used for an urban farm or for
growing forestry products when it is provided with access to a public street by an easement at least fifteen
feet (15’) in width for the exclusive use of the farming or forestry activity.
E. Individual dwelling units within a cottage cluster housing development do not need to abut a street, provided
there is a shared driveway access connecting to a public street. [formerly known as § 153.039]
155.601.6. Fractional Requirements
When any requirement of this Title results in a fraction of a unit, a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more will be considered
a whole unit and a fraction of less than one-half (1/2) will be disregarded. When the determination of the number of
dwelling units permitted on a lot results in a fraction of a dwelling unit, a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more will be
considered a dwelling unit and a fraction of less than one-half (1/2) will be disregarded. ('72 Code, § 24-1013) (Ord.
477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.040]
155.601.7. Modification of Development Standards
Within the R-VS, CrC, and MUD Conditional-Only districts, and for cottage cluster housing developments in any
allowed districts, which are approved or proposed under the provisions of this Title, certain development standards
may be modified. This modification is allowed under the provisions of § 155.401.7. ('72 Code, § 24-1309) (Ord. 477,
passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.051]
155.601.8. Structures Above Height Limit
A. The following structures, features, or equipment are permitted above the height limit in any nonresidential
district and for non-residential uses in residential districts, when upon or extending through the roof of a
building: roof structures for elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air conditioning or similar equipment
for the operation or maintenance of buildings, satellite dishes, and any device used for screening those
structures and equipment. Any of these features must be set back from the edges of buildings or otherwise
visually screened so that no more than one-half (1/2) of their height is visible from the ground at any property
line of the lot on which the building is located. Chimneys and skylights are also permitted above the height
limit in these districts but are not subject to screening requirements.
B. The following structures are permitted above the height limit, subject also to provisions at § 155.605, on lots
in the residential/institutional, office, business, and industrial districts which do not adjoin lots in any
residential district: steeples and clock or bell towers (either attached to the principal structure or as a separate
freestanding structure associated by architectural design to the principal structure), flagpoles, smokestack or
chimney separate from a building, water tanks, or similar structures. If this type of a structure is on a lot
which adjoins a residential district then the structure or that part of the structure above the height limit must
be separated from any such adjoining lot line by a distance equal to its height measured from the ground.
(See also § 155.608.6.A. for limits on flagpole height.)
C. The structures listed in § 155.601.8.B above are also permitted above the height limit in residential districts.
However, any part of such a structure which extends above the height limit must be separated from any
adjoining property line by a distance equal to its height measured from the ground and must meet yard
requirements of the zoning district. Maximum permitted height of these structures in any residential district
is eighty feet (80’) unless further restricted elsewhere in this Title.
D. Electric and telephone poles used to support electric power and other utility wire lines are permitted above
the height limit in any district up to sixty feet (60’). Electric transmission line towers are exempt from height
limits or separation requirements. ('72 Code, § 1605) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88: Am. Ord. 643, passed 11-5-
90; Am. Ord. 775, passed 4-12-93; Ord. 912 passed 1/27/97) [formerly known as § 153.076]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 3
155.601.9 Certain Encroachments into Yard Allowed
A. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, and fire escapes may project up to three feet (3’)
into any required yard or beyond any required setback unless that feature would obstruct driveways which
may be used for service or emergency vehicles.
B. A portion of the required rear yard on a single-family residential zoned lot used for a single-family home
may be utilized for an extension of the principal structure, including garage, porch, deck, greenhouse, covered
patio, or similar unheated space when meeting the following criteria:
1. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the required rear yard may be used to
accommodate an extension of the principal structure.
2. No such extension may encroach into the rear yard more than twenty five percent (25%) of the depth
of the required rear yard.
3. No such extension may be more than fifty percent (50%) of the width of the dwelling at the rear
building line.
4. Any such extension shall meet the required minimum front setback and side yard requirements for
a principal structure on the lot, including street side yard requirements on corner lots.
5. Such extension shall not be allowed into any utility easement.
6. Such extension shall maintain a minimum four foot (4’) building separation from any other building
within the lot.
7. No extension of the principal structure into the required rear yard shall be converted to an enclosed
heated area.
C. Structural accommodations to meet ADA standards may encroach into a required setback or yard when
necessary and no alternative application is appropriate. ('72 Code, § 1610) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Ord,
passed 8-13-12) [formerly known as § 153.081]
155.601.10 Private Alleys Included in Lots
When a private alley is allowed, the lot lines of adjacent properties may meet at the centerline of the alley, and the
land area of the alley portion may be included in calculating minimum lot area. However, in order to assure sufficient
and unencumbered travel lane width, all minimum distances to buildings or parking spaces shall be measured from
the outer edges of the alley pavement and not from the lot line. ('72 Code, § 1611) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88)
[formerly known as § 153.082]
155.601.11 Specific Standards for Certain Side and Rear Yards
A. ADJOINING RAILROADS OR WATERFRONT. In nonresidential districts, side and rear yards as may be
established for those districts are not required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way or on the waterfront side of
lots adjacent to impounded water. In these instances, the required minimum side or rear yard shall be ten
feet (10’). Any other provisions of this Title shall also apply, and if there is any conflict between this and
other provisions, the most restrictive shall apply. ('72 Code, § 1612) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly
known as § 153.083]
B. CORNER OR THROUGH/DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. When a lot has public street frontage on more than one
side, one or more of the following standards may apply in addition to the underlying minimum yards of the
zoning district. When the standards listed here and the zoning district’s side and/or rear yard requirements
differ, the standards requiring the greater distance shall take precedence.
1. If two (2) corner lots are separated by a common lot line, the corner side yards for the lots shall be
a minimum of ten feet (10’).
2. If the rear lot line of a corner lot is also the side lot line of an adjacent lot to the rear, then the corner
side yard must be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required front setback for the adjoining lot.
3. If the side lot line of a corner lot in any zoning district abuts a thoroughfare, the corner side yard
must be at least forty five feet (45’) in a lot used for residential purposes, and at least thirty five feet
(35’) in a lot used for mixed use or nonresidential purposes.
4. If both the front setback and rear yard of a lot in any single-family residential district abut public
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 4
streets, the minimum rear yard will be the same as the minimum front setback for that district.
5. When the rear yard of a through lot in any zoning district abuts a thoroughfare, the minimum rear
yard depth must be at least fifty five feet (55’). [formerly known as §§ 153.085, 153.086, and
153.095(B) and (C)]
C. ZERO LOT LINE DWELLINGS. When a zero lot line dwelling is allowed in various zoning districts, the
underlying front setback, side and rear yards and other dimensional standards for that district will apply with
the exception of one side or rear yard dimension, which may be reduced down to zero (0) feet to allow
placement of the structure at or near the one lot line. When this is done, a maintenance easement of at least
five feet (5’) in width shall be created and recorded at the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds for the
adjacent property, to allow for access, repair and general maintenance of the structure along the zero lot line.
Eaves, bay windows, gutters, mechanical equipment, and similar extensions or attachments to the principal
structure shall not be placed on or extend over the property line. The lot line to which the zero dimension is
applied shall not be the streetside side yard of a corner lot. No windows or door openings shall be located
within the wall portion at the lot line in order to create a sense of separation for the adjacent parcel.
155.601.12 Location of Required Yards on Irregular Lots
The location of required front, side, and rear yards on irregularly shaped lots will be determined by the Zoning
Administrator. The determination will be based on the spirit and intent of this Title to achieve an appropriate spacing
and location of buildings on individual lots. ('72 Code, § 1613) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as §
153.084]
155.601.13 Sight Triangle
A. STANDARDS. Within a sight triangle, and except as provided in § 155.601.13.B below, no structure, sign,
plant, shrub, tree, berm, fence, wall, mailbox or object of any other kind shall be installed, constructed, set
out or maintained so as to obstruct cross-visibility at a level between two (2) feet and ten (10) feet above the
level of the center of the street intersection.
B. EXEMPTIONS. The standards of this § 155.601.13 shall not apply to:
1. Existing natural grades, which, by reason of natural topography, rises twenty four (24) or more
inches above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection.
2. Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the
area between two feet (2’) and ten feet (10’) above the level of the center of the abutting intersection.
3. Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental signs, and traffic control devices.
(Ord. No. 1532, passed 1-8-07)
C. Reduced Sight Triangle for Certain Districts. A modified sight triangle with dimensions no less than
twenty five feet by twenty five feet (25’ x 25’) as measured from back of curb may be allowed
within the Downtown Overlay district and within the C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT districts with the
approval of the Town Engineer. This provision may only be applied adjacent to Town-maintained
streets (not state roads) and private streets, and only when the adjacent building or approved outdoor
amenity is at, or less than, twenty feet (20’) from the public street right-of-way line or the platted
private street right-of-way. Outdoor amenities that may justify a reduced sight triangle may include,
but are not limited to, a retaining wall or substantial sharp change of natural grade, stairs, fire escape,
or low wall that visually and physically separates the public right-of-way from the adjacent private
use area and cannot efficiently be relocated elsewhere on the site. The reduced sight triangle must
be located where the travel lane closest to the building is controlled by either a signal or signage.
[formerly part of § 153.078] (Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-17)
155.601.14 More than One Principal Building per Lot
More than one (1) principal nonresidential building may be located on a lot if a paved access driveway at least ten feet
(10’) wide is maintained from a public street to each building for use by service and emergency vehicles. Unless a
lesser standard is allowed elsewhere in this Title and by applicable building codes, a minimum separation of four feet
(4’) is required between separate buildings. No more than one (1) principal residential building may be located on a
lot, except under the provisions for accessory apartments, cottage cluster developments, multi-family developments,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 5
manufactured home parks, overnight camping trailer parks, and institutionalized residential facilities. In the case of
attached single-family development where the side or rear lot lines match the center of common shared walls, the
approved preliminary subdivision plat indicating the proposed lot lines shall be used for building permit approval,
although temporary or final Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued until a final plat is approved and recorded.
('72 Code, § 1619) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 871, passed 9-12-94) (Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00) [formerly
known as § 153.088]
155.601.15 Driveways
Driveways in any mixed use or nonresidential district may be used to provide access to uses in any of these districts.
('72 Code, § 1618) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.087]
155.601.16 Vibrations
No use in any district may operate in such a way that any inherent or recurring ground vibrations can be felt or detected
at the property line without the use of instruments. ('72 Code, § 1620) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known
as § 153.089]
155.601.17 Noise
Every use of land must be operated in such a way that regularly recurring noises are not disturbing or unreasonably
loud and do not cause injury, detriment, or nuisance to any person of ordinary sensitivities. Every nonresidential use
must be operated in such a way that any noise which may be detected by the human senses without instruments at all
public right-of-way and property lines is no louder than the noise which could be expected from uses permitted in
those districts. In instances where more restrictive provisions of this Title may apply, they will control. See also the
Town Noise Ordinance. ('72 Code, § 1621) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) [formerly known as § 153.090]
155.601.18 Special Requirements for Lots along Thoroughfares
A. TRANSITIONAL SETBACK/YARD REQUIRED.
1. DETERMINATION OF TRANSITIONAL SETBACK/YARD. The required setbacks and/or streetside yards
prescribed for each zoning district which abut a proposed, but not yet constructed thoroughfare,
shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line established for each street classification as
designated on the Town or CRTPO Comprehensive Transportation Plan. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-
12-17)
2. USE OF TRANSITIONAL SETBACK/YARD. A transitional setback or yard shall also be applied for each
parcel which abuts a thoroughfare that has an existing right-of-way which is not as wide as the rightof-
way established for that thoroughfare as designated by the adopted Comprehensive
Transportation Plan, this Title, or other adopted document which identifies right-of-way dimensions.
The transitional setback or yard area established for lots abutting thoroughfares can be used for any
purpose allowed by the particular zoning district, except for (i) those uses which are prohibited in
the required setbacks or yards elsewhere in this Title, or (ii) to satisfy any minimum parking
requirements if parking is not allowed in the setback or yard by the particular zoning district. The
transitional setback or yard (the area between the existing required setback/yard and the line
established when measured from the future widened right-of-way) may be used for parking only
when such parking exceeds the minimum parking requirements At the time that the proposed rightof-
way is dedicated or otherwise acquired for roadway purposes, the property owner shall be
responsible for the removal of any uses constructed after July 10, 2000, which are within the
transitional setback or yard that are not otherwise permitted in the setback or yard by the zoning
district regulations. The property owner shall have one year from the date of right-of-way
acquisition to remove any such uses. (Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00; Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
3. EXCEPTIONS. The standards of § 155.601.18.A.1 and § 155.601.18.A.2 will not apply to any
development satisfying one or more of the following circumstances: (i) Any multi-building site or
multi-lot development which has at least one (1) building built or under construction, or has a valid
unexpired building permit issued for at least one building prior to July 10, 2000; (ii) Any project
which had a site plan not requiring any additional right-of way approved prior to July 10, 2000
through a zoning action of the Board of Commissioners, or through a Highway Overlay Compliance
Review, a Downtown Overlay Compliance Review, or Landscape Plan Review by Town Staff.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 6
4. An affected property owner shall have the right to request a variance to transitional setback or yard
requirements to the Board of Adjustment. In granting relief, the Board of Adjustment may impose
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards to protect the interest of neighboring
properties.
B. Either the provisions for site perimeter screening at §155.606.6.A or the provisions for loading area screening
at §155.606.6.B must be provided along the rear yard and along the side yard of any lot which abuts a
thoroughfare when located within the following districts: all Traditional zoning districts except HUC, and
Conditional-Only districts R-VS, CrC, SRN, C-MF, B-1SCD, and AU ('72 Code, § 1631) (Ord. 477, passed
2-8-88; Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17) [formerly known as § 153.095]
155.601.19 Prior Cluster Subdivisions
Provisions for Cluster subdivisions were in effect in previous Matthews development ordinances, until August 13,
2012. A cluster development has been defined as a tract of land of at least ten acres initially owned by a single person,
firm, partnership, association, or corporation which is planned and developed as a single project. Any existing cluster
development shall be considered to be in conformance with all lot dimensions and minimum required setbacks and
yards as long as the subdivision remains substantially the same as recorded. Minor revisions to individual lots may
be made and the cluster dimensional standards provided here may be applied to those altered lots. Alternative
dimensional standards for lot area, and for front setbacks, side and rear yards for any lot line on the interior of the
proposed subdivision were allowed when shown on a final plat recorded prior to the given end date. Because these
dimensions remain legal within the R-20, R-15, R-12, and R-9 districts when they were put into effect prior to the
date given above, the applicable table of dimensions for Cluster development is provided here as a historical guide.
These dimensions and the Cluster provisions here are no longer available to new development.
R-9 R-12 R-15 R-20
Minimum lot area 6,750 9,000 11,250 15,000
Minimum lot width 60 feet 60 feet 70 feet 80 feet
Minimum side yards (1) Six feet one side, eight feet other side
Minimum setback 20 feet 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Average setback** 25 feet 30 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Minimum rear yard (1) 25 feet 30 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Minimum unobstructed
Open space 50% 55% 60% 65%
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
** Arithmetic average of all setbacks for all lots on one side of a block, or of all lots on a cul-de-sac.
(1) Any side and/or rear yards which form the outer boundary of a Cluster development must conform to the
conventional minimum requirements of the district in which the development is located. [formerly § 153.093 and §
153.206]
155.601.20 Accessory Structures
A. Accessory structures shall not be permitted in any required front setback or side yard or within three feet (3’)
of any exterior property line. If located on a corner lot, the accessory structure shall not be nearer to the side
street than the principal structure.
B On parcels with single-family attached or detached dwellings, no accessory structure shall be the greater of:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 7
taller than twenty feet (20’) in height; or exceed the height of the principal structure. The size of all accessory
structures on such a residentially-used lot shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the heated area of the
principal structure.
C. Accessory structures on properties with multi-family uses or mixed uses that include dwellings shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the heated area of all residences.
D. Underground accessory structures may be permitted within any required yard or setback as long as the any
ventilating or other similar equipment extends no higher than thirty two inches (32”) above the finished
grade, is at least three feet (3’) away from any property lines, and does not cover more than five percent (5%)
of the required yard area. Accessory structures such as piers and docks may also be permitted in any required
setback or yard on lots which adjoin bodies of water. [formerly § 153.077]
155.601.21 Fences and Walls in Residential Districts and Developments
A. Within the single-family residential districts (R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R-VS, CrC), no wall or fence
may exceed four feet (4’) in height in any required front setback, or no more than six feet (6’) in height within
any required side or rear yard.
B. For any housing development in other districts which are exclusively or primarily residential in nature,
including R-15MF, R-12MF, SRN, and C-MF, no wall or fence may exceed six feet (6’) in height in any
required front setback, or required side or rear yard.
C. Fence height shall be the vertical distance measured on the exterior side of the fence from the ground directly
under the fence to the highest point of the fence, exclusive of capitals or ornamental projections which are
no closer than five foot (5’) intervals. When applicable, the finished side of the fence shall face the exterior
of the property.
D. Where the ground elevation is inconsistent, the fence height along any unbroken run, up to sixteen (16) lineal
feet, may be averaged, as long as no point along that unbroken run exceeds ten percent (10%) of the stated
height limit. Fence capitals or ornamental projections on columns or posts may extend six inches (6”) above
the actual fence height if they are spaced centerline to centerline between five feet (5’) and twelve feet (12’)
apart. Capitals or ornamental projections may extend twelve inches (12”) above the actual fence height if
they are spaced centerline to centerline greater than twelve feet (12’) apart, or may extend eighteen inches
(18”) above the actual fence height if they are spaced centerline to centerline greater than twenty four feet
(24’) from any other capital or ornamental projection.
E. Fully opaque fences and walls are not desired at entrances to housing areas or along front setbacks of
dwellings. Privacy fences and walls which are intended to create private yards, courtyards, or play spaces
for use by residents are allowed along street edges, but should incorporate landscaping or other features to
visually break the appearance of a solid single plane for pedestrians.
F. The wall or fence height limitation does not apply to walls and fences constructed around structures and
facilities for public utilities, communications towers and related equipment, or similar essential
nonresidential uses. Walls and fences related to these uses are subject to landscape screening provisions
elsewhere in this Title. (’72 Code 1624) (Ord.477, passed 2-8-88; Ord. 912, passed 1/27/97; Ord 1526,
passed 1/8/07; Ord 1577, passed 7/23/07) [formerly § 153.091]
155.601.22 Accessory Uses and Buildings
No accessory use or building may be located on a residential property unless an allowed principal use is present.
When the principal use is a residential dwelling, the principal building on the site must have a valid Certificate of
Occupancy before an accessory building may receive a permit for construction. Other accessory structures may
receive a permit for construction after the permit for the principal building is issued. When the principal use on a
parcel is an open use of land, then a construction permit for an accessory building or structure may be issued.
155.601.23 Unit Ownership (Condominium/Townhouse/Planned Community) Development
When a development is proposed for construction or conversion to a form of condominium, twenty plus (20+)
townhouses, or a planned community, which would be subject to the regulations outlined in NCGS 47A, 47C, and
47F, such development shall conform to normal use and development requirements of this Title for the district within
which it is proposed to be located, including recordation of a final plat showing lots, when applicable. Any required
improvements included in an approved zoning site plan or conditional zoning action shall be indicated as “must be
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 8
built” on documents for the development. A copy of the recorded declaration shall be provided to the Town Planning
office. [formerly known as §153.170]
155.602. Site Plan Layout – General Urban Design Principles
155.602.1 General
With proper urban form, a greater integration of building uses is natural and comfortable. The following general
principles are encouraged to be applied throughout the Town in all zoning districts, and must be followed when
Conditional-Only zoning designation is requested for the SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT districts:
• Buildings form the public realm that is primarily streets and pedestrian pathways.
• The street is a coherent space, with consistent building form. This agreement of buildings
facing across the public realm contributes to a clear public space and identity.
• Buildings oversee the street with active fronts. This overview of the public realm
contributes to vital and safe public space.
• Land should be clearly public or private—in public view and under surveillance or private
and protected.
• Buildings are designed for communal encounters, and must be designed for the urban
situation within the Town. Views are directed to the public space as much as possible.
• Vehicle storage/parking, (not including on-street parking), garbage storage and collection,
and mechanical equipment are kept away from the public realm.
155.602.2 Civic Use Areas.
Within the various Conditional-Only district there may be appropriate locations for improvements and structures
available to the general public. Their design can significantly enhance the ambiance of the public realm.
A. CIVIC BUILDINGS. Civic buildings contain public or civic uses of special significance to residents, employees,
or visitors. Civic buildings are used for the following purposes: community services, day care, education,
government, places of worship, or social services. Civic buildings must be designed to physically express
their community prominence, which means they should generally be sited adjoining or surrounded by civic
spaces or where they provide a visual landmark by being placed at the axial termination of a street.
B. CIVIC OUTDOOR SPACES. Civic greens, squares and plazas shall be designed, planted and maintained
according to the following requirements. Squares and plazas are generally intended to be active pedestrian
centers and should be designed appropriate to their high foot traffic level with a higher percentage of paved
surface area and should provide scattered short-interval seating accommodations. Civic greens are spaces
intended for less intensive foot traffic and visitors may stay for a longer duration. Use of pervious paving
materials is encouraged to allow oxygen to reach tree roots.
1. Trees planted within civic spaces provide a landscape and civic architecture that complement the
surrounding building architecture. A clear view through the public space between two (2’) to eight
feet (8’) in height is important for safety and urban design purposes. The foliage of newly planted
trees may intrude below the eight foot (8’) clear vision level for up to four (4) growing seasons, and
low hanging branches of large maturing preserved trees may encroach into the eight foot (8’) clear
vision space when not extending over a paved walkway.
2. Materials and Configurations.
a. Street trees shall be planted along the perimeter of the square or civic green at an average
spacing not greater than forty feet (40’) on center. Where the natural shape and spread of
large maturing trees would not properly occur at this spacing, an explanation of proposed
alternate tree layout and comparison of tree count as shown and per the forty foot spacing
shall be included on the Landscape Plan for the civic space. The required trees shall be
selected from the approved Street Tree List in § 155.606.14.
b. At least sixty percent (60%) of the trees within any civic space shall be large maturing
trees, both evergreen and deciduous, except where existing trees are preserved that are
predominately small maturing species. Existing trees shall be preserved to the greatest
extent practical in designing civic spaces.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 9
c. Except for tree trunks, street lights, civic buildings, public art, or monuments, there shall
be a clear view between two (2’) and eight feet (8’) above grade.
d. Asphalt alone as a paving material is prohibited within a civic space, but may be
incorporated in the pedestrian use and travel portions along with other paving materials.
Stamped asphalt, concrete, brick, stone pavers, cobblestone, and similar materials may be
used within civic spaces.
3. Greens, squares and plazas must be located so that building walls that will face the civic space will
have at least twenty five percent (25%) of their primary facade, including at least forty (40) percent
of the ground story’s primary facade, in transparent windows.
155.603. Buildings – General Urban Design Principles
155.603.1 General
These principles favor an aesthetic that is traditional in a broad sense, and which create an architectural aesthetic of
load-bearing walls and regionally appropriate materials. The principles also specify certain details, such as window
proportions, roof or parapet configurations, shop fronts, and overhang features. The intent behind these urban design
principles is to foster a unique image while utilizing regionally appropriate elements. While materials, techniques,
and product types are identified in this Title as allowed, use of equivalent or better practices and products are
encouraged. They shall be submitted to the Town Planning office either for Administrative Amendment as explained
at § 155.401.5 or Flexible Design as explained at § 155.401.7., whichever applies. Many of the principles apply only
in conditions where the building elements are clearly visible from the public use realm, including streets, shared
parking areas, and civic spaces. These urban design principles therefore concentrate on the views from the public
realm and minimize interference in the private realm. For example, an architectural element that is visible only through
an opening in the street wall is not clearly visible from the public realm. The following general principles are
encouraged throughout the Town in all zoning districts and must be followed when Conditional-Only zoning
designation is requested for the SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT districts.
155.603.2 Exterior Building Walls
Exterior building walls shall generally reflect and complement the traditional materials and construction techniques
of the Charlotte region on all sides of any structure which may be visible from the public realm. They should express
the construction techniques and structural constraints of traditional, long-lasting, building materials. Simple
configurations and solid craftsmanship are favored over complexity and ostentation in building form and the
articulation of details. All building materials to be used shall express their specific properties. For example, heavier
more permanent materials (masonry) support lighter materials (wood).
Buildings constructed for commercial uses, particularly retail, which are predominately or wholly single story
facilities, need to pay particular attention to the impact of their bulk and length along public street frontages. In order
to improve the appearance from the public realm, these buildings should break up any expanses of blank walls with
the use of exterior materials changes, a shift in wall location so that the frontage is not on a single plane parallel to the
street, window and door openings, architectural design elements, and similar visually obvious detail changes that break
up the horizontal expanse of plain wall. To the greatest extent possible, single story buildings greater than thirty
thousand square feet (30,000 sq ft) and/or with a front elevation longer than one hundred feet (100’) facing the public
realm should utilize some architectural and visual variety to reduce the appearance of a single monolithic structure
when initially designed or renovated for retail use. (Am. Ord 2264 passed 10-9-17)
155.603.3 Roofs and Parapets
Roofs and parapets should demonstrate a commonsense recognition of the climate by utilizing appropriate pitch,
drainage, and materials in order to provide visual coherence.
155.603.4 Windows and Doors
The placement, type, and size of windows and doors help to establish the scale and vitality of the public realm. For
nonresidential and mixed use buildings, they allow interplay between the business interiors and the street or public
realm space. For residential buildings, they foster “eyes on the street” surveillance which provides for security and
safety in the area. Windows should be divided by multiple panes of glass. This helps the window “hold” the surface
of the façade, rather than appearing like a “hole” in the wall, an effect produced by a large single sheet of glass.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 601 - 10
When larger single-story buildings are initially designed for commercial retail uses, they should include windows
along at least forty percent (40%) of the length of the façade facing the public realm and should provide placement
for future door openings for eventual reuse by multiple users. “Larger buildings” refers to single story buildings
greater than thirty thousand square feet (30,000 sq ft) and/or with a front elevation longer than one hundred feet
(100’) facing the public realm. (Am. Ord 2264 passed 10-9-17)
155.603.5 Signage
Signs along mixed use and nonresidential frontages should be clear, informative to the public and should weather well.
Signage is desirable for advertising shops and offices, and as decoration. Signs should be scaled to the nature of the
particular area of the designated district, such as a mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented first floor environment, a high
volume and free-flowing traffic corridor, or predominately residential. Inappropriate use or placement of signage
increases driver distraction, intrudes into and lessens the urban environment pedestrian experience, and creates visual
clutter.
(Ord# passed 12-9-13; Am. Ord 2188 passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord 2264 passed 10-9-17)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 604 - 1
155.604. Dimensional Standards
.
Any parcels within the Downtown Overlay or Highway 51 Overlay shall also meet build-to lines, minimum lot sizes, and minimum setbacks/yards
For corner lots or through/double frontage lots, see also § 155.601.11
For lots adjacent to existing or proposed thoroughfares, see also § 155.601.18
(10) Required minimum side and rear yards must be increased one foot (1’) for each foot or fraction of a foot in height over the given maximum when adjacent to a residential
district, or one foot (1’) for each two feet (2’) in height over the maximum given limit when adjacent to all nonresidential districts
(17) See § 155.601.11 for further standards when a lot adjoins a railroad, waterfront, or thoroughfare. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
155.604.1 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
RESIDENTIAL TRADITIONAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R-20 R-15 R-12 R-9 R-MH R-15MF R-12MF
Minimum lot area (sq ft) 20,000 15,000 12,000 9,000 10,000 15,000 12,000
Minimum overall development area (sq ft or ac) NA NA NA NA NA 15,000 12,000
Maximum overall development area (sq ft or ac) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Area for each additional dwelling unit (sq ft) NA NA NA NA NA 3,500 3,000
Minimum lot width (ft) 90 80 70 60 70 90 80
Minimum width when a corner lot (ft) 90 80 70 60 70 90 80
Minimum front setback (ft) 50 40 35 30 25 40 35
Maximum build-to line (ft) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum side yard, interior (ft) (17) 12 10 10 8 & 6 8 10 10
Minimum corner side yard (streetside) (ft) (17) 12 10 10 10 10 10 10
Minimum rear yard (ft) (17) 60 55 50 45 30 55 50
Maximum building height (ft) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35/45(10)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 604 - 2
155.604.2 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
NONRESIDENTIAL TRADITIONAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R/I O HUC B-1 B-3 B-D B-H I-1 I-2
Minimum lot area (sq ft or ac) 2 AC (1) 9,000 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum overall development area (sq ft or ac) 2 AC (1) 9,000 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Maximum overall development area (sq ft or ac) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum lot width (ft) 200 60 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum width when a corner lot (ft) 200 60 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum front setback (ft) 50 30 (5) 40 40 40 40 40/20(15) 40
Maximum build-to line (ft) NA NA (5) NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum side yard, interior (ft) (17) 50 8 & 6 (6) 10 (3) 25 (3) 10 10 (3) 10 (8) (16) 10 (8)
Minimum corner side yard (streetside) (ft) (17) 50 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Minimum rear yard, adjacent to residential (ft) (17) 50 40 10 20 25 20 20 20 20
Minimum rear yard, adjacent to other districts (ft) (17) 50 20 10 10 10 10 10 20 20
Maximum building height (ft or stories) 60 (2) 40 40, or 3 stories (7) 40 50 (4) 40 40 40 (4) 40 (4)
Minimum building height (ft) NA NA NA NA 35 NA NA NA NA
Any parcels within the Downtown Overlay or Highway 51 Overlay shall also meet build-to lines, minimum lot sizes, and minimum setbacks/yards
For corner lots or through/double frontage lots, see also § 155.601.11
For lots adjacent to existing or proposed thoroughfares, see also § 155.601.18
(1) See § 155.605.2 for min lot size based on presence and size of assembly room(s)
(2) Structures may exceed the maximum height provided the required side and rear yards are increased 1 ft for each foot or fraction of a foot in height over 60'
(3) No side yard required when not adjacent to a residential district.
(4) Structures may exceed the maximum height provided the required side and rear yards are increased 1 ft for each foot or fraction of a foot in height over the given maximum when
adjacent to a residential district, or 1 ft for each two feet in height over the maximum given limit when adjacent to all nonresidential districts
(5) Front setback or max build-to line is based on downtown street type. See § 155.502.10.C and Downtown Design Guidelines and Streetscape improvements
(6) Side yards not required. If one or more present, each must be at least 4'.
(7) Buildings facing on a public green and used for public and/or institutional uses, may increase maximum building height to 55'.
(8) Side yards must be a minimum of 20' when adjacent to a residential district.
(15) Front setbacks may be reduced when meeting the provisions established at § 155.502.15. (Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14; Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14)
(16) When an applicable side lot line is not forming a portion of an exterior boundary of a planned nonresidential park, then that side yard may be decreased to either i) 0’ if buildings
currently abut, or are planned to abut, along their common side lot line, or ii) may be decreased such that a minimum of 10’ total remains between two existing or proposed buildings
along their common side lot line. (Ord. 2121, passed 12-14-15)
(17) See § 155.601.11 for further standards when a lot adjoins a railroad, waterfront, or thoroughfare. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 604 - 3
155.604.3 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
CONDITIONAL-ONLY ZONING DISTRICTS
R-VS CrC SRN (12) C-MF MUD (12) TS B-1SCD ENT (12) AU
Minimum lot area (ft or ac) (11) 7,500 (9) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum overall development area (ft or ac) 1/2 AC NA 1 AC 3 AC (13) 15 AC(13) NA 3 AC NA NA
Maximum overall development area (ft or ac) 15 AC NA 15 AC 15 AC NA 6 AC NA NA 2 AC
Minimum lot width (ft) (11) 65 (9) 40 40 NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum width when a corner lot (ft) (11) 65 40 40 NA NA NA NA NA
Minimum front setback (ft) (11) 25 (9) NA NA 14 NA 40 NA 40
Maximum build-to line (ft) NA NA 20 20 20 20 NA 20 NA
Minimum side yard, interior (ft) (17) (11) 8 (9) 10 10( 14) NA NA 25 (18) NA 20
Minimum corner side yard (streetside) (ft) (17) 10 10 10 10 NA NA 25 (18) NA 20
Minimum rear yard (ft) (17) (11) 30 (9) 10 10 (14) NA NA 25 NA 20
Maximum building height/ max ht with increased
yards (ft) 35 35 45 45/60 (10, 14) 45/60 (10) 60 40/50 (10) 60/80 (10) 35
Minimum building height (ft) NA NA NA 18 18 24 14 24 NA
Exterior project edge adjacent to any residential
district: undeveloped/developed NA NA NA =/>3 ac: 60 (14)
=/<1 1/2 ac: 20 (14) 50/100 NA NA NA NA
Exterior project edge adjacent to all other districts NA NA NA =/>3 ac: 25 (14)
=/<1 1/2 ac: 10 (14) 15 NA NA NA NA
Minimum Setback/yard along an interstate highway NA NA NA NA 50 NA NA NA NA
Any parcels within the Downtown Overlay or Highway 51 Overlay shall also meet build-to lines, minimum lot sizes, and minimum setbacks/yards
For corner lots or through/double frontage lots, see also § 155.601.11
For lots adjacent to existing or proposed thoroughfares, see also § 155.601.18
(9) Dimensions for single parcels of development sites under five (5) acres not being developed as a SF detached subdivision. See other dimensional standards at §155.503.2
(10) Required minimum side and rear yards must be increased one foot (1’) for each foot or fraction of a foot in height over the given maximum when adjacent to a residential district,
or one foot (1’) for each two feet (2’) in height over the maximum given limit when adjacent to all nonresidential districts
(11) Dimensional standards vary depending on the overall tract area and style of housing provided. See § 155.604.4
(12) Single-family attached and detached, all styles, must follow R-VS dimensional standards at § 155.604.4 or Cottage Cluster provisions at §155.506.22
(13) A C-MF designation within one-half (1/2) mile of the intersection of Trade and John Streets shall be less than one and one-half (1 1/2) acres, with no required minimum size.
(see §155.503.4.C.2)
(14) See § 155.503.4.C.3 and 4 for further qualifications. (Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14)
(17) See § 155.601.11 for further standards when a lot adjoins a railroad, waterfront, or thoroughfare. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
(18) Side yards are not required along the interior lot lines of parcels or lots created as part of a shopping center. (Am. Ord. 2387, passed 5-13-19)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 604 - 4
155.604.4 Table of Dimensional Standards - R-VS District
A. For land parcels or alternative housing project development areas up to three (3) acres in size:
Single-Family Zero Two-Family Single Family
Detached Lot Line or Duplex Attached
Minimum
lot area (sq ft) 3,000 3,000 2,500 / du 2,000 / du
Minimum
lot width (ft) 30 25 20 / du 20 / du
Minimum
setback (ft) 20 20 20 20
Minimum
side yard (ft) 8 / 6 01 / 10 01 / 8 01, 8 for end unit
Minimum
rear yard (ft) 25 20 25 20
Maximum
height (ft) 35 35 35 35
1 Any wall constructed on the side lot line must be a solid, windowless wall. If there is an offset of the wall from the property line, that offset
portion must be at least eight feet (8’) from the side lot line. A five foot (5’) maintenance easement and maximum eave encroachment of three
feet (3’) within the maintenance easement must be established in the deed restrictions and covenants of the adjoining lot, where applicable to a
zero (0) foot side yard not adjoining another structure. This will provide ready access to the lot line wall at reasonable periods of the day for
normal maintenance.
B. For land parcels or alternative housing project development areas over three (3) acres in size:
Single-Family Zero Two-Family Single Family
Detached Lot Line or Duplex Attached
Minimum
lot area (sq ft) 4,500 4,500 4,500 / du 3,000 / du
Minimum
lot width (ft) 40 35 35 / du 30 / du
Minimum
setback (ft) 20 20 20 20
Minimum
side yard (ft) 8 / 6 01 / 15 01 / 8 01, 8 for end unit
Minimum
rear yard (ft) 30 20 30 20
Maximum
height (ft) 35 35 35 35
1 Any wall constructed on the side lot line must be a solid, windowless wall. If there is an offset of the wall from the property line, that offset
portion must be at least eight feet (8’) from the side lot line. A five foot (5’)maintenance easement and maximum eave encroachment of three
feet (3’) within the maintenance easement must be established in the deed restrictions and covenants of the adjoining lot, where applicable to a
zero (0) foot side yard not adjoining another structure. This will provide ready access to the lot line wall at reasonable periods of the day for
normal maintenance.
C. For nonresidential uses allowed in the R-VS district:
Minimum lot area 1 acre, or as required at § 155.506.7, whichever is greater
Minimum lot width 80 feet, or as required at § 155.506.7, whichever is greater
Minimum setback 25 feet, or as required at § 155.506.7, whichever is greater
Minimum side yard 20 feet, or as required at § 155.506.7, whichever is greater
Minimum rear yard 25 feet, or as required at § 155.506.7, whichever is greater
Maximum height 35 feet, unless a greater height is allowed at § 155.506.7
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 604 - 5
155.604.5 Table of Dimensional Standards -- Nonresidential Uses in SRN and C-MF Districts.
Although the SRN and C-MF districts are primarily higher density residential, they are intended to create a balanced
neighborhood environment. In order to encourage walking opportunities for residents, and to concentrate daily convenience
activities near homes, the SRN and C-MF districts may include a variety of nonresidential uses. Residential and
nonresidential uses may be located within a mixed use building or may be in separate buildings within the overall
development site. In order to prevent inappropriate impacts on the residential quality of life, the extent of nonresidential use
in the SRN and C-MF districts shall be subject to the following:
Minimum Dwellings Maximum size of Maximum size of Maximum Overall
To Include Any Any Nonresidential Any Individual Nonresidential
Nonresidential Use Building (stand-alone) Establishment Uses in District
SRN 40 8,000 sq ft GFA 3,500 sq ft GFA 5,000 sq ft per ea
20 du; max of
40,000 sq ft
C-MF 60 10,000 sq ft GFA 4,000 sq ft GFA 6,500 sq ft per ea
(must be minimum 20 du; max of
2-story) 80,000 sq ft
As an example, a five (5) acre tract is developed under the SRN district with an average of sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre,
for total of eighty (80) dwelling units in the overall development site. This would allow a maximum of 20,000 sq ft of
nonresidential uses.
80 total du/20 = 4
5,000 x 4 (groups of 20 du) = 20,000 sq ft
In a second example, a five (5) acre tract is developed under the C-MF district with an average of twenty four (24) dwelling units
per acre, for a total of one hundred twenty (120) dwellings in the overall development site. This would allow a maximum of
39,000 sq ft of nonresidential uses.
120 total du/20 = 6
6,500 x 6 (groups of 20 du) = 39,000 sq ft
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
155.605. Lot Development Standards
155.605.1. Residential Only Buildings.
A. ONE- AND TWO-UNIT RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
1. TYPE A-1 BUILDING: SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED HOUSE. Single-family detached dwelling units may take a
variety of forms, including:
Front Vehicular Access – typical suburban, contemporary style home on a detached lot meeting required
minimum front setback, side and rear yard standards, with vehicular drive access from the front or corner
street side
Rear Vehicular Access – contemporary home on a detached lot meeting required minimum front setback,
side and rear yard standards, with vehicular drive access via a rear alley (public or private)
Accessory Apartment – a detached home on a lot with an accessory apartment within an accessory building
on the same lot (illustration)
House and Accessory Unit Within Principal Building – a detached homes with an accessory dwelling within
the same principal dwelling structure (illustration)
a. Type A-1 Building is allowed in the following districts when adhering to the lot standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
NOT TO SCALE
C
G
STREET A D
F E
B
RESIDENTIAL
PARKING
BUILDING USE
RESIDENTIAL PARKING
C
BUILDING USE
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL
PARKING
ALLEY J
STREET
C
D A B D B
F
E
H H
G
I
K
Page 605 - 1
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-20 § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-15 § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12 § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-9 § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-MH § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-15MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
O § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
HUC § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
R-VS §§ 155.604.3 & 155.604.4 Residential Residential/Parking
CrC §§ 155.604.3 & 155.503.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Accessory apartments shall meet the provisions at § 155.506.9.
Conditions may be added through site plan or conditional zoning actions.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
2. TYPE A-2 BUILDING: ZERO LOT LINE DETACHED HOUSE. A zero lot line house may be placed on a lot
where standard front setback and side and rear yards apply to all but one side or rear yard. When this one
minimum building yard is eliminated so the structure sits at the lot line, a maintenance easement is required
on the adjacent lot.
ZERO LOT LINE HOUSE – DETACHED (illustration)
a. Type A-2 Building is allowed in the following districts when adhering to the lot standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-15MF § 155.604.11 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12MF § 155.604.11 Residential Residential/Parking
R-VS §§ 155.604.31 & 155.604.4 Residential Residential/Parking
CrC §§ 155.604.31 & 155.503.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.604.31 Residential Residential/Parking
C-MF § 155.604.31 Residential Residential/Parking
MUD § 155.604.31 Residential Residential/Parking
1 See § 155.601.11.C.
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. The zero lot line shall not be the on streetside of a corner parcel.
Where conditions are allowed, and when two (2) or more detached zero lot line houses are in a row,
they shall utilize a consistent pattern of zero lot lines (i.e., all use the east side yard line) to create a
private side courtyard for adjacent properties.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
3. TYPE A-3 BUILDING: TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A residential building with two (2) separate dwellings,
generally side-by-side and each having their own private lockable entrance, located on one lot. A two-family
dwelling may also have one dwelling unit stacked on top of the other on a single lot. A two-family or duplex
design is different from an accessory unit within a single-family home due to interior floor area.
Page 605 - 2
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Side-by-side Duplex
Stacked Flat
a. Type A-3 Building is allowed in the following districts when adhering to the lot standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-15MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
O § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
HUC § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
R-VS §§ 155.604.3 & 155.604.4 Residential Residential/Parking
CrC §§ 155.604.3 & 155.503.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
C-MF § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
MUD § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. None apply but may be added through site plan or conditional
zoning actions.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
4. TYPE A-4 BUILDING:MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family dwelling constructed to HUD standards rather
than North Carolina State Building code may be located either within a manufactured home park or a
manufactured home subdivision. Site-built or modular construction homes and related accessory structures
may also be associated with the housing development.
BUILDING USE
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL
PARKING
RESIDENTIAL
ALLEY
STREET
B
C
C
E
D
A
F
USEBUILDING
USE
RESIDENTIAL
ESIDENTIAL
PARKING
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
ALLEY
G
H
G
D A B
C
E
F
Page 605 - 3
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Manufactured home (illustration)
a. Type A-4 Building is allowed in the R-MH district in a platted and recorded subdivision of
individual lots or within a park setting, as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-MH § 155.604.1 for subdivisions Residential Residential
§ 155.502.5 for parks Residential Residential
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Manufactured homes must have been constructed after July 1, 1976
and must meet or exceed the construction standards of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction. In addition, manufactured homes
shall also meet the following criteria:
i. All manufactured homes shall have a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet, and when
located on individual lots, shall be placed so that their longest axis is nearly parallel to the
front lot line;
ii. All manufactured homes shall have a minimum width of nine feet (9’);
iii. The pitch of the roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of three feet (3’) for each twelve
feet (12’) of horizontal run;
iv. The towing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights shall be removed and not
included in the length and width measurement;
v. All manufactured homes shall be set up in accordance with the standards set by the North
Carolina Department of Insurance;
vi. Each manufactured home shall have a continuous masonry, metal, or vinyl curtain around
its entire base which is unpierced except for required ventilation and access. Skirting
materials shall be compatible with the exterior finish of the manufactured home. In
addition, any access panel shall not be installed on the elevation facing the front lot line.
It is the intent of this subsection to eliminate the exposure of the undercarriage of the
manufactured housing unit and to prevent the harborage of rodents and other vermin which
constitute a threat to the public health and safety;
vii. The exterior siding shall consist of one or more of the following:
- vinyl or aluminum lap siding whose reflectivity does not exceed that of a flat
white paint; or
- cedar or other wood siding; or
- brick or stone siding
vii. Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other means of entrance and exit to and
from the manufactured housing unit shall be installed or constructed in compliance with
the North Carolina State Building Code, attached firmly to the primary structure and
anchored firmly to the ground in a permanent fashion. Stairs shall only be used in
conjunction with a porch or entrance platform with a minimum dimension (length and
width) of five feet (5’). It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit the use of stairs only
at any entrance to a manufactured home.
viii. Before a manufactured home placement permit is issued, verification of an operative septic
system or connection to a public sewer system, and connection to a potable water supply
shall be required.
c. ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES. No storage shall be allowed on or around a manufactured
home other than items contained in a completely enclosed storage facility. This requirement does
not include the storage of operable grills, bicycles, and other items that are clearly incidental to the
dwelling unit. Also see § 155.601.20.
5. Type A-5 BUILDING: COTTAGE CLUSTER. This style of housing involves multiple detached structures sharing
Page 605 - 4
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
a tract of land with shared common amenities and shared open space.
Cottage cluster (illustration)
a. Type A-5 Building is allowed in the following districts when adhering to the standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-20 § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
R-15 § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
R12 § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
R-9 § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
R-15MF § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12MF § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
R-VS § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
CrC §§ 155.506.22 & 155.503.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.506.22 Residential Residential/Parking
b. Conditions or restrictions. See § 155.506.22.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
B. ATTACHED HOUSING WITH INDIVIDUAL LOTS
1. TYPE B-1 BUILDING: SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED HOUSE. Single-family attached dwelling units may take a
variety of forms, including:
Attached Row with Front Vehicular Access – multiple units attached side-by-side meeting required minimum
front setback and rear yard standards, with vehicular drive access from the front or corner street side
Attached Row with Rear Vehicular Access – multiple units attached side-by-side meeting require front
setbacks, with vehicular access via a rear alley (public or private)
Attached Row, front and rear access
Pinwheel, Quadraplex, Triplex and similar – multiple dwellings attached at various walls such that front doors are situated
along different angled planes, so that units are arranged other than in a straight line row
Pinwheel, triplex (illustrations)
BUILDING
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIALR
PARKING
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
ALLEY
I I
G
H
G
D A B
C
E
F
Page 605 - 5
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
a. Type B-1 Single-Family Attached Building is allowed in the following districts when adhering to
the lot standards and dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-15MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
HUC § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
R-VS §§ 155.604.3 & 155.604.4 Residential Residential/Parking
CrC §§ 155.604.3 & 155.503.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
C-MF § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
MUD § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
TS § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
ENT § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. None apply but may be added through site plan or conditional
zoning actions.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
2. TYPE B-2 BUILDING: MEDIUM DENSITY ECOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT. Medium density Ecological
Development is an optional design of housing that coordinates and encourages human dwellings in close
association with wildlife in an urban environment.
(illustration)
a. Type B-2 Medium Density Ecological Housing is allowed in the following districts when adhering
to the lot standards and dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-VS § 155.506.23 Residential Residential/Parking
CrC §§ 155.506.23 & 155.503.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.506.23 Residential Residential/Parking
C-MF § 155.506.23 Residential Residential/Parking
MUD § 155.506.23 Residential Residential/Parking
ENT § 155.506.23 Residential Residential/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. See § 155.506.23.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
3. TYPE B-3 BUILDING: Multi-Family Residential within a Building or Buildings
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
D
A C
E
PARKING
PARKING F
B
BUILDING USE
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL
Page 605 - 6
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
a. Type B-3 Multi-Family Residential is allowed in the following districts when adhering to the lot
standards and dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-15MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
R-12MF § 155.604.1 Residential Residential/Parking
HUC § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
B-1 § 155.604.2 Residential Residential/Parking
SRN § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
C-MF § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
MUD § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
TS § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
ENT § 155.604.3 Residential Residential/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. None apply but may be added through site plan or conditional
zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed configuration, within
garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other uses.
c. Accessory residential structures. See § 155.601.20.
155.605.2. Institutional Buildings.
A. Institutional Buildings, for churches and places of worship, schools, hospitals, CCRCs, and similar institutional
settings.
BUILDING USE
PARKING
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL
RESIDENTIAL
G
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
ALLEY
A
C
D
E
F H
B
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
INSTITUTIONAL
USE
Page 605 - 7
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
1. TYPE I-1 BUILDING: Buildings for institutional uses within the Traditional residential districts.
a. Type I-1 Institutional facilities are allowed in some or all of the following districts (see Tables of
Allowed Uses at § 155.505) when adhering to the lot standards and dimensional requirements as
given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-20 § 155.506.7 Institutional Institutional
R-15 § 155.506.7 Institutional Institutional
R-12 § 155.506.7 Institutional Institutional
R-9 § 155.506.7 Institutional Institutional
R-MH § 155.506.7 Institutional Institutional
R-VS § 155.506.7 Institutional Institutional
CrC §§ 155.506.7 & 155.503.2 Institutional Institutional
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Some institutional uses without assembly areas may be allowed in
other zoning districts, as provided in the Tables of Allowed Uses at § 155.505. In those cases, the
dimensional requirements for lots and building placement for the underlying zoning district shall
control. Additional conditions may be applied to any institutional use through site plan or
conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed
configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
2. TYPE I-2 BUILDING: Facilities in the R/I district which do not include any common assembly areas.
a. Type I-2 Institutional facilities in the R/I district shall meet the following dimensional standards:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R/I only Institutional & Institutional, Residential, and
Residential Parking
Minimum lot area 2 ac
Minimum lot width 200’
Minimum front setback 50’
Minimum side yard 50’
Minimum rear yard 50’
Maximum height 60’1
1 Structures may exceed the maximum height, provided that the required side and rear yards be increased one foot (1’) for each
foot (or fraction of a foot) in height over sixty feet (60’), and provided the Fire Chief or County Fire Marshal confirms there is
adequate firefighting equipment available locally or through mutual aid.
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied to any institutional use
through site plan or conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a
covered shed configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other
uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
3. TYPE I-3 BUILDING: Facilities in the R/I district which include one or more assembly rooms, any one of which
has the capacity to contain more than two hundred (200) but less than one thousand (1,000) persons.
a. Type I-3 Institutional facilities in the R/I district shall meet the following dimensional standards:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Page 605 - 8
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R/I only Institutional & Institutional, Residential, and
Residential Parking
Minimum lot area 2 ac
Minimum lot width 200’
Minimum front setback 50’
Minimum side yard 50’
Minimum rear yard 50’
Maximum height 60’1
1 Structures may exceed the maximum height, provided that the required side and rear yards be increased one foot (1’)for each foot
(or fraction of a foot) in height over sixty feet (60’), and provided the Fire Chief or County Fire Marshal confirms there is adequate
firefighting equipment available locally or through mutual aid.
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied to any institutional use
through site plan or conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a
covered shed configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other
uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
4. Type I-4 Building: Facilities in the R/I district which include one or more assembly rooms, any of which has
the capacity to contain one thousand (1,000) or more persons.
a. Type I-4 Institutional facilities in the R/I district shall meet the following dimensional standards:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R/I only Institutional & Institutional, Residential, and
Residential Parking
Minimum lot area 10 ac
Minimum lot width 250’
Minimum front setback 50’
Minimum side yard 50’
Minimum rear yard 50’
Maximum height 60’1
1 Structures may exceed the maximum height, provided that the required side and rear yards be increased one foot (1’) for each
foot (or fraction of a foot) in height over sixty feet (60’), and provided the Fire Chief or County Fire Marshal confirms there is
adequate firefighting equipment available locally or through mutual aid.
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied to any institutional use
through site plan or conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a
covered shed configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other
uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
155.605.3. Commercial and Mixed Use Buildings.
A. NONRESIDENTIAL USES BUILDINGS
1. TYPE C-1 BUILDING: Office, Service, Restaurant, Retail Sales, Single Story.
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
RETAIL
Page 605 - 9
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
a. Type C-1 Single story nonresidential uses buildings are allowed in some or all of the following
districts (see Tables of Allowed Uses at § 155.505) when adhering to the lot standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
R-20, R-15, R-12,
R-9, R-MH, R-VS,
CrC § 155.506 (specific uses only) NA Nonresidential
R-15MF, R-12MF § 155.506 (specific uses only) NA Nonresidential
SRN, C-MF § 155.604.5 NA Nonresidential
R/I, O, HUC, B-1,
B-3, B-D, B-H,
I-1, I-2 § 155.604.2 NA Nonresidential
MUD, TS, B-1SCD,
ENT, AU § 155.604.3 NA Nonresidential
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied through site plan or
conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed
configuration, or within garage structures.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
2. TYPE C-2 BUILDING: Nonresidential Uses, Multiple Stories.
a. Type C-2 multi-story nonresidential uses buildings are allowed in some or all of the following
districts (see Tables of Allowed Uses at § 155.505) when adhering to the lot standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
SRN, C-MF § 155.604.5 Nonresidential Nonresidential/Parking
R/I, O, HUC, B-1,
B-3, B-D, B-H,
I-1, I-2 § 155.604.2 Nonresidential Nonresidential/Parking
MUD, TS, B-1SCD,
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
RETAIL
Page 605 - 10
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
ENT, AU § 155.604.3 Nonresidential Nonresidential/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied through site plan or
conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed
configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
B. Mixed Use Buildings, Residential and Nonresidential
1. TYPE C-3 BUILDING: Mixed uses including both residential units and nonresidential establishments.
(illustration)
a. Type C-3 mixed uses (residential and nonresidential uses) buildings are allowed in the following
districts (see Tables of Allowed Uses at § 155.505) when adhering to the lot standards and
dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
SRN, C-MF § 155.604.5 Any Allowed Uses Any/Parking
R/I, O, HUC, B-1 § 155.604.2 Any Allowed Uses Any/Parking
MUD, TS, ENT § 155.604.3 Any Allowed Uses Any/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied through site plan or
conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed
configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
C. INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS.
1. TYPE C-4 BUILDING: Industrial, warehousing and distribution.
a. Type C-4 industrial or warehouse uses buildings are allowed in the I-1 and I-2 district, and some
uses also are allowed in the B-D district (see Tables of Allowed Uses at § 155.505) when adhering
to the lot standards and dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
B-D § 155.604.2 Industrial/Warehouse Industrial/Warehouse/Parking
I-1, I-2 § 155.604.2 Industrial/Warehouse Industrial/Warehouse/Parking
b. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS. Additional conditions may be applied through site plan or
conditional zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed
BUILDING USE
WAREHOUSE /
MANUFACTURING / OFFICE
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING
LOADING
PARKING
LOADING
D
Page 605 - 11
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
configuration, within garage structures, or as the lower level(s) of a building with other uses.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20.
D. Heavy Industrial uses with significant Outdoor Storage or are substantially open air operations.
1. Type C-5 Open/Outdoor Use.
(illustration)
a. Type C-5 open air/outdoor uses buildings are allowed in the I-2 district when adhering to the lot
standards and dimensional requirements as given:
District Lot/Dimensional Standards Building Usage
Upper Floors Ground Floor
I-2 § 155.604.2 NA Accessory/Industrial/Warehouse
b. Conditions or restrictions. Additional conditions may be applied through site plan or conditional
zoning actions. Parking may be in an open pavement lot, in a covered shed configuration, or within
garage structures.
c. Accessory structures and uses. See § 155.601.20
B. NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
9. TYPE 9 Building (Institutional Building, 200 to 1,000 persons)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
R/I
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: 200 feet
Lot Width, Corner Lot: XX feet
Lot Area (acres): 2
Lot Coverage (max): 65%
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Front Setback: 50 feet
Corner Side Setback: 50 feet
Side Setback: 50 feet
Rear Setback: 50 feet
Permitted Yard Obstructions: See Section
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
Maximum Height: 60 feet*
Maximum Stories: 2
Fences and walls: See Section
*See allowance for additional height in § 153.056.D.1
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Residential/Institutional
Ground Floor: Residential/Institutional/Parking
Additional Standards: max. 200 to 1,000 persons
f. PARKING STANDARDS
Number G of off-street parking
A
B
C
D
E
F
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
INSTITUTIONAL
USE
Page 605 - 12
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
spaces required: 4
Alley: Required
Covered parking: Optional
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
10. TYPE 10 Building (Institutional Building, 1,000 persons or more)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
R/I
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: 250 feet
Lot Width, Corner Lot: XX feet
Lot Area (acres): 10
Lot Coverage (max): 70%
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Front Setback: 50 feet
Corner Side Setback: 50 feet
Side Setback: 50 feet
Rear Setback: 50 feet
Permitted Yard Obstructions: See Section
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
Maximum Height: 60 feet*
Maximum Stories: 2
Fences and walls: See Section
*See allowance for additional height in § 153.056.D.1
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Residential/Institutional
Ground Floor: Residential/Institutional/Parking
Additional Standards: 1,000 persons or more
f. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: 4
Alley: Optional
Covered parking: Optional
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
INSTITUTIONAL
USE
Page 605 - 14
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
11. TYPE 11 Building (Institutional Building, without assembly rooms)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
R/I
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: 200 feet
Lot Width, Corner Lot: XX feet
Lot Area (acres): 2
Lot Coverage (max): 60%
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Front Setback: 50 feet
Corner Side Setback: 50 feet
Side Setback: 50 feet
Rear Setback: 50 feet
Permitted Yard Obstructions: See Section
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
Maximum Height: 60 feet*
Maximum Stories: 2
Fences and walls: See Section
*See allowance for additional height in § 153.056.D.1
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Residential/Institutional
Ground Floor: Residential/Institutional/Parking
Additional Standards: without assembly rooms
f. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: 4
Alley: Required
Covered parking: Optional
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
INSTITUTIONAL
USE
Page 605 - 15
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
12. TYPE 12 Building (Institutional Building in Selected Residential Districts)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
R-9 R-12 R-15 R-20
R-12MF R-15MF R-20MF
b. LOT STANDARDS
R-15
R-15MF
R-12 R-20
R-9 R-12MF R-20MF
Lot Width (feet): 60 70 80
Lot Area (square feet): 12,000 15,000 20,000
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
R-15
R-15MF
R-12 R-20
R-9 R-12MF R-20MF
Front Setback (feet): 30 35 40
Corner Side Setback (feet): 30 35 40
Side Setback:
Adjacent residential use: 20 20 20
Adjacent office, business
industrial use 10 10 10
Rear Setback:
Adjacent residential use: 20 20 20
Adjacent office, business
industrial use 10 10 10
Building Coverage (max): 60% 60% 60%
Permitted Yard Obstructions: See Section
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
Maximum Height* (feet): 35 35 35
Fences and walls: See Section
*Maximum structure height may be increased to 40 feet provided
the required side and rear yard setbacks are increased by one (1)
foot for each foot or fraction thereof in height over 35 feet.
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Institutional
Ground Floor: Institutional/Parking
f. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Covered parking: Optional
g. OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
Lighting of buildings, parking areas, accessory uses, and
grounds shall be shielded so as to cast no glare upon adjacent
properties and streets. Lighting of outdoor accessory uses,
such as ballfields, shall not remain lighted after 11:00 p.m.
or be turned on before 8:00 a.m.
h. LOCATION STANDARDS
Any institutional use with one or more assembly rooms, any
of which are over 200 seating capacity, or any use which
regularly operates every weekday throughout the year and
has forty (40) or more persons (child or adult) regularly in
attendance, must be located on a road other than a minor
residential street, and its main entrance must be on that nonminor
residential street.
i. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE / USE STANDARDS
Typical accessory uses to churches and synagogues are
permitted by right subject to the dimensional standards
established in the underlying zoning district. Typical
accessory uses may include but are not limited to day care
centers, day nurseries, pre-schools, family life centers,
church offices excluding district or region administrative
offices, gymnasium, book or tape library, ballfields, and
basketball courts. Accessory uses within an enclosed
structure may be in the principal building or in an accessory
structure. Outdoor accessory uses shall not be located within
the required setback or the outer 20 feet of a required side or
rear yard.
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
INSTITUTIONAL
USE
Page 605 - 16
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
j. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
The tree and landscaping regulations in § 155.606 are
applicable for all institutional uses.
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
• The tree and landscaping regulations in § 155.606 are
applicable for all institutional uses.
Page 605 - 17
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
14. TYPE 14 Building (Adult Use)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
AU
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: None
Lot Width, Corner Lot: None
Lot Area: None
Lot Coverage (max): 25%
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Front Setback: 40 feet
Corner Side Setback: 40 feet
Side Setback: 20 feet
Rear Setback: 20 feet
Permitted Yard Obstructions: See Section
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
Maximum Height: 35 feet
Fences and walls: See § 155.
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Maximum Total Floor Area: 5,000 square feet
Use Limitations:
? There shall not be more than one adult business
establishment on the same property or in the same
building, structure, property or portion thereof
? Except for an adult motel, no use permitted in the AU
District may have sleeping quarters
f. SEPARATION STANDARDS
No use permitted in the AU District shall be located within:
1. 1,500 feet of any other use permitted in the AU District
2. 1,500 feet of any residential zoned property, or any
residential or institutional use permitted in Section
155.502.1
3. 1,000 feet of any establishment with an on-premise ABC
license
g. PARKING STANDARDS
A site plan showing the location of parking spaces, drive
entrances and exits, loading docks, and maneuvering space
must be submitted to the Board of Commissioners to verify
compliance
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Parking Setback*: No parking shall be located
within any required setback
Underground Parking: Not permitted
Parking lot screening as required by § 155.607 shall be
provided for all adult uses, except that screening will
not be required along a public street.
*Applies to parking structures and surface parking. No
maneuvering space for parking spaces is permitted in
required setback, except that driveways providing access to
the parking area may be located in the required setback
h. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE / USE STANDARDS
No other principal or accessory use, except as listed below,
may occupy the same building, structure, property, or
portion thereof:
1. Off-street parking for the principal use.
2. Vending machines for cigarettes, candy, soft drinks or
other food items, and similar items located within an
enclosed building as an accessory to the uses in the
principal building or buildings.
D
A
B
C
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
D PARKING
PARKING
BUILDING USE
ADULT USE
Page 605 - 18
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
i. SIGN STANDARDS
An adult establishment shall be permitted one
detached freestanding sign of up to fifty (50) square
feet, and attached signage (in one or more signs) not to
exceed fifty (50) square feet, for a total of one hundred
(100) square feet total sign area allowed. A site plan
showing the location of the freestanding sign and the
number and location(s) of the attached sign(s) must be
submitted to the Board of Commissioners to verify
compliance.
j. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Any use in the AU District shall be screened on all
non-street front district boundaries as required in §
155.606
All other tree and landscape regulations of § 155.606
shall apply.
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
• [formerly § 153.059]
Page 605 - 19
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
15. TYPE 15 Building (Commercial Building)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
B-1 B-2
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: none
Lot Width, Corner Lot: none
Lot Area (square feet): none
Lot Coverage (max): none
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Front Setback: 40 feet 40 feet
Corner Side Setback: na na
Side Setback: * 10 feet
Rear Setback: 10 feet 20 feet
* Side yards not required. If side yards are provided, one must be
at least 4 feet and the other at least 8 feet. If only one side yard is
provided it shall be at least 8 feet.
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Maximum Height: 40 feet 40 feet
Fences and walls: See Section
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Office
Ground Floor: Retail/Parking/and other uses
permitted in § 155.501
Floor Area* (max): 100,000 square feet
*Maximum total floor area of any single retail establishment or
shopping center. Retail establishments smaller than 100,000
square feet may be considered only under the provisions of §
153.204.
f. ACCESSORY BUILDING STANDARDS
Floor Area (max): 10% of the total floor area of the
principal structure(s)
Height (max): 35 feet, provided accessory structure
is less than 5% of the total floor area
of the principal structure(s) or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less
g. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Underground parking: Optional
h. SIGN STANDARDS
As required in § 155.608
i. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
As required in § 155.606
j. OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
As required in § 155.60X
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
RETAIL
Page 605 - 20
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
16. TYPE 16 Building (Commercial Building)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
B-3
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: none
Lot Width, Corner Lot: none
Lot Area: 1 acre
Lot Coverage (max): none
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Front Setback: 40 feet 40 feet
Corner Side Setback: na na
Side Setback: * 10 feet
Rear Setback: 10 feet 20 feet
* Side yards not required. If side yards are provided, one must be
at least 4 feet and the other at least 8 feet. If only one side yard is
provided it shall be at least 8 feet.
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Maximum Height: 50 feet 50 feet
Minimum Height: 35 feet 35 feet
Fences and walls: See Section
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Office
Ground Floor: Retail/Food Services/Parking/and other
uses permitted in § 155.501
Floor Area* (max): 100,000 square feet
Floor Area** (min): 20,000 square feet
*Maximum total floor area of any single retail establishment or
shopping center. Retail establishments smaller than 100,000
square feet may be considered only under the provisions of §
153.204.
** The minimum total floor area shall be 20,000 square feet, and
any combination of non-retail uses in a single building or in a
group of buildings may exceed 100,000 square feet in floor area.
f. ACCESSORY BUILDING STANDARDS
Floor Area (max): 10% of the total floor area of the
principal structure(s)
Height (max): 35 feet, provided accessory structure
is less than 5% of the total floor area
of the principal structure(s) or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less
g. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Underground parking: Optional
h. SIGN STANDARDS
As required in § 155.608
i. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
As required in § 155.606
j. OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
As required in § 155.60X
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
RETAIL
Page 605 - 21
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
Page 605 - 22
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
17. TYPE 17 Building (Commercial Building)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
B-D
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: none
Lot Width, Corner Lot: none
Lot Area (square feet): none
Lot Coverage (max): none
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Front Setback: 40 feet 40 feet
Corner Side Setback: na na
Side Setback: 10 feet 10 feet
Rear Setback: 10 feet 20 feet
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Maximum Height: 40 feet 40 feet
Fences and walls: See Section
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Office
Ground Floor: Retail/Animal-Related/Business &
Professional Services/Food
Services/Parking/and other uses
permitted in § 155.501
Floor Area* (max): 100,000 square feet
*Maximum total floor area of any single retail establishment or
shopping center. Retail establishments smaller than 100,000
square feet may be considered only under the provisions of §
153.204.
f. ACCESSORY BUILDING STANDARDS
Floor Area (max): 10% of the total floor area of the
principal structure(s)
Height (max): 35 feet, provided accessory structure
is less than 5% of the total floor area
of the principal structure(s) or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less
g. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Underground parking: Optional
h. SIGN STANDARDS
As required in § 155.608
i. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
As required in § 155.606
j. OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
As required in § 155.60X
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING D
PARKING
BUILDING USE
RETAIL
Page 605 - 23
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
18. TYPE 18 Building (Industrial Building)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
I-1 I-2
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: none
Lot Width, Corner Lot: none
Lot Area (square feet): none
Lot Coverage (max): none
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Front Setback: 40 feet 40 feet
Corner Side Setback: na na
Side Setback: 20 feet 10 feet
Rear Setback: 20 feet 20 feet
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
RESIDENTIAL ALL OTHER
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Maximum Height*: 35 feet** 35 feet***
Fences and walls: See Section
*The Fire Chief or County Fire Marshall must confirm that there
is adequate firefighting equipment available (locally or
through mutual aid).
**Maximum allowable height within 50 feet of a residential
zoning district. Buildings and structures may exceed the 35
foot height limit beyond this 50-foot zone when side and rear
yards are increased by one foot for every one foot (or fraction
thereof) of building height over 35 feet.
*** Buildings and structures may exceed the 35-foot height limit
beyond this 50-foot zone when side and rear yards are
increased by one foot for every one foot (or fraction thereof) of
building height over 35 feet.
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Ground Floor: Manufacturing/Retail/Parking/and
other uses permitted in § 155.501
Floor Area* (max): 100,000 square feet
*Maximum total floor area of any single retail establishment or
shopping center. Retail establishments smaller than 100,000
square feet may be considered only under the provisions of §
153.204.
f. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Underground parking: Optional
g. SIGN STANDARDS
As required in § 155.608
h LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
As required in § 155.606
i. OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
As required in Section 155.60X
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
A
B
C
D
BUILDING USE
WAREHOUSE /
MANUFACTURING / OFFICE
NOT TO SCALE
STREET
B
A
C
PARKING
LOADING
PARKING
LOADING
D
Page 605 - 24
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
19. TYPE 19 Building (Mixed-Use Building)
a. PERMITTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
MUD TS
b. LOT STANDARDS
Lot Width: 100 feet
Lot Width, Corner Lot: 100 feet
Lot Depth: 165 feet
Lot Area (square feet): 16,500
Lot Coverage (max): none
c. BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
ALL OTHER TS / MUD
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Build-To Line (Front): 0 feet 0 feet
Corner Side Setback: 0 feet 0 feet
Side Setback: 20 feet 0 feet*
Rear Setback: 20 feet 0 feet
* Side yards not required.
d. VERTICAL STANDARDS
ADJACENT ADJACENT
ALL OTHER TS / MUD
DISTRICTS DISTRICTS
Maximum Height: 40 feet 75 feet
Maximum Stories: 6
Fences and walls: See § 155.605.??
e. BUILDING USE STANDARDS
Upper Floor: Residential / Lodging / Office / Parking
Ground Floor: Retail / Food Services / Personal
and Business Services
Below Grade: Parking / Utilities
f. ACCESSORY BUILDING STANDARDS
Floor Area (max): 10% of the total floor area of the
principal structure(s)
Height (max): 35 feet, provided accessory structure
is less than 5% of the total floor area
of the principal structure(s) or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less
g. PARKING STANDARDS
Number of off-street parking
spaces required: See § 155.607
Underground parking: Optional
Structure parking: Optional
NOTE: No parking shall be located at ground level along
any street in the TS or MUD Districts
h. SIGN STANDARDS
As required in § 155.608
i. LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
As required in § 155.606
j. OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
As required in § 155.60X
Notes:
• All dimensions are expressed as minimums, except
where noted otherwise
• Lot width and side yard setbacks shall be increased to
accommodate excessive side slope situations
• Building entrance shall face front lot line
• Service entries are prohibited on street facades
• Building elevations facing a street shall have windows
on each floor elevation
• Buildings on corner lots shall extend architectural
features and details on each street frontage
• Buildings on corner lots shall not encroach upon sight
triangle
A
B
C
D
NOT TO SCALE
ALLEY
PARKING D PARKING
C A B
STREET BUILDING USE
RESIDENTIAL / LODGING / OFFICE / PARKING
RETAIL/FOOD SERVICES
PARKING
RESIDENTIAL / LODGING / OFFICE / PARKING
RESIDENTIAL / LODGING / OFFICE / PARKING
RESIDENTIAL / LODGING / OFFICE / PARKING
RESIDENTIAL / LODGING / OFFICE / PARKING
Page 605 - 25
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
MUD
• 2.DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Development permitted within the MUD District shall comply with the
following standards:
• a. Single-family attached dwellings, two- family dwellings, and zero lot line dwellings shall comply with the
development standards outlined in § 153.205(F) – dimensional requirements table for R-VS.
• b.Multiple-family development and non-residential uses shall comply with the following development
standards:
• 1.MINIMUM LOT AREA: None
• 2.MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT AREA per Unit: None
• 3.MINIMUM LOT WIDTH: None
• 4.MINIMUM SETBACK: 14 feet
• 5.MINIMUM SETBACK ALONG AN INTERSTATE HIGHWAY: 50 feet
• 6.MINIMUM SIDE YARD: None
• 7.MINIMUM REAR YARD: None
• 8.MINIMUM HEIGHT: None
• 9.MAXIMUM HEIGHT: Forty-five feet (45’). The maximum height of any building may be increased provided
its building separation from any properties outside the project site is increased in accordance with §
155.502.C.1.e, above.
• c.Multiple-family development in the MUD District is not subject to the provisions of § 155.503.2.AF of this
Title.
Page 605 - 26
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 1
155.606. Tree Protection and Landscaping Regulations
155.606.1. Purpose, Applicability, and Use of Terms
A. PURPOSE. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish standards to protect and enhance the Town’s
appearance by the installation of appropriate landscaping and buffering materials; to encourage the
preservation of native plant communities and ecosystems; to maintain and increase the value of land by
providing for restoration of disturbed areas and by incorporating adequate landscaping into development; to
restrict the spread of invasive plant species that disrupt and destroy native ecosystems; to encourage skilled
installation and continued maintenance of all plant materials; and, to establish procedures and standards for
the administration and enforcement of these landscaping regulations at § 155.606.
B. APPLICABILITY. § 155.606 applies to all properties in business, office, industrial, multi-family, and mixed
use districts, unless otherwise exempted, to any nonresidential use in a residential district, and to properties
bordering designated portions of NC51.
C. USE OF TERMS. Many terms used throughout the Landscaping regulations section of this Chapter are
defined in Chapter 1. Some definitions specific to this Section are provided here. Other words or phrases
used in the Landscaping section of this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. Words, terms, and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the following definitions or in § 155.103.C., except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Casualty Loss of Nature: shall mean a loss of value or property resulting from an act of nature, such as
fire, winds, ice storms, etc., that is beyond normal human control.
Construction Period: shall mean the time period on a development site from the granting of a construction
permit until the issuance of a final certificate of compliance.
Developed Properties: shall mean land that has been converted to a specific purpose by addition of
planned and structured improvements.
Impervious Cover: shall mean buildings, structures, compacted gravel, and other paved or compacted
surface areas, which by their dense nature do not allow the passage of sufficient oxygen and moisture to
support and sustain healthy root growth.
Riparian Buffer: shall mean a biologically diverse community consisting of trees, woody shrubs, and
groundcover that exists or is planted along the banks of rivers, creeks or intermittent and perennial streams.
Screening: shall mean a structure and/or plant material providing enclosure and a visual barrier between
the area enclosed and the adjacent property.
155.606.2. General Planting and Screening Requirements
Planting or screening may be required to meet different standards depending on where on a property they are
located. The types of required landscaping that may be applicable are as follows:
A. STREETSCAPE LANDSCAPING: Trees shall be required in or along a public right-of-way on all developed
properties in accordance with § 155.606.3.
B. PERIMETER LANDSCAPING: Existing or new trees and shrubs on developed properties other than singlefamily
dwellings shall be required alongside and rear property boundaries in accordance with § 155.606.4.
C. INTERIOR LANDSCAPING: Existing or new trees and shrubs on developed properties shall be required in and
around on-site parking lots and other interior structures in accordance with § 155.606.5.
D. SCREENING: Existing or new trees and shrubs and/or structures such as walls or fences shall be required in
accordance with § 155.606.6:
1. Along all side and rear yard property boundaries abutting an existing residential use or
residentially zoned area; and
2. Around loading areas, service areas or outdoor storage areas which are visible from a public rightof-
way.
3. Along all side and rear yard boundaries of properties abutting a thoroughfare in all Traditional
zoning districts except HUC, and within Conditional-Only districts R-VS, CrC, SRN, C-MF, B-
1SCD, and AU. (Am. Ord. 2188, passed 11-14-16)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 2
E. TREE CANOPY REQUIREMENT. Landscaping in the form of trees shall either be retained or planted on site to
meet minimum canopy coverage in accordance with § 155.606.7. These provisions may also assist in
compliance with tree protection and planting standards in the Post Construction Storm Water Regulations
in Chapter 8. [formerly known as § 153.075 (E)]
155.606.3. Streetscape Planting
Except for the Downtown Overlay District, the Highway Overlay District, and any other location with an adopted
neighborhood or small area plan when it has its own streetscape requirements, the following shall be required for
development of any property in Matthews:
A. A planting strip whose total length shall be equal to the total length of the property line adjacent to the
public right-of-way, or in the public right-of-way if sufficient room exists between curb and sidewalk,
exclusive of access drives and their sight triangles. The width of the strip shall be a minimum of eight feet
(8’) and shall generally start immediately adjacent to the street side property line.
B. Trees shall be planted, if not existing, within the planting strip with large maturing trees. Large maturing
trees shall be spaced no greater than forty feet (40’) apart with a minimum of one tree planted on all
properties with frontage greater than thirty feet (30’). Each tree shall be a minimum of two inch (2”) caliper
and have a minimum height of eight feet from the ground surface. See § 155.606.14 for a selection of
recommended large maturing trees.
1. If the use of large maturing trees is considered inappropriate for the site, then a written explanation
of why they cannot be used shall be made to the Town.
2. Where overhead power lines or other obstructions prevent the use of large maturing trees, then
small maturing trees shall be used. Small maturing trees shall be spaced no greater than thirty feet
(30’) apart. See § 155.606.14 for a selection of recommended small maturing trees.
3. No large maturing tree shall be planted within thirty five feet (35’) of an overhead utility line as
measured from the closest wire.
4. Trees shall be selected so that a mixture of species shall be planted or preserved. If a property has
greater than three hundred feet (300’) of frontage on any one street, a minimum of three (3)
different species shall be planted. If less than three hundred feet (300’) of frontage exists, than
only a single species shall be required.
5. When an existing or proposed sidewalk is within one foot (1’) of the property line, then trees must
be located a minimum of four feet (4’) from the sidewalk.
C. The planting strip shall not be paved or used for automobile parking and shall have vegetative or organic
ground cover and/or beds of flower plants or bulbs mulched and kept weed and litter free by the property
owner or may be planted in grass and mowed on a regular basis. In addition to the required trees and
surface treatment within the planting strip, shrubs and additional trees may be included at the option of the
landowner. Xeriscape plantings are strongly encouraged.
D. In the case of unusual site factors that would make the strict adherence to this section serve no useful
purpose, the Planning Director may waive all or part of the requirements of this section. A waver may be
requested by a written statement explaining the mitigating circumstances on or off the site. It must be
supported by documented facts. Waivers may be considered as long as the spirit and intent of this §
155.606 are maintained.
E. Where streetscape trees are to be located in the public right-of-way, all planting standards in §155.606.12
must be followed. In addition, trees must be inspected by the Town’s landscape manager before planting.
See § 155.606.13 for landscape maintenance requirements. [formerly known as § 153.075 (F)]
155.606.4. Perimeter Planting
Plantings along those property boundaries not facing a public right-of-way are designed to provide a sense of
boundary between nonresidential land uses. Perimeter landscaping is not mandatory in zoning districts such as the
ENT district which are intended to create and achieve a mixed-use urban environment and where pedestrian
connectivity between land uses and parcels is encouraged. Whenever practical, such plantings shall include
preserved vegetation on the site. (Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-17)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 3
A. A combination of trees and shrubs shall be arranged along the non-street rear and side perimeters. This
landscaping will consist of a minimum of one tree and ten shrubs for each fifty (50) lineal feet, not
including the streetscape-planting strip. The planting may be arranged in a single row, staggered, or may
be clustered or otherwise arranged anywhere within fifteen feet (15’) of the property line to allow for
maximum flexibility and landscaping design.
B. A combination of large and small maturing trees shall be planted with large trees comprising at least fifty
percent (50%) of the total. Large maturing trees shall be a minimum of two inch (2”) caliper and have a
minimum height of eight feet (8’) from the ground surface. Small maturing trees shall be a minimum of
one and one-half inch (1½”) caliper and have a minimum height of six feet (6’) from the ground surface.
C. Trees shall be selected so that a mixture of species shall be planted. A minimum of three different species
shall be planted along every three hundred (300) lineal feet.
D. As long as the space allows, shrubs shall be selected so that a mixture of species shall be planted. A
minimum of five (5) different species shall be planted along every three hundred (300) lineal feet.
Likewise, unless design elements require it, no more than ten (10) individuals of any one (1) species shall
be planted in a group, row, or staggered row.
E. The minimum depth of a perimeter landscape area shall be fifteen feet (15’) from any property line. The
minimum depth of a perimeter landscape area may be reduced to six feet (6’) for a limited distance for
parking space maneuverability or dumpster pad enclosure, or to zero feet (0’) from a property line when a
zero building setback is established, an access easement crosses or is parallel to the perimeter landscape
area, or a private drive or other non-landscaped surface lies within the perimeter landscaping area, or strict
adherence to this section serves no useful purpose or imposes an unnecessary hardship on the property
owner. In those cases, the Planning Director may waive the fifteen foot (15’) requirement as long as the
spirit and intent of this section are maintained.
F. The side or rear yard perimeter landscape area may be extended beyond fifteen feet (15’) when unusual
topography of a site, elevation of a site, the size of the parcel involved, the presence of a utility easement
along the property edge, or other factors exist which make the strict adherence to this section serve no
useful purpose. In those cases, the Planning Director may waive the location and/or depth of the perimeter
landscape area as long as the spirit and intent of this section are maintained.
G. Whenever feasible, preserved vegetation shall be used. For preserved plants to be used to satisfy part or
whole of this requirement, the size, species, condition, and location on the site should be noted on the
required landscape plan. The spacing requirement for planted trees and shrubs may be waived when the
intent of the perimeter landscape requirement can be satisfied by preserved plants.
H. No wall or fence may be placed within the established perimeter landscape zone when established at a
fifteen foot (15’) width. Where the established perimeter landscape area is less than fifteen feet (15’), a
fence or wall may be used and can be located no closer than six feet (6’) to the property line. The finished
side of the fence shall face outward from the property. Any plant material required under this section shall
be located between any fence and the property line. [formerly known as § 153.075 (G)]
I. When a public-use pedestrian pathway is proposed to be located along a non-street property line of a
parcel, or shared by more than one parcel along non-street property lines, the pathway may be located on
top of the lot line and/or within the 15’ perimeter planting area. Such pathway, however, shall not require
removal of any existing trees over eight inches (8”) DBH, and grading or other land disturbing activity for
such pathway shall not take place within more than twenty percent (20 %) of the protected tree’s dripline,
unless construction methods to protect the tree are approved by the Town Landscape Manager. (Am. Ord.
2188, passed 11-14-16)
155.606.5. Interior Landscaping
Landscaping is required for parking lots and other impervious surface areas as follows:
A. PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING. Landscaping is required for parking lots to reduce the aesthetic and
environmental impacts resulting from paving or the removal of natural vegetation from large areas; to
reduce the noise, heat, glare and dust associated with parking lots, and to control the direction and velocity
of surface water runoff. Within the requirements of this section, parking lots should be visually minimized
from view from public right-of-ways as much as possible.
1. APPLICABILITY. Landscaping shall be required for all off-street parking facilities with ten (10) or
more spaces.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 4
2. LANDSCAPING REQUIRED.
a. Landscaping required by § 155.606.5 shall be located within the perimeter of the parking
lot. Parking lot landscaping areas, generally, are squared or rounded-off in shape,
including the planting islands, curbed areas, corner islands, parking spaces and all interior
driveways and aisles except those with no parking spaces located on either side.
b. PLANTING ISLANDS. Planting islands, either separate or protruding from the perimeter of
the parking lot, shall be appropriately located in the parking facility to create parking subareas
and to help establish distinct patterns of traffic flow. Planting islands shall be
integrated with pedestrian circulation in the parking lot to provide a landscaped
pedestrian path through the parking lot between the street and the building entrance.
c. REQUIRED PLANTING. At least one preserved or planted tree having a minimum caliper of
two inches (2”) and a minimum eight feet (8’) height for large maturing trees and a
minimum caliper of one and one-half inches (1½”) and a minimum six feet (6’) height for
small maturing trees shall be provided for every ten (10) provided parking spaces, or
fraction of ten (10) spaces.
d. MINIMUM LARGE MATURING TREES REQUIRED. If less than thirty (30) parking spaces
are present on the development site, then small maturing trees may be used. If there are
thirty (30) to sixty (60) parking spaces on a development site, then at least thirty five
percent (35%) of the trees shall be large maturing. If there are greater than sixty (60)
parking spaces on the site, at least fifty percent (50%) of the trees planted must be large
maturing species. When there are overhead utilities or other circumstances that require a
lesser percentage of large maturing trees, a written explanation must be provided for a
waiver of the above percentage requirements.
e. PLANTING ISLAND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. Any planted area in any island shall have all
straight-line dimensions of at least twelve feet (12’) and total area of at least two hundred
fifty six (256) square feet for large maturing trees, or eight feet (8’) straight-line
dimensions and one hundred forty four (144) square feet area for small maturing trees.
The depth of available soil for root growth shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30”)
before an impervious surface is encountered. Smaller protrusions from planting islands
shall not have trees planted within them, however, shrubs or smaller types of vegetation
can be used.
f. TREE LOCATION REQUIREMENT. No parking space shall be located more than forty feet
(40’) from a tree either in an island or outside of the parking lot. Trees need not be
uniformly distributed throughout the parking lot when existing trees are being preserved
to meet the parking lot landscaping requirements. It is more important that the maximum
root zone be made available to the trees planted or preserved on site, and that the
maximum shading of parking lot surface area be achieved.
g. LANDSCAPING PROTECTION REQUIRED. All parking lot landscaping shall be protected by
bollards, curbs, or similar methods to prevent vehicles from overhanging planting islands
or landscaped yards by more than two feet (2’) or damaging adjacent fences or screens.
Tree islands lacking a complete curbing and placed at or slightly below grade may be
used to treat storm water runoff and fulfill the requirements of the Post Construction
regulations of Chapter 8.
h. INCENTIVES. For new development that requires twenty (20) or more parking spaces,
or existing development that is expanding or revising its parking lot area by twenty (20)
or more parking spaces, a reduction in parking spaces may be permitted as follows:
i. A five percent (5%) reduction in the total number of required parking spaces is
permitted inside the new or disturbed parking area that preserves an existing
tree(s) with a caliper of eight (8) inches in diameter or greater; and/or
ii. The applicant may reduce the amount of required parking spaces up to ten
percent (10%) for the purpose of installing additional tree islands, when each
tree island over the required number contains a large maturing tree. One (1)
additional tree island equals a reduction of two parking spaces. Reduction in
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 5
parking for the disabled or required loading facilities is not permitted by this
section. (Am. Ord. 2268, passed 11-13-17)
i. MINIMUM NUMBER OF TREE SPECIES REQUIRED. The minimum number of different
species that shall be used to meet these requirements shall be as follows:
Total Minimum Number of
Number of Trees Tree Species Required
Required in a Parking Lot
1-11 1
12-23 2
24+ 3
j. If parking is within twelve feet (12’) of a street property line, a row of shrubs shall be
planted parallel to the street but not within the sight triangle of intersecting streets or a
street and driveway or alley. The shrubs shall be planted no greater than five feet (5’) oncenter,
and should be of a species that matures between one (1’) and three feet (3’) in
height.
k. Any development existing at the time of enactment of this Title which does not conform
to the standards imposed in § 155.606.5.A.2. above but did meet required parking lot
landscaping standards in effect at time of development, and subsequently desires to make
further changes to the parking lot(s) on-site, shall not be required to come into
compliance with the parking lot landscaping standards of § 155.606.5.A.2 unless more
than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the existing parking lot(s) are disturbed. If more
than fifty percent (50%) of the parking lot area(s) are disturbed, only those disturbed
areas shall come into compliance with the above landscaping standards.
B. POST CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS. In addition to the provisions for tree canopy and landscaping on
developed parcels, requirements of Chapter 8, the Post Construction Ordinance shall also apply. Where the
requirements for undisturbed open space can be met with existing or new tree canopy requirements of this
section, they may be counted toward each. The preference, as intended in Chapter 8, is the preservation of
vegetation in place.
C. SWIM BUFFERS. Preservation of vegetation along designated, riparian buffers shall comply with the
requirements of § 155.703.
D. OTHER INTERIOR LANDSCAPING. Areas of a development site left in existing natural state, foundation
plantings, and other interior landscaping elements may be included when land disturbing activity is
proposed on a site. [formerly known as § 153.075 (H)]
155.606.6. Screening
A. SITE PERIMETER SCREENING. Screening is required along all side and rear yard property boundaries
abutting an existing residential use or residentially zoned area. However, the screening requirement of
§155.606.6 shall only apply to the exterior boundaries of the intended ultimate ENT district. Screening on
all side and rear yard boundaries when a property abuts a thoroughfare shall use the provisions here or in
§155.606.6.B below. Screening shall be designed and installed to provide a visual buffer of at least seventy
five percent (75%) opacity to a height of six feet (6’). When screening is to be accomplished with plant
materials, this height and opacity must be reached within four growing seasons. Whenever practical,
plantings to achieve screening shall include preserved vegetation, especially trees and evergreen shrubs,
existing on the site. (Am. Ord. 2188, passed 11-14-16) (Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-17)
1. Screening shall normally be provided through one of four options, as listed in the table below.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 6
OPTION PLANT MATERIALS PLANTING
Type Quantity BED WIDTH
Large Trees 4
1 Small Trees 2 20 feet
Shrubs 12
Large Trees 4
2 Small Trees 2 15 feet
Shrubs 16
Large Trees 5
Small Trees 2
3 Shrubs 20 10 feet
Wall or Fence at
Minimum 10 feet
from property line
4 Large Trees 4
Large Shrubs* 10 20 feet
* planted in a triangular manner ten (10) feet apart at centers
Figure §155.606.6. Site Perimeter Landscaping Requirement Options Illustrated.
PLANT MATERIAL / 100 LINEAL FEET
4 LARGE TREES
2 SMALL TREES
12 SHRUBS
PLANTING
BED
WIDTH
20 FEET
4 LARGE TREES
2 SMALL TREES
16 SHRUBS
15 FEET
5 LARGE TREES
2 SMALL TREES
20 SHRUBS
BERM WALL OR FENCE
10 FEET
4 LARGE TREES
10 SHRUBS
(PLANTED IN A TRIANGULAR
MANNER TEN (10) FEET APART
AT CENTERS)
20 FEET
WALL,FENCE OR
BERM
OR
OR
OR
== LARGE TREES == SMALL TREES == SHRUBS
1
2
3
4
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 7
2. To determine the total number and variety of plants required for each screening alternative, the
length of each side of the property requiring a screen, minus the area covered by sight distance
triangles, shall be divided by one hundred (100) and multiplied by the number of each kind of
plant shown for the chosen required screen (rounded off to the nearest whole number).
3. Fences or walls within any nonresidential district or for any non-residential use in a residential
district shall be placed behind the interior side of the required plant materials and shall not be over
seven feet (7’) in height.
4. In the event of unusual site disturbances, such that none of the four (4) options given in §
155.606.6.A.1 will create the intended level of screening, or where screening is not desired
(generally for public safety) or is inappropriate, then an alternative screening plan may be
presented to the Planning Director for review and approval. This alternative plan must include
documentation describing how the proposed alternative will provide effective visual screening, or
why there is no feasible way to adequately screen view of the subject site from the adjacent
property due to, for example, pedestrian circulation, the proximity of a public plaza, or
architectural features.
B. LOADING AREA, SERVICE AREA OR OUTDOOR STORAGE AREA SCREENING.
1. Screening around all loading and service areas and all outdoor storage areas which may be visible
from a public right-of-way, shall be required in all nonresidential districts or for a nonresidential
use in a residential district. Screening on all side and rear yard boundaries when a property abuts a
thoroughfare shall use the provisions her or in §155.606.6.A above. The screening may be located
anywhere on the property, subject to other pertinent provisions of this section. (Am. Ord. 2188,
passed 11-14-16)
2. Any vegetation used to comply with the provisions of this section must be in a planting bed at
least five feet (5’) wide. This area may contain any type screening materials sufficient to visually
block the view of the loading and storage use area.
3. If a wall or fence is used alone, then the area devoted to the screen need only be wide enough to
accommodate the screen and allow for its maintenance. The composition of the screening material
and its placement on the lot will be left up to the discretion of the property owner, so long as the
purpose and requirements of this section are met.
4. Within nonresidential districts walls and fences used for screening purposes must be at least six
feet (6’) in height, measured from the ground level to the top of the structure, and measured along
the entire length of the finished side of the structure.
C. SCREENING STANDARDS. The following list contains specific standards to be used in installing screening:
1. Fences and walls used for screening shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, other
masonry materials or wood post and planks with no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
fence surface left open. The finished side of the fence shall face the adjoining property. The
restrictions on fences and walls in Chapter 9, Floodplain Regulations also apply.
2. Where a fence or wall is used as part of a required screen area, any required plantings
accompanying the fence or wall shall be located on the side of such fence or wall opposite the new
development.
3. Shrubs used in any screening must be at least three feet (3’) tall when planted and no further apart
than five feet (5’). A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required shrubs shall be evergreen.
They must be of a species and variety and adequately maintained so that an average height of five
(5’) to six feet (6’) could be expected as normal growth within four (4) years of planting. Shrubs
planted on a berm may be of a lesser height, provided that the combined height of the berms and
plantings is at least six feet (6’) after four (4) years.
4. No part of a berm shall be left as bare soil. No slope of a berm shall exceed one foot (1’) of rise for
every three feet (3’) in plane. No part of a berm shall intrude into the existing or transitional rightof-
way. At least seventy five percent (75%) of required plantings shall be planted on the top of
the berm and opposite the new development. Plant species on a berm shall be selected to adapt
well to slope and drainage conditions found on the berm.
5. Screening requirements may be waived when screening is already provided. There may be cases
where the unusual topography or elevation of a site, or the size of the parcel involved, or the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 8
presence of required screening on adjacent property would make the strict adherence to §
155.606.6 serve no useful purpose. In those cases, the Planning Director may waive the
requirements for screening so long as the spirit and intent of this section and the general
provisions of this section pertaining to screening are adhered to. This waiver provision does not
negate the necessity for establishing screening for uses adjacent to vacant property. [formerly
known as § 153.075(I)]
6. When a public-use pedestrian pathway is proposed to be located along or near a property line of a
parcel that is required to install and maintain screening, the pathway shall generally be located at
least ten feet (10’) to the interior side of the property line. Required amounts of planting material
must be provided, although they may be located on both sides of the pedestrian path. This
pathway shall not require removal of any existing tree over eight inches (8”) DBH, and grading or
other land disturbing activity for the pathway shall not take place within more than twenty percent
(20%) of the protected tree’s dripline, unless construction methods to protect the tree are approved
by the Town Landscape Manager. When a pedestrian pathway crosses through a required
screening, the crossing opening shall be at an angle between thirty and 70 degrees (300 to 700), or
in such a way as to not create a direct vision opening from the residential property or public rightof-
way. (Am. Ord. 2188, passed 11-14-16)
155.606.7. Tree Canopy Requirements
A. CANOPY PRESERVATION REQUIREMENT.
1. PURPOSE. The amount of tree canopy covering a site is an indication of the site’s ability to retard
storm water run-off, mitigate air pollution, and contribute to site-cooling effects. The tree canopy
requirements outlined here may also be applied to the minimum Undisturbed Open Space
requirements of Chapter 8, the Post Construction Ordinance.
2. REQUIREMENTS. A minimum percentage of tree canopy is required to be maintained or created on
any development site or on any site of any land disturbing activity. If a site over one (1) acre in
size was formerly in a forested state and fifty percent (50%) or more of the land area was clear cut
within three (3) years of the plan submittal date for any land disturbing activity, then the tree
canopy preservation requirements must be applied as though the site was not clear cut. It will be
the applicant’s responsibility to provide proof that any clear cutting activity on the site took place
greater than three years prior to the current submittal date.
a. The amount of existing canopy that must be preserved on the site during development is
determined by two (2) factors: the zoning district classification; and the percentage of
existing tree canopy present before any land disturbing activity, as indicated below:
TABLE OF MINIMUM TREE CANOPY REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District Required Tree Canopy
R-15, R-20 20%
R-9, R-12, R-MH, R-15MF, 15%
R-12MF, CrC, R/I, O, B-1, B-3,
BD, AU
B-1SCD, B-H, 12%
I-1, I-2, MUD, ENT, SRN 10%
R-VS, MUD, SRN, ENT 8%
HUC, C-MF, TS 5%
b. Whenever the existing tree canopy is greater than twenty percent (20%) of the total
property area, then a minimum canopy must be preserved, as defined in the above table at
§ 155.606.7.A.2.a.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 9
c. Whenever the existing tree canopy of the site prior to land disturbance is less than twenty
percent (20%) of the total property area, then the percentage of canopy, as defined in §
155.606.7.A.2.a, must be achieved by a combination of preservation and new planting.
Property within the ENT district may request minimum tree canopy preservation
reduction through the use of Flexible Design Standards at §155.401.7. (Am. Ord. 2269,
passed 11-13-17)
d. Tree save areas that include mature trees over minimum planting calipers are strongly
encouraged. Placement of proposed buildings, vehicle use areas, and other site
improvements should be designed to reduce disturbance of existing vegetation.
e. For all single-family detached homes recorded at Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds
after November 13, 2017, large maturing trees must be placed on lots according to the
table below. This functions to replenish the urban tree canopy in areas of new residential
development. Large maturing trees may be placed within the front, rear, or side yard of
the lot. If existing saved trees meet the below requirements then no additional plantings
are necessary. No large maturing tree shall be planted within 35’ of an overhead utility
line as measured from the closest wire. If tree placement would put a tree within 35’ of an
overhead wire, a small maturing tree may be substituted.
RESIDENTIAL TREE CANOPY REPLACEMENT REQUIRMENTS
Lot Size (sqft) Required Number of
Large Maturing Trees
7,500 - 10,000 1
10,001 - 15,000 2
15,001 - 20,000 3
Greater than 20,000 5
3. CALCULATION OF CANOPY AREAS.
a. The baseline canopy measurements on a proposed development site shall be provided by
the property owner and submitted as part of the vegetation survey and landscape plan.
The percent canopy cover may be calculated by aerial photographs and verified, if
feasible, by ground measurement. The area of existing dedicated rights-of-way, storm
water facilities and easements that do not incorporate trees, utility easements, and
existing ponds, lakes, or perennial streams shall be subtracted from the total property area
before the tree preservation requirements are calculated. If root disturbance or
construction activities occur within the drip line of any tree designated as protected, only
the area actually being protected will be included in the calculated tree protection area
b. Each large maturing tree, whether preserved or newly planted, is calculated to provide
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of tree canopy. Newly planted large
maturing trees must be a minimum of two inch (2”) caliper and eight feet (8’) in height at
time of planting.
c. Each small maturing tree, whether preserved or newly planted, is calculated to provide
four hundred (400) square feet of tree canopy. Newly planted small maturing trees must
be a minimum of one and one-half inch (1½”) caliper and six feet (6’) in height at time of
planting.
d. Trees planted to meet canopy coverage requirements shall be planted no less than twenty
feet (20’) from any other proposed or existing small maturing tree and forty feet (40’)
from any other proposed or existing large maturing tree.
e. Preserving a Specimen Tree is calculated to provide a tree canopy equal to six (6) times
the actual square footage contained within its drip line.
f. All preserved trees designated to meet this canopy coverage requirement must be
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 10
protected according § 155.606.9.D.
g. All tree planting requirements cited in § 155.606.3 through § 155.606.6, inclusive, may
be credited toward the minimum tree canopy requirement.
h. METHOD OF CALCULATION FOR TREE CANOPY: The Tree Canopy shall be calculated by
the following formulas:
(SA – U) x 0.2 = RTC
Where:
SA: The total Site Area (square feet)
U: Any utility easements, road rights-of way
or other area allowed to be excluded (in
square feet)
RTC: Required Tree Canopy (square feet)
and,
(SA – U): Net land disturbance area (NLD) (square
feet)
When Existing Tree Canopy as provided in the vegetation survey is calculated in excess
of twenty percent (20%) of the NLD, then all of the RTC must be in preserved trees.
When Existing Tree Canopy is calculated at less than twenty percent (20%) of the NLD,
then all of the existing tree canopy must be preserved, and newly planted trees must be
added to achieve the RTC. (Am. Ord. 2268, passed 11-13-17)
4. PAYMENT - IN- LIEU OF REQUIRED TREE CANOPY
a. While achieving minimum tree canopy coverage through preserving existing canopy is
strongly preferred, the Applicant may request to pay into the Town of Matthews Tree
Canopy Fund in lieu of meeting on-site tree canopy requirements when the development
site has unique or practical difficulties. In order to qualify for payment-in-lieu, the
Applicant shall submit a letter outlining the unique hardship(s) that make the tree canopy
requirement difficult to meet. Examples of unique hardships may include: conditions that
are peculiar to the property; topography which does not allow ADA compliance or stub
street connections; scattered location of large trees on the site; limited options for utility
placement; and inability to achieve an appropriate development density. Personal
hardships not directly related to the land do not justify use of this section. The Applicant
must explain how the deviation from the tree canopy requirements are consistent with the
spirit, purpose, and intent of the Town’s policies to preserve existing trees during
development. Prior to submitting site plans for development, the Applicant shall schedule
a meeting with the Planning office to discuss the project. Payment-in-lieu may be
requested for a portion of the required tree save or its entirety. If Applicant requests more
than thirty percent (30%) reduction of the tree save requirements listed in §
155.606.7.A.2.a for through payment-in-lieu, Board of Commissioners approval is
required. If thirty percent (30%) or less reduction in tree canopy is requested, the
Planning office may determine if hardship warrants a reduction in tree canopy
requirements.
b. The tax value per acre (TV) used to calculate the payment-in-lieu will not exceed ninety
percent (90%) of the average tax value of land per acre in the Town of Matthews. The
average tax value per acre will be determined by the Planning office using the current tax
data from Mecklenburg County and will be calculated in October annually. See the
formula below for calculation of payment-in-lieu.
c. The primary objective of the Tree Canopy Fund is the installation and maintenance of
trees on public property. The Town may also use funds for the cost associated with the
implementation of this Chapter, the Tree Ordinance, Town sponsored tree management
programs, and for the study, inventory, maintenance or treatment of public trees requiring
the services of a certified arborist or other qualified consultants. Tree Canopy Funds will
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 11
not be used in lieu of General Fund support for existing landscaping and forestry
programs.
d. METHOD OF CALCULATION FOR PAYMENT-IN-LIEU: The payment-in-lieu shall
be calculated by the following formula:
TV x A = PIL
Where:
TV: The tax value of the property per acre, or 90% of the average tax value
per acre of land in Matthews, whichever is less (dollars)
A: Reduction of required tree save area (acres)
PIL: Required payment in lieu (dollars)
[formerly known as § 153.075 (J)] (Am. Ord. 2268, passed 11-13-17)
155.606.8. Vegetation Survey
A. In order to assure that the location of existing trees and vegetation on the development site is acknowledged
prior to preparing any design plans for development, a vegetation survey is required on all sites other than
single-family residential. The vegetation survey must be submitted to the Planning Office in advance of, or
with a Landscape Plan, and prior to any land disturbing activity or any applications for grading, building, or
rezoning. The vegetation survey should be completed in conjunction with a Concept Plan to meet the PCO
requirements, when applicable.
B. Elements required as a part of the vegetation survey include: a map, drawn to scale, and a written
component, identifying any potential Specimen Tree on site, and all existing trees and vegetation eligible to
be preserved. Where clear cutting activity occurred within the previous three years, then all trees that were
previously on the site need to be identified and quantified in some way. A general grade of the condition of
each tree shall be provided.
C. A certified arborist, landscape architect, or forester shall evaluate the vegetation survey to determine what
existing vegetation will be preserved, and how it can be incorporated into the development plans for the
site. Root protection zones for all trees to be preserved must be indicated on the vegetation survey.
[formerly known as § 153.075 (K)]
155.606.9. Tree Preservation Planning
A. CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING TREE PRESERVATION. Healthy and structurally sound trees, either singularly
or in stands, located anywhere on the construction site shall be considered for preservation, and shall be
evaluated for designation as protected trees.
B. Trees preserved to meet streetscape, screening, and buffer requirements can receive credits according to the
following:
Preserved Trees Credit toward planting requirements
(DBH in inches) (Number of trees required)
2 – 5 1
6 - 17 2
18 + 4
C. TREE PRESERVATION SCHEDULE. When it has been decided which vegetation is to be preserved, then this
written and graphic information shall be included with the Landscape Plan submission: map locations
where trees, shrubs and ground covers will be preserved, their species (botanical and common names), size
(DBH), general condition rating, individual tag number and their contribution to any site-required
landscaping will be provided both on a map drawn to scale and in an accompanying text. When included
on an approved Landscape Plan, all trees listed in the schedule shall become Protected Trees.
1. Each tree to be preserved shall be tagged on-site with an identifying tree number.
2. Trees with potential Specimen Tree status shall be marked as such in the field and noted on the
Schedule.
3. If the construction site contains existing trees that are not scheduled for preservation, a written
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 12
statement citing the reasons shall be included in the application materials. A map of the site must
accompany the written statement.
D. In any required landscape buffer or screen, and in any location within the site that will not be disturbed, all
deciduous and coniferous trees at least three inches (3”) caliper and all dogwoods, redbuds, and American
hollies at least four feet (4’) high shall be considered protected. Elsewhere on the site, trees of these sizes
and larger are encouraged to be preserved and incorporated into required landscaping, but will not be
considered protected.
E. PROTECTED TREES. Protected trees include North Carolina Champion Trees, Matthews Specimen Trees,
existing streetscape trees within the public right-of-way, and any other trees designated on an approved
landscape plan to be preserved during any land disturbing activity. Preservation standards are outlined at §
155.606.11. [formerly known as § 153.075 (L)]
155.606.10. General Landscape Plan
A landscape plan is required for any land disturbing activity in any multi-family, mixed use, or nonresidential
district, and for nonresidential uses in a residential district.
A. SUBMITTAL. Landscaping plans shall be submitted to the Planning Director for administrative approval,
with review by the Town Landscape Manager.
B. REQUIREMENTS. Required elements to be included in this submittal, which may be combined on
documents and maps for clarity, are:
1. A development summary that includes total acres in development, proposed use(s), total building
square footage, required parking and provided parking spaces.
2. An accurate drawing of property boundaries.
3. Name of the project, owner, name and address of engineer, scale, date and north arrow.
4. Existing topography, watercourses and water bodies, floodplains and floodways, or other areas
that would require extensive clearing and grading or alteration for development. This may be
combined with the Vegetation Survey of the site.
5. Location of proposed buildings, driveways and parking areas.
6. Location of loading areas, service areas or outside storage areas and required screening.
7. A copy of the Vegetation Survey map and written document and the Tree Preservation Schedule.
8. Locations of all preserved trees and their root protection zones including all existing and finished
grades at these locations.
9. Locations of required screening buffer strips, riparian buffers, canopy preservation locations,
streetscape, perimeter plantings, interior plantings, and screen landscaping.
10. The Landscape Plan drawing shall depict with illustrations and written explanation of how all the
root protection zone requirements as outlined in § 155.606.11.D will be applied to the site’s
Protected Trees.
11. Details of required landscaping showing species, dimensions, and spacing of planted materials and
the use and protection of existing vegetation. Plans shall normally include a scaled drawing and a
written component that includes planting specifications.
12. A completed irrigation plan or written statement citing the purpose for not complying with the
irrigation requirement at § 155.606.13.F.
13. Proposed location of any free-standing sign to be employed on the site.
14. A completed Landscape Establishment Guarantee showing the calculations for the bond amount.
15. A statement on the anticipated completion date of the installation or land disturbing activity.
Owner shall notify the Town Landscape Manager not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to the
start of any land disturbing activity on the site.
C. LANDSCAPE PLAN APPROVAL.
1. No land disturbing activities shall commence on site until the submitted Landscape Plan is
approved by the Planning Director.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 13
2. The Town may inspect the development site prior to plan approval. The property owner or
developer will be notified prior to such a site visit and may accompany the inspection. The results
of the inspection shall be provided to the owner or developer in writing within seven (7) days of
the inspection. Any problems encountered or suggestions generated during the inspection shall be
noted.
a. The Town may verify by inspection the Vegetation Survey and the Tree Preservation
Schedule.
b. Any trees found by the Town’s representative to be of potential North Carolina
Champion or Matthews Specimen Tree quality will be brought to the attention of the
developer. A tree determined to be a Champion or Specimen Tree shall be classified as a
Protected Tree and the developer shall be required to incorporate its protected status into
the Landscape Plan for the site.
c. CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PLAN. Minor changes or additions to existing development
or approved plans may be submitted to the Planning Director as an abbreviated
Landscape Plan.
1. An abbreviated plan shall be allowed when the proposed change is physically
limited to only a contained portion of the site. An abbreviated plan shall include,
but not be limited to, items listed in § 155.606.10.B.2, 6, 8, and 9. The Planning
Director shall determine when an abbreviated plan may be submitted for a
detailed plan and what items must be included.
2. Any substitutions in plant species and varieties cited in the original landscape
plan to be planted must be approved by the Planning Director before installation.
[formerly known as § 153.075 (M)]
3. Prior to the commencement of any activities requiring a grading and/or construction permit, a preconstruction
conference must be held with the Town Landscape Manager and Planning office to
review all procedures for protection and management of all protected landscape elements
identified in the landscape plan.
For all development other than single-family dwellings on individual lots, the following
on-site supervision is required:
a. The applicant shall designate one or more landscape protection supervisors who
attended the pre-construction conference with the Town Landscape Manager
and Planning office.
b. It shall be the duty of the landscape protection supervisor to ensure the
protection of new or existing landscape elements as defined in the landscape
plan. The approved landscape protection supervisor(s) shall supervise all site
work to assure the development activity conforms to provisions of the approved
landscape plan. At least one (1) designated landscape protection supervisor shall
be present on the development site at all times when activity that could damage
or disturb soil and adjacent landscape elements occurs including but not limited
to: any excavation, grading, trenching, or moving of soil; removal, installation,
or maintenance of all landscape elements and landscape protection devices; or
delivery, transporting and placement of construction materials and equipment on
site.
c. Sites shall be inspected as needed by the Town Landscape Manager and/or
Planning office to assure work is conforming to the approved landscape plan.
The landscape protection supervisor shall be in frequent communication with the
Town Landscape Manager and Planning office during all land disturbance and
planting activities. (Am. Ord. 2268, passed 11-13-17)
155.606.11. Preservation Standards
A. SHRUB AND GROUND COVER VEGETATION. The ground surface under any preserved shrub and
groundcover should be disturbed as little as possible, following the basic standards for tree preservation.
B. TREES. Existing trees specified on an approved landscape plan to remain on site during any land disturbing
activity are Protected Trees. In addition, any land disturbing activity that may come within the drip line of
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 14
any Protected Tree, or a tree having all or a portion of its trunk in or upon any public property, shall be
identified on site and protected as explained below.
C. THE ROOT PROTECTION ZONE DESIGNATION:
1. For each inch of DBH a minimum of one foot (1’) of protected space from the trunk is measured
in all directions. This area is designated as the Root Protection Zone. Unless physical obstructions
are encountered within this area, the entire zone will receive protection. For tree stands the Root
Protection Zone shall extend five feet (5’) beyond the perimeter drip line of the entire stand.
2. All grading, construction, and site layout plans shall show the vertical elevation of the trunk at the
soil line, the existing topography, and proposed grade changes within and immediately
surrounding the root protection zone.
D. PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS OF THE ROOT PROTECTION ZONE.
1. A durable fence of plastic or wood with a minimum height of four feet (4’) shall protect the zone.
No soil disturbance will occur in the zone. The fence will be maintained at all times during any
land disturbing activity.
2. No storage of materials, piling of soil, parking of equipment, or dumping of debris shall occur in
the zone.
3. The natural grade shall be maintained within the zone. Stripping topsoil from, or adding topsoil
to, the zone is prohibited.
4. Excavation for buried utilities is prohibited. Boring may be permitted in individual situations.
5. No trenching for irrigation lines shall take place.
6. Removal of understory vegetation within the zone shall be restricted to hand-operated power
equipment.
7. A minimum of one sign designating the Root Protection Zone shall be placed on the fence and
should be visible for a minimum distance of thirty feet (30’).
8. Minor pruning of branches to accommodate the construction of nearby buildings or planting of
shrubs or ground covers within the zone may be allowed with the approval of the Town Landscape
Manager.
9. The Town will evaluate any requests for encroachment into the zone. Review of the request shall
consider the overall needs of the site development. Utility line encroachments will be considered
if the encroachment is unavoidable and damage to existing root systems is kept to an
accommodating level. In these cases, encroachment will only be allowed on one side of the tree
and no closer than two thirds (2/3) of the distance from the edge of the zone to the trunk. A
revised Landscape Plan drawing or a written document giving the dimensions and explaining the
reasons for the encroachment shall be prepared and submitted by the developer, to be signed by
the Town Landscape Manager and attached to the approved Landscape Plan,
10. The requirements of this section shall remain in effect throughout the construction period or the
duration of the land disturbing activity. [formerly known as § 153.075 (N)]
155.606.12. Planting Standards
A. Except for Streetscape Trees, which can be variable, the minimum distance to the nearest property line or
public right-of-way for planting shall be six feet (6’) for large maturing trees and three feet (3’) for small
maturing trees.
B. The minimum distance to a sidewalk, curb, or other impervious surface is four feet (4’) for large maturing
trees and three feet (3’) for small maturing trees.
C. For large maturing trees a minimum planting area of two hundred fifty six (256) square feet with a
minimum dimension of eight feet (8’) and a tree center no closer than four feet (4’) to the edge of the
planting area is required. For small maturing trees a minimum planting area of one hundred forty four (144)
square feet with a minimum dimension of eight feet (8’) and a tree center no closer than three feet (3’) to
the edge of the planting area is required.
D. Trees shall normally not be guyed or staked, except in an extreme situation to salvage a damaged tree after
planting. If guying is employed, it must be removed as soon as possible or within one (1) year at the latest.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 15
Mulch shall be applied (two (2”) to three inch (3”) layer around the tree pit) in accordance with accepted
practices in the landscape industry.
E. Adequate drainage shall be provided for all planting areas and specific plant materials shall be chosen
which can adapt to the anticipated drainage conditions. Whenever possible, natural surface drainage that
flows into the root protection zone shall be considered for plant selection and location, and interrupted
curbing or curbless planting islands may be used.
F. No trees identified as large maturing trees shall be located within thirty five feet (35’) from the center-line
of a power distribution line.
G. No planting identified as reaching a mature height of more than twenty feet (20’) shall be placed within a
transmission power line right-of-way.
H. Normally, trees should not be planted within a utility or access easement. When a tree is to be located
within an easement, a written statement to the Planning Director should indicate why this is necessary.
When the planting is within a dedicated easement for underground utilities, trees planted shall be of the
small maturing size to minimize future root conflict. This statement shall become an attachment to the
approved Landscape Plan.
I. At all points of egress from off-street parking areas to a road, and at corners of road intersections,
unobstructed visibility for sight triangles shall be maintained as defined in § 155.601.13.
J. Tree holes shall normally be back-filled with the native soil that was excavated. Amending the soil with
organic additives is permissible when extremely poor site conditions are encountered.
K. Planting trees within sidewalk space, particularly in concrete, and within parking lot tree islands, requires
special techniques and procedures in order to provide enough growing space beneath the concrete for the
tree to prosper and maintain the integrity and stability of the surrounding impervious pavement. The
Landscape Manager will individually evaluate any landscape plan that includes trees in sidewalk pits and
parking lots.
L. All trees and shrubs to be planted must comply with the American Standard for Nursery Stock, published
by the American Association of Nurserymen (current edition).
M. Trees to be planted shall generally be on the Town’s approved tree list, provided as § 155.606.13. The
Planning Director, with Town Landscape Manager input, shall approve the use of trees not on the list.
[formerly known as § 153.075 (O)] (Am. Ord. 2268, passed 11-13-17)
155.606.13. Landscape Maintenance Standards
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS. The property owner and/or lessee shall maintain all landscape materials and
landscape areas in accordance with the approved Landscape Plan. Maintenance shall include watering,
weeding, mowing, fertilizing, treating, mulching, pruning, removal and replacement of dead or diseased
trees and shrubs. Maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis in order to maintain plant vigor and
stability and to present a neat and well-kept appearance at all times.
B. DURATION OF MAINTENANCE. For preserved vegetation, maintenance shall begin at the time that the root
protection zones are established (prior to rough grading) and shall continue indefinitely. For planted
materials, maintenance shall begin at the time of planting and shall continue indefinitely.
C. MITIGATION FOR LOSS OF PROTECTED TREES AND SHRUBS.
1. If a Protected Tree is destroyed or dies within three (3) years after completion of construction,
then replacement trees of total equal diameter shall be planted on the site. Tree destruction or
death during this three (3) year period shall be assumed to be the result of the land disturbing
activity unless the tree destruction is easily verified as due to a casualty loss of nature (storm,
lightning strike, and the like) or the property owner provides documentation from a certified
arborist of an alternate explanation for the tree’s death. It is the intent of these mitigation
provisions that a replacement tree will be located where the Protected Tree had grown prior to
death or destruction.
2. Any Protected Tree dying after the initial three (3) years shall be replaced with planted tree(s) of
an approved species, with either a single tree of equal caliper to the lost tree or multiple new trees
each with a minimum of two inch (2”) caliper (for large maturing trees) or a minimum of one and
one-half inch (1½”) caliper (for small maturing trees). It is the intent of these mitigation provisions
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 16
that a replacement tree will be located where the Protected Tree had grown prior to death or
destruction. If two inch (2") caliper tree(s) are planted, a total caliper equivalent to the lost tree
determines the total quantity of replacement trees needed.
3. Where possible, replacement trees should be of the same species as the lost tree(s). When the same
species is not proposed, an explanation for the alternate selection, and what replacement species is
proposed, shall be submitted to the Planning Director for approval prior to replacement.
4. Replacement plantings shall normally be made within one (1) month of the loss or within the first
month of the next planting season. Any shrubs indicated on the Landscape Plan to be preserved,
which later die, shall be replaced with the same species at a minimum size of three (3) gallon,
three foot (3’) height. Replacements for casualty loss fatalities must be made within one calendar
year after the event.
D. MITIGATION FOR LOSS OF PLANTED TREES AND SHRUBS.
1. Any planted tree or shrub dying during the first three (3) years after planting shall be replaced with
a plant kind and size that was specified in the original plans.
2. Any planted tree dying during the fourth (4th) year or later shall be replaced in the same location,
with a tree, or trees, of the same type or value (using the International Society of Aborculture’s
Tree Evaluation Formula) of the loss, a minimum size of two inch (2”) caliper for small maturing
trees and four inch (4”) caliper for large maturing varieties.
3. Any shrub which dies after three (3) years shall be replaced with the same species, minimum three
(3) gallon and three feet (3’) in height. Replacements for casualty loss fatalities of any trees or
shrubs must be made within one calendar year after the event.
E. MISCELLANEOUS MAINTENANCE PROVISIONS.
1. TOPPING, TREE PRUNING, AND LIMBING. Trees and shrubs should generally be kept in their
natural form and allowed to reach their mature height and spread.
a. Topping of any landscape tree in excess of twenty five percent (25%) of its canopy
planted or preserved is prohibited.
b. TREE PRUNING. No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the canopy may be pruned.
The natural canopy shape must be maintained, and all trees shall reach eighty five percent
(85%) of their overall height at maturity. No pruning may commence until a request by
the developer or owner of the property is approved by the Town Landscape Manager.
Such signed document shall be attached to the approved Landscape Plan.
c. LIMBING-UP. Where necessary for public safety, visibility, or pedestrian or vehicular
activity, limbing-up may take place on existing trees and shrubs, as long as at least
seventy five percent (75%) of the tree canopy is maintained, and limbing-up does not
exceed fifteen feet (15’) above the adjacent ground elevation except where large vehicles
are regularly required, in which case limbing-up shall not exceed the height of the
required vehicles. No limbing-up activity shall commence until a request by the
developer or owner of the property is approved by the Town Landscape Manager. Such
signed document shall be attached to the approved Landscape Plan.
2. PURPOSEFUL REMOVAL OF PROTECTED TREES.
a. Purposeful removal of any tree approved in the original planting plan must be based on
unsafe conditions from developing structural, insect, or disease problems. Only in the
event of a written recommendation by a certified arborist or the Town’ Landscape
Manager, and approval by the Planning Director, should removal take place.
b. Prior to any replanting a replacement Landscape Plan must be submitted indicating trees
by species and size at the time of removal. In addition, the plan should list any
replacements by species, variety, and planting size. Generally a replacement Landscape
Plan shall be considered an abbreviated plan, unless more than twenty percent (20%) of
the preserved or planted trees and shrubs on the original approved plan are scheduled for
replacement.
c. Where an existing protected tree is of a species that since its installation has become
recognized as having substantial difficulty maintaining a full and safe canopy in an urban
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 17
environment, then a written request by a property owner or developer, with a written
explanation of the tree conditions and status and a recommendation for replacement by a
certified arborist, may be submitted to the Planning Director and Town Landscape
Manager. A proposed tree replacement plan shall be submitted, showing replacement in
substantially the same locations as trees proposed to be removed. Replacement trees shall
be of a large maturing variety unless site conditions (overhead power lines, etc.) prohibit
their placement. Replacement trees shall be equal to the caliper size of removed trees, up
to four inches in DBH, and additional replacement trees shall be placed elsewhere on-site
to replace the total DBH being removed.
3. REMEDIES FOR DISTURBANCE, DESTRUCTION, OR REMOVAL OF VEGETATION AND REQUIRED
LANDSCAPING.
a. Any disturbance, destruction, or removal of any required landscaping or approved
vegetation shall constitute a violation of § 155.606.
b. Any person who violates any of the tree protection or landscaping provisions of §
155.606 or any approved landscape/vegetation plan previously approved by the Town
prior to enactment of this Title shall be subject to any one or combination of penalties
prescribed at § 155.214.
F. IRRIGATION REQUIREMENT. Unless otherwise approved, an irrigation system shall be provided to all
landscaped, non-turf areas containing living plant materials.
1. All irrigation systems shall be installed by a licensed master plumber, licensed sprinkler contractor
or owner/builder and shall be maintained in proper operating condition.
2. Low-volume irrigation systems such as drip or bubble systems are encouraged for use in order to
conserve water.
3. Sprinkler type irrigation systems are not encouraged within the Town limits; however, when
installed, they shall be designed to avoid spray that will fall on sidewalks, neighboring properties,
and adjacent buildings.
4. Any sprinkler system installed shall be programmed to supplement normal rainfall, and shall be
operated to conserve water.
5. An operable rain sensor is required on all automatically controlled systems.
6. The installation of an irrigation system is not required on new plantings of all native plant
materials or Xeriscape plant species designated as such by the North Carolina State University, or
on preserved vegetation when root protection zones have been identified and continuously
maintained during all land disturbing activities.
7. Before any irrigation system or portion of an irrigation system is installed within a public right-ofway
or on any other public land, an encroachment permit must first be obtained from the Public
Works Director or from NCDOT as applicable.
8. Irrigation systems that water only landscape turf are not encouraged, but are not prohibited.
G. MAINTENANCE VIOLATIONS. The property owner and/or occupant or lessee shall be held jointly liable for
any infractions of the requirements set forth in § 155.606.13. Where purposeful removal, topping, severe
pruning, limbing, or other disfiguration occurs to one (1) or more trees or shrubs on a site without prior
approval of a replacement Landscape Plan, the developer, property owner and/or occupant or lessee shall
jointly be held in violation and each one shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 155.214.
H. LANDSCAPE ESTABLISHMENT GUARANTEE. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, proper
maintenance of the planted and preserved trees and shrubs during the landscape establishment period shall
be guaranteed by a Landscape Establishment Guarantee from the property owner to the Town. The bond
amount shall be equal to: the retail cost of the new trees; the actual value of preserved trees; the labor costs
for installation, plus an amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the combined amount of the factors
listed here. Values shall be calculated using The Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the Council of
Tree and Landscape Appraisers (current edition). The project landscaper shall be responsible for providing
these figures to the Town and County. The bonding period shall be for a three (3) year period commencing
from the date of successful inspection of the installation and preservation as being in compliance with the
approved Landscape Plan for the site. See also Section 155.405.10.C.3 (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 18
Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17)
I. SEASONAL DEFERRAL OPTION. During the months of April through August, or during a declared
community-wide drought, a separate bond may be provided to the Town to allow a Certificate of
Occupancy to be issued when all other construction requirements have been inspected and declared
complete except for completion of landscaping. Such bond amount shall be equal to twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000) per each acre or fraction of acre of the total development site, plus the bid package price
the property owner/developer received for completion of the landscaping elements of the development
project. The Town Landscape Manager shall review the bid package price to determine it is appropriate to
the amount of plant and landscape materials remaining to be installed, and the labor required to complete
the unfinished landscaping elements. This bond shall be issued in the name of the property owner to the
Town, and shall be in effect for up to six (6) months or no longer than thirty (30) days into the next planting
season, whichever is less. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for the site until the Town
Landscape Manager confirms in writing to Mecklenburg County LUESA that the required bond has been
accepted by the Town. Once the required landscaping is installed and approved by the Town Landscape
Manager, the owner/developer can request the release of the bond for work completed. If such landscaping
has not been installed within the given bond period, the Town reserves the right to cash such bond for the
purpose of completing the required landscape installation. A seasonal deferral option shall be in addition to
the required Landscape Establishment Guarantee.
155.606.14. Approved Tree and Shrub List
A list of approved trees and shrubs for planting is provided to increase the likelihood of survival and to reduce
maintenance requirements. All trees utilized should be generally adapted to the normal climatic and environmental
conditions expected for the Matthews area. The listed trees satisfy these general criteria. This list is not intended to
be a comprehensive survey, but it will serve as a guide to plant selection. Plants on the approved plant list shall
normally be used in a landscape plan.
A. Plants materials that are not on this list may be used if it can be shown that the selected species satisfies one
or more of the following criteria:
1. A species indigenous to the area that can be shown to be adapted to the proposed site conditions.
2. A cultivated species that is well suited for use in this area.
3. A non-indigenous species, meeting a specialized use that will not be adversely affected by normal
climatic environmental conditions.
4. Any plant species that has been previously approved for use in a similar site situation.
B. The use of any plant not on the list shall be so noted on the Landscape Plan with a brief explanation of
purpose.
C. PROHIBITED PLANT MATERIAL. Any tree or plant material that is determined by the Town Landscape
Manager as invasive, disease-prone, subject to infestation or fragile shall be prohibited from being
approved on a Landscape Plan.
1. STREET TREES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any tree species existing within the public right-of-way
which is subsequently determined by the Town Landscape Manager to be a prohibited plant
material may be removed by the Town and replaced with an appropriate alternate species.
Replacement trees shall be a minimum of four inches (4”) caliper and twelve feet (12’) in height at
time of planting whenever they replace trees of same or larger dimensions. Existing street trees
being replaced under this provision which are less than four inches (4”) caliper or twelve feet (12’)
in height shall be replaced with appropriate alternate species trees of at least two inches (2”) in
caliper and eight feet (8’) in height. All replaced street trees shall be installed to industry
standards.
2. STREET TREES WITHIN FIVE FEET OF RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. Any tree species existing within five
feet (5’) of the right-of-way or on private property and subsequently determined by the Town
Landscape Manager to be a prohibited plant material may be assessed by the Town Landscape
Manager for its health and survivability expectations. Upon finding of a need to replace such tree
or trees, the Landscape Manager shall give written notice to the property owner detailing the
tree(s) that need to be replaced along with a variety of desire species well suited for the location.
The property owner shall have two (2) years from date of the written notice to remove the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 19
prohibited trees and replace them with approved alternate species. Minimum planting size of
replacement trees shall be two inches (2”) caliper and twelve feet (12’) in height. If the property
undergoes a change of use prior to the two (2) year period, then the tree replacement action shall
be required prior to the new use obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy.
1. Large Maturing Deciduous Trees
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? ? Ash, Green* Fraxinus pennsylvanica 50-60
? ? Ash, White Fraxinus Americana 50-80
? Baldcypress Taxodium distichum 50-70
? Basswood Tilia americana 60-75
? ? Beech, American Fagus grandifolia 40-60
? ? Birch, Black Betula lenta 50-60
? ? Birch, River Betual nigra 40-60
? ? Black Gum* Nyssa sylvatica 30-50
?
Sweet Gum Rotundiloba Liquidambar sylvatica 20-50
?
Black Walnut Juglans nigra 20-50
? Cherry, Japanese Prunus subhirtella 20-50
? Chinese Elm &B Hybrids Ulmus parvifolia 30-60
? Chinese Pistache Pistachia chinesis 25-35
? Hackberry, Weeping Celtis occidentalis 40-60
? Hackberry, Common Celtis laevigata 60-70
? Hickory Carya spp. 50-80
? ? Hornbeam, American hop Ostrya virginiana 25-40
? Sugar Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba 50-80
? Katsura Tree Cercidiphyllum japonicum 40-60
? ? Maple, Red* Acer rubrum 40-60
? ? Maple, Sugar* Acer saccaharum 60-75
? ? Oak, Black Quercus velutina 60-80
? ? Oak, Chestnut Quercus prinus 60-70
? ? Oak, Laurel Quercus hemisphaerica (laurifolia) 40-60
? ? Oak, Northern Red Quercus rubra 50-60
? ? Oak, Pin Quercus palustris 60-70
? ? Oak, Post Quercus stellate 30-50
? ? Oak, Sawtooth Quercus Acutissima 40-60
? ? Oak, Scarlet Quercus coccinea 65-100
? ? Oak, Shumard Quercus shumardii 40-60
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 20
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? ? Oak, Southern Red Quercus falcate 70-80
? ? Oak, Swamp Chestnut Quercus michauxil 60-100
? ? Oak, Water Quercus nigra 50-80
? ? Oak, White Quercus alba 50-80
? ? Oak, Willow Quercus phellos 70-90
? ? Pagoda Tree, Japanese* Sophora japonica 50-60
?
Pecan Carya illinoinensis 40-60
?
Persimmon Diospyrus virginiana 40-60
?
Sour Wood Oxydendron arboreum 40-60
?
Southern Catalpa Catalpa bignoniodes 75-100
? ? Sycamore Platanus occidentalis 75-100
? ? Tulip Poplar Liriodendron Tulipifera 70-90
? White Willow Salix alba 75-90
? Yellow Wood Cladrastis kentuckea 30-50
? Zelkova, Japanese* Zelkova serrata 50-80
* Many varieties available
2. Small Maturing Deciduous Trees
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? ? Alder, Tag Ainus serrulata 20-30
? Althea* Hibiscus syriacus 8-12
? American Hazelnut Corylus Americana 10-15
? Birch, River Betula nigra 20-30
? Buckeye, Red Aesculus pavia 10-20
? Chaste Tree Vitex negundo 15-20
? ? Cherry, Japanese* Prunus serrulata 15-25
? ? Cherry, Yoshino Prunus X yedoensis 20-25
? ? Cherry, Laurel Prunus Caroliniana 15-25
? Crabapple, Flowering* Malus sp. 7-25
? Crepe Myrtle* Lagerstroemia sp. 15-25
? Devil’s Walking Stick Aralla spinosa 10-20
? ? Dogwood, Flowering* Cornus florida 15-30
? Dogwood, Kousa Cornus kousa 10-15
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 21
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? Dogwood, Redosier Cornus stolonifera 15-30
? Eastern Serviceberry Amelanchier canadensis 5-20
? Elm, Winged Ulmus alata 20-30
? Goldenrain Tree* Koelreuteria paniculata 20-30
? ? Hawthorn* Crategus 15-30
?
Holly, American Ilex opaca 20-30
? Holly, Possumhaw Ilex decidua 20-30
? Ironwood Carpinus caroliniana 20-30
? Hornbeam Carpinus betulus 20-30
? Magnolia, Saucer Magnolia soulangiana 20-30
? Magnolia, Sweetbay* M. Virginia 10-20
? Magnolia, Star* M. Stellata 15-20
? Maple, Amur Acer ginnala 15-20
? Maple, Chalk Acer leucoderme 25-30
? Maple, Hedge Acer Campestre 15-25
? Maple, Japanese* Acer Palmatum 15-25
? Myrtle, Wax Myrica cerifera 10-15
?
Paw Paw Asimina triloba 20-30
? ? Redbud, Eastern* Cercis Canadensis 20-30
?
Sassafras Sassafras albidum 20-30
? ? Serviceberry Amelanchier sp. 10-20
? Silverbell, Carolina Halesia carolina 20-30
? Snowbell* Americanus 8-15
? Sparkleberry Vaccinium arboretum 5-20
? White Fringetree Chionanthus virginicus 12-20
* Many varieties available
3. Evergreen Trees
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? ? Eastern Red Cedar Tsuga caroliniana 20-30
?
Hemlock, Carolina Juniperus virginiana 20-30
? Holly, American* Ilex opaca* 20-40
? Holly, Chinese (Tree Form) Ilex cornuta* 8-15
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 22
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? Holly, Foster Ilex x attenuate 20-30
? Holly, Hume Ilex x attenuate 25-35
? Holly, Nellie R Stevens Ilex x Nellie R Stevens 15-25
? Holly, Yaupon* Ilex vomitoria 15-20
? Holly, Savannah* Ilex x attenuate 25-30
? ? Magnolia, Southern* Magnolia grandiflora 60-80
? ? Pine, Loblolly Pinus taeda 60-90
? ? Pine, Shortleaf Pinus echinata 80-100
?
Pine, Virginia Pinus virginiana 40-60
? Spruce, Norway Picea abies 40-60
? Ti-ti or Leatherwood Cyrilla racemiflora 8-25
* Many varieties available
4. Low Maintenance Shrubs
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? Abelias++ Abelia grandiflora 6
? Azalea, Pinxter Rhododendron periclymenoides 7
? Azalea, Swamp Rhododendron viscosum 15
? Azalea, Sweet Rhododendron arborescens 20
? Beautyberry, American Callicarpa americana 8
? Blueberry, Highbush Vaccinium corymbosum 10
? ? Blackberry (various)++ Rubus spp. 6
? Camelia Sasanquas++ Camelia sasaqua 6
? ? Carolina Rose+++ Rosa carolina 6
? Chokeberry, Red Aronia arbutifolia 10
? Common Buttonbush Cephalanthus occidentalis 8
? Hearts-a-bustin Euonymus americanus 12
? Holly, Buford++ Ilex cornuta 8
? Holly, Inkberry++ Ilex glabra 12
? Holly, Winterberry Ilex verticillata 15
? Loropetalum++ Loropetalum chinesis 6
? Otto Luykun Laurel++ Prunus laurocerasus 5
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 606 - 23
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height (feet)
? Spicebush Lindera benzoin 16
? Sweet-pepperbush Clethra alnifolia 9
? Sweetspire, Virginia+++ Itea virginica 6
? Upright Juniper++ Juniperus chinensis 6
? ? Viburnum (various)++ Viburnum spp. 8
? Viburnum, Arrowood Viburnum dentatum 8
? Viburnum, Blackhaw Viburnum prunifolium 15
? Viburnum, Mapleleaf Viburnum acerifolium 6
? Wax Myrtle++ Morella (Myrica) cerifera 12
++ Evergreen
+++ Semi-Evergrren
5. Groundcover & Vines
Recommended for use specifically in the Special Highway Overlay District
Recommended for all other landscaping applications
Common Name Botanical Name Winter Leaves
?
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens Evergreen/deciduous
? Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus cinquefolia Deciduous
? Grape (various) Vitix spp. Deciduous
? Green Brier (various) Smilax spp. Deciduous
? Clematis (various) Clematis spp. Deciduous
? Winter Jasmine Jasminum nudiflorum Deciduous
? Crossvine Bignonia capreolata Evergreen/Deciduous
? Carolina Jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens Evergreen
? Passionflower Passiflora i ncarnate Deciduous
(These varieties to be retained in required screens.)
(Ord. 1598, passed 10-8-07; Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16, Am. Ord. 2382, passed 4-8-19)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 1
155.607. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
____________________________________
155.607.1 General Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
A. PURPOSE. This Section establishes the minimum standards for the amount, location, and development of off-street
motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces, and off-street loading areas. These standards are provided to assure proper
and uniform development of off-street parking and loading areas throughout the town, to relieve traffic congestion in
the streets, to encourage the use of bicycles for transportation, and to minimize any detrimental effects of off-street
parking and loading areas on adjacent properties and on the environment. ('72 Code, § 2001) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-
88; Ord. No. 1532; passed 1-8-07) [formerly known as §153.115]
B. SCOPE. The off-street parking and loading provisions of this Title shall apply as follows:
1. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the Effective Date of this Title,
accessory parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required. However, where a permit has been
issued prior to the Effective Date of this Title, construction is begun within one (1) year of such Effective
Date and diligently pursued to completion, parking and loading facilities as required by the code
provisions in effect at the time of the initial permit issuance may be followed.
2. When the intensity of use of any conforming building, structure or premises shall be increased through the
addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, ballfields, or other units of measurement as
specified for required parking or loading facilities, then associated parking and loading facilities shall be
provided only to accommodate for such increase in intensity of use when the aggregate increase in units of
measurement shall be less than fifteen percent (15%) and existing parking and loading facilities are not
materially altered.
3. When the intensity of use of any conforming building, structure or premises shall be increased through the
addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, ballfields, or other units of measurement as
specified for required parking or loading facilities and such increase in aggregate units of measurement is
increased by fifteen percent (15%) or more, then the parking and loading facilities as required by this Title
shall be provided for the entire building, structure or use.
4. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall be changed to a new use which would require
additional parking or loading facilities, then associated parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required by this Title for such new use.
C. GENERAL OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS.
1. EXISTING PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. Accessory off-street parking or loading facilities which are
located on the same lot as the building or use served and which were in existence on the Effective Date of
this Title or were provided voluntarily after the Effective Date shall not be reduced below, or if already less
than, shall not further be reduced below, the requirements of this Title for a similar new building or change
of use.
2. VOLUNTARY PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. Except where maximum parking standards are given for
certain uses or zoning district designations, nothing in this Title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary
establishment of off-street parking or loading facilities to serve any use of land or buildings provided that
all regulations governing the location, design, improvement and operation of such facilities are met.
3. DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION. For any conforming or legally nonconforming building for use which is in
existence on the Effective Date of this Title, which subsequently is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse,
explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed, re-established or repaired, off-street parking or
loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or
continued in operation, except that when such damage or destruction exceeds more than forty percent
(40%) of the value of the building or use, sufficient off-street parking or loading facilities shall be provided
as required by this Title. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this Title for equivalent new uses or construction.
4. LANDSCAPING. All vehicular use areas providing parking space for five (5) or more vehicles shall be
landscaped in accordance with the provisions of §155.606. Ground cover, shrubs, and trees shall be located
and maintained so they do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation or obstruct visibility within
the property or at entrances and exits. [formerly known as §153.126]
5. ILLUMINATION. Exterior lighting within or adjacent to vehicular use areas shall comply with the
provisions of §155.609.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 2
6. SIGNS. Incidental signs directing visitors to parking or loading areas, assigning parking spaces,
identifying handicap parking spaces, and similar instructions may be placed within off-street vehicular use
areas.
7. DISTANCE OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES FROM ASSOCIATED USE. Off-street parking
spaces shall be located so that no space is farther than four hundred feet (400’) from the building(s) or
use(s) to which they are assigned. This requirement does not apply to parking spaces for auditoriums,
stadiums, assembly halls, gymnasiums and other places of assembly, industrial, wholesaling,
manufacturing establishments, and hospitals.[formerly known as §153.119]
8. SURFACE TREATMENT FOR VEHICULAR USE AREAS. All parking spaces, aisles, driveways,
loading spaces, and vehicular maneuvering areas in nonresidential districts shall be paved, unless meeting
one of the following exceptions: location within a property designed for occasional excess parking;
vehicular use area where the primary use is not intended for parking; vehicular use area designed with
alternative materials as part of the site’s storm water management system; or nonresidential uses in a
residential district. For each of these exceptions, an alternate surface material may be used providing it is
approved by the Town Engineer and the Town Planning Office. [formerly known as §153.118]
9. DESIGN FOR MANEUVERING OF VEHICLES. Parking and loading facilities must be designed and
constructed so that all maneuvering in and out of parking and loading spaces can take place entirely within
the property lines of the lot and not encroach into any required landscape areas. The use of public streets,
sidewalks, alleys, or other public rights-of-way or public use realm for parking or for maneuvering in and
out of off-street parking spaces is prohibited, except where such maneuvering is necessary in conjunction
with driveways for single-family dwellings. The use of private streets or driveways for maneuvering shall
only be approved when all property owners of lots adjacent to, or having cross access rights to the private
street provide written agreement to such parking and maneuvering design.[formerly known as §153.125
(part)]
10. ACCESS TO PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. Access to parking areas and loading facilities
shall be limited to driveway or alley entrances and exits specified in the approved parking plan which have
received a driveway permit from the Town and/or NCDOT, as appropriate, when connecting to a public
right-of-way. [formerly known as §153.125 (part)]
11. MARKED SPACES. Hard surface parking and loading areas shall be striped or permanently marked on
the pavement to define each designated space. Where an alternative ground surface treatment is utilized for
parking areas, individual spaces or rows of spaces may be identified in an understandable manner, such as
by chalk marks, ropes, chains, or wheel stops.
12. BARRIER SPECIFICATIONS. Curbs, walls, fences, individual wheel stops, and similar devices shall be
located inside and along the perimeters of parking and loading facilities where needed to prevent parked
vehicles from extending beyond the designated parking space area, and/or to prevent encroaching into
pedestrian pathways, landscaping areas, storm water drainage facilities, internal driving aisles or adjacent
rights-of-way, or similar improvements. Barriers shall also be provided along all perimeters of parking
structures when necessary to protect paving surface edges or adjacent land from damaging effects of
surface drainage. Curb inlets for rain gardens and other storm water facilities are allowed. [formerly
known as §153.124]
13. RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES. The
storage, display, and/or sale of merchandise or materials, any engine or mechanical repair of a vehicle, any
vehicular washing, the assembly of any product, the display or sale of merchandise from a vehicle without
a zoning permit, or the repair of any equipment, is prohibited in any required off-street parking or loading
space. The temporary storage of construction material and equipment while work is occurring on the
premises may be located on off-street parking or loading spaces not required for any functioning use on the
property.
14. PARKING WITHIN INDIVIDUAL PARCELS.
a. Parking in the required building setback is not permitted for any multi-family use in the R-12MF,
R-15MF, SRN, or C-MF district, or for any multi-family or office use in the O (Traditional or
Parallel Traditional) districts.
b. Parking for single-family dwellings in single-family districts is allowed within the required front
setback as provided in §155.607.2.B. In single-family residential districts, parking in the required
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 3
building setback, or within the outer twenty feet (20’) of any side or rear yard is not permitted for
parks and playgrounds operated on a noncommercial basis for purposes of public recreation.
Parking in the required setback, or side or rear yard is not permitted for institutional uses in singlefamily
residential districts.
c. On corner lots, parking shall not be permitted in the streetside side yard closer to the public rightof-
way than ten feet (10’). [formerly § 153.092]
d. In the HUC district, no parking or vehicle use area shall be allowed between the front property
line (right-of-way) and the front of any building, although driveways providing access to a parking
area may be installed across this space perpendicular to the street and front of building. [formerly
§153.061(I)(4)] (Ord. No. 945, passed 11-10-97)
e. In the Highway NC51 Overlay district, parking shall not be located between NC51 and any
building, or closer to NC51 right-of-way than sixty feet (60’) when no building exists within sixty
feet (60’) of NC51 right-of-way, unless meeting the provisions of §155.504.2.
f. In the single-family residential districts, R-12MF and R15MF multi-family districts, and the SRN
district, parking of commercial vehicles is not allowed, except under the following provisions:
i. One mid-range commercial vehicle may be parked overnight (9 PM to 7 AM) on the
same lot as an occupied dwelling unit. It shall only be parked on a clearly delineated
parking pad or driveway, and shall not be within the required front setback.
ii. Vehicles intended and regularly used to transport people to and from institutional uses
may be parked overnight (9 PM to 7 AM) on the same lot as the institutional use. They
shall only be parked on a clearly delineated parking pad.
iii. A rental or moving van or truck may only park in these zoning districts for the purposes
of loading or unloading personal belongings for the lot at which it is parked. Such
vehicles parked in residential areas shall not exceed three (3) consecutive nights.
iv. Emergency response vehicles, road and utility repair and maintenance vehicles, delivery
trucks, and similar vehicles used for emergency situations, repair of public infrastructure,
or for the delivery of goods and services are exempt from this parking limitation while
they are needed on the site.
v. Commercial and construction vehicles and equipment at an active development site or
active construction staging area are exempt from this parking limitation. [formerly known
as §153.128]
15. OPEN AND ENCLOSED PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES. Parking spaces and loading
facilities may be open to the sky, covered with a roof, or enclosed in a building.
16. Parking shall be calculated separately for each different use area in a building or site, including all
accessory uses.
17. Disabled Parking Facilities. Any parking area for use by the general public shall provide parking spaces
designated and located to accommodate the disabled. Parking spaces reserved for the disabled shall be
located, designed, identified, and otherwise provided in accordance with the most restrictive requirements
of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) Guidelines, 28 C.F.R. Part 36, Appendix A, and the
North Carolina Building Code as the same are from time to time amended. [formerly known as §153.122]
155.607.2 Additional Off-Street Parking Requirements
A. PARKING AND CIRCULATION PLAN REQUIRED.
1. Plans for all development, other than single-family residential, must be submitted to the Town Planning
Office for review for compliance with the provisions of this §155.607 and as a part of any zoning plan, site
plan, overlay compliance plan, landscape and lighting plan, and similar as required by that particular
location.
2. Parking and circulation plans shall provide locations for all modes of transportation and shall identify the
number and dimensions of off-street parking spaces and arrangements of parking aisles, location of
driveway entrances, provisions for motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian circulation, the location and
dimension of bicycle parking, locations of sidewalks and curbs on or adjacent to the property, utilities,
barriers, locations of shelters, locations of signs, typical cross-sections of pavement, storm drainage
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 4
facilities, and other information or plans as the circumstances may warrant.
B. PARKING ON SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL LOTS.
1. Single-family dwellings in residential districts without garages or carports, driveways may be considered as
providing required off-street parking spaces. When driveways are used to provide required parking, they
shall have a minimum of twenty feet (20’) of length between the front property line and the nearest
building, structure or other on-site obstacle per vehicle, in order to allow a passenger vehicle to park
perpendicular to the street without extending over the right-of-way or sidewalk. When the streetside
sidewalk is partially or completely located within an easement on the property, then the minimum length
for a driveway parking space shall be measured from the edge of the sidewalk closest to the dwelling. The
location and dimension of each required off-street parking space in single-family districts shall be shown
on site plans submitted for building permit, when required, and shall be verified as meeting this standard
prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy. ('72 Code, § 2010) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) (Ord. No.
1532, passed 1-8-07) [formerly known as §153.123]
155.607.3 Design of Off-Street Parking Facilities.
A. GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
1. SURFACE MATERIAL. Every off-street parking space and off-street loading space, including all access and
aisle drive areas and maneuvering space associated with the parking area, shall have an all-weather dustfree
surface and shall be so graded and drained as to disperse and dispose of surface water accumulation by
means of a positive storm water drainage system. Except as may be provided otherwise, gravel and other
stabilization material without a permanent wearing surface is not a permitted surface material for vehicular
use areas.
2. LOCATION RELATIVE TO STREET. Parking lots shall not dominate the frontage of pedestrian-oriented streets,
interrupt pedestrian routes, or negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods. Parking facilities should be
located to the side or behind buildings or in the interior of a block whenever possible.
3. Off-street parking areas shall be designed to facilitate adequate movement and access by sanitation,
emergency, delivery and other public service vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians or
diminishing the function of the parking area.
4. Off-street parking areas for commercial, industrial, mixed use, or multi-family residential uses may be
designed to accommodate containment facilities for both garbage and recycling containers.
5. Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that the parked vehicles do not encroach upon or extend onto
public rights-of-way, sidewalks, area designated for pedestrian or bicycle use, or strike against any wall,
vegetation, utility, or other structure.
6. REDUCTION OF THE SCALE OF SURFACE PARKING AREAS. Large surface parking lots should be visually and
functionally segmented into several smaller lots. Parking area designs shall create separate and distinct
outdoor rooms for no more than sixty (60) cars per room, with each room delineated from other parking
rooms by landscaping. The size of any overall (single or multi-room) surface parking lot shall be limited to
three acres, unless divided by a street or building.
7. PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION. Off-street parking areas that contain more than thirty six (36) parking spaces
or two (2) or more outdoor parking rooms, shall provide a separated pedestrian circulation network. Such
pedestrian network may be oriented parallel or perpendicular to parking rows and shall provide a safe
pedestrian connection between the parking rows and the building or use entrance(s) and shall be free of
obstruction from parked motor vehicles. [formerly known as §153.116]
B. Off-Street Parking Space Dimensions. Required minimum dimensions for parking spaces are given in the tables
below. The table for standard passenger vehicles shall be used except for situations specifically authorized to
incorporate alternative sized vehicles. See §155.607.6 for these exceptions. The actual pavement dedicated to an
individual parking space may vary based on the angle of the row of spaces in relation to the associated driving and
maneuvering aisle. In measuring the length of a parking space the area which can be safely utilized at one end of the
space by a vehicle beyond a curb or wheelstop may be included in the dimension given below. For parallel spaces,
any generally horizontal hard surface of the gutter area may be included in the required minimum width. These
dimensions are for parking spaces primarily used by private passenger vehicles. Where commercial vehicles,
vehicles with attached trailers, recreational vehicles, and similar larger vehicles are expected to be parked,
additional area shall be provided in parking spaces on a case-by-case basis adequate to accommodate their extended
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 5
length and width. See also §155.607.6.
Angle of Parking Spaces - Standard Passenger Vehicles
0o (Parallel) 30o 45o 60o 90o
Length 24’ 24’ 22’ 20’ 20’
Width 8’ 8.5’ 8.5’ 9’ 9’
Curb Width 24’ 18’ 13’ 10.5’ 9’
Angle of Parking Spaces - Compact Vehicles
0o (Parallel) 30o 45o 60o 90o
Length 21’ 21’ 20’ 17’ 17’
Width 7.5’ 8’ 8’ 8’ 8’
Curb Width 21’ 16’ 11.5’ 9’ 8’
C. ACCESS AND ON-SITE CIRCULATION.
1. PARKING AISLES. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of
such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space.
Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table, which varies the aisle width requirement
according to the angle of parking spaces to the aisle.
Angle of Parking
0o 30o 45o 60o 90o
Aisle Width
One-Way Traffic 14 14 18 20 24
Two-Way Traffic 19 20 22 24 24
2. DRIVEWAYS. Off-street parking areas shall be designed so as to require egress from the zoning lot to the
street by forward motion of the vehicle. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements on the
public streets:
a. Width. All driveways installed, altered, changed, replaced, or extended after the Effective Date of
the Title shall be a maximum of twelve feet (12’) in width for one-way traffic and twenty four feet
(24’) in width for two-way traffic. In no case shall a driveway width exceed twenty four feet (24’),
except as required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT).
b. INTERSECTION SEPARATIONS.
i. Driveways located along an arterial (Class IV or higher) right-of-way shall not be located
less than fifty feet (50’) from an intersecting right-of-way.
ii. Driveways located along a collector (Class V) right-of-way shall not be located less than
fifty feet (50’) from an intersecting right-of-way.
iii. Driveways located along a local street or alley right-of-way shall not be located less than
twenty feet (20’) from an intersecting right-of-way.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 6
c. STREET TRANSITION. All parking facility
driveways which lead to or from a public right-of-way of a Class V or
higher street shall provide a protected transition distance of not less
than thirty feet (30’) in length from the public right-of-way to the
nearest parking space or aisle, intersecting driveway, on-site pedestrian
or bicycle facility, or dumpster/garbage and recycling containment area
along said entrance driveway to ensure traffic safety and circulation
efficiency. Where NCDOT or the Mecklenburg County Land
Development Standards Manual imposes a greater distance, the higher
standard will control.
3. CONNECTIVITY. Parking lots may need to be designed for connections to future off-site development.
Shared driveways and access easements between adjoining lots shall be encouraged to reduce the number
of parking lot driveways along public streets.
4. CIRCULATION AND ACCESS. Parking lot driveway centerlines on opposite sides of an arterial (Class IV or
higher) or collector street (Class V) shall be either aligned or off-set by no less than one hundred-fifty feet
(150’) between the centerlines of each opposing driveway. When the street has a center median which
prohibits vehicular left-turning movements, this alignment and off-set standard does not apply. Parking
aisles throughout the parking lot shall align as closely as practical in order to create four-way intersections.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 7
155.607.4 Queuing Standards.
A. QUEUING SPACES REQUIREMENTS. Queuing spaces shall be provided as an accessory to drive-up service facilities
and for institutional uses that utilize drop-off/pick-up areas.
1. QUEUING STUDY. The Planning Director is authorized to
require the submittal of a queuing study when deemed
necessary to competently measure the vehicle queuing demands
of a proposed use.
2. DESIGN AND LAYOUT. Required queuing spaces are subject to
the following design standards.
a. DIMENSIONS. Queuing spaces shall measure ten feet
(10’) in width and eighteen feet (18’) in length.
b. LOCATION. Queuing spaces shall be located so as to not interfere with parking or pedestrian and
vehicular circulation and safety on the zoning lot, or circulation on adjacent public streets.
3. MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF QUEUING SPACES. Unless otherwise required by the Planning Director,
queuing spaces for various commercial uses shall be provided in accordance with the Table of Queuing
Space Requirements:
TABLE OF QUEUING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Use / Activity Type Minimum Number of Measured From
Queuing Spaces
Bank Teller lane 4 Teller or window
Automated Teller Machine 1 Teller
Restaurant, Drive through 8 Pick-up window to Drive-through lane
entrance (including order-taking station);
where double order-taking stations merge
to single pick-up window, spaces in both
lanes are added together
Car Wash 2 Stall entrance
Drive-up service window (pharmacy, etc.) 2 Pick-up window
Drive-up loading services (groceries, etc.) 2 Designated loading area outside of any
travel lane, driveway, or parking aisle
Other To be determined by Planning Director based on traffic/queuing study
c. DESIGN. Queuing space shall not occupy the same area as parking spaces or aisles. Queuing spaces
may be separated from other on-site circulation traffic by a raised median. Queuing spaces also
may use different paving surfaces and materials, and may be marked on the pavement surface.
4. SPECIAL QUEUING REQUIREMENTS FOR PASSENGER DROP-OFF/PICK-UP AREAS FOR SCHOOLS, DAY CARE
CENTERS, PLACES OF WORSHIP, AND OTHER PLACES OF ASSEMBLY AND SIMILAR USES. All public and
private schools, day care centers, institutional uses, places of worship, and other places of assembly shall
provide off-street passenger drop-off and pick-up facilities.
a. TRAFFIC CIRCULATION PLAN REQUIRED. Any use or building that includes facilities for passenger
drop-off/pick-up shall submit a traffic circulation plan to the Town Planning office with the
parking plan and/or site plan. If a queuing study is determined to be necessary, it shall be
submitted with the Traffic Circulation Plan. The Traffic Circulation Plan, at minimum, shall (i)
describe proposed measures for ensuring safe and efficient traffic circulation on and adjacent the
premises and on public streets in the immediate vicinity of the premises; (ii) include information
about the number of enrollees or users, the hours of operation, the peak loading/unloading times,
the projected number of vehicles that will be using the passenger loading/unloading facilities; (iii)
outline plans for directing traffic on the premises and on adjacent streets; and, (iv) other
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 8
information as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Director.
b. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
i. SCHOOLS. Drop-off and pick-up areas for public and private schools shall be designed to
accommodate, at a minimum, five (5) automobile queuing spaces and five (5) bus
queuing spaces for every fifty (50) students, when buses are employed for student
transportation. When a queuing study is conducted, the minimum queuing facilities
indicated by the study shall be provided. Bus and passenger vehicle drop-off and pick-up
areas shall be separated.
ii. INSTITUTIONS, PLACES OF WORSHIP/ASSEMBLY. Drop-off and pick-up areas for public
and private schools shall be designed to accommodate (i) ten (10) automobile and two (2)
bus queuing spaces, or (ii) one (1) automobile and one quarter (0.25) bus space for every
fifty (50) seating spaces in the largest assembly room, whichever results in the greater
number of drop-off and pick-up spaces. Bus and passenger automobile drop-off and pickup
areas may be separated.
iii. DAY CARE CENTERS. Drop-off and pick-up areas for day care centers shall be designed
to accommodate six (6) automobile queuing spaces.
iv. ALL OTHER USES. Where used, drop-off and pick-up areas for all other uses shall be
designed to accommodate three (3) automobile queuing spaces, unless determined
otherwise by the Planning Director.
c. DESIGN. Queuing spaces used for passenger pick-up and drop-off purposes shall be designed (i) to
allow vehicles to maneuver in and out of the drop-off spaces without backing onto the drop-off
lane, parking circulation aisles, alleys, or public streets; (ii) for one-way traffic flow and does not
require passengers to cross circulating traffic in order to enter the use or building; and, (iii) to be
separated from the circulating traffic by a raised median or sidewalk, landscaping, special paving
surface or other feature or design approved as a part of the site plan by the Board of
Commissioners or with the landscaping and lighting or overlay compliance plan(s) if no other site
plan approval is required. Queuing spaces used for passenger pick-up and drop-off purposes and
their pedestrian access may be covered to protect pedestrians from the elements, i.e. porte cochere.
Any structure used for protecting the passenger pick-up and drop-off area shall comply with the
lot development requirements for the district.
155.607.5 Parking Structures.
In addition to the foregoing, parking structures shall comply with the following requirements.
A. UNDERGROUND PARKING STRUCTURES. Underground parking structures are permitted within any required
setback, side yard, or rear yard on any lot in a nonresidential Traditional or Parallel Traditional district,
provided that the underground structure maintains the same setback and yard requirements as surface
parking. No portion of the underground structure shall extend above the finished grade at the wall of the
structure more than five feet (5’) at any point nor more than four feet (4’) for seventy five (75%) of its
length along any lot line. A balustrade, parapet, or railing may extend above the permitted structure height
provided it is not greater than thirty two inches (32”) in height, is set back from the property line at least
three feet (3’), and has openings equal to at least thirty percent (30%) of its surface along each side. Such
structures must conform to any sight triangle requirements in effect at the time the underground structure is
built. ('72 Code, § 2014) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88) Penalty, see § 153.999 [formerly known as §153.127]
B. PARKING STRUCTURES. All parking structures, unless otherwise provided, shall conform to design,
placement, and use standards of the district in which it is, or is proposed to be, located, and to one of the
following development options. §155.607.5.B sets forth development standards to address parking
structures as a principal or accessory use within allowed districts. Design options, which range from
landscaping requirements to architectural treatments, are proposed to lessen the impact of parking
structures upon the street environment.
1. GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
a. APPEARANCE AND MATERIALS.
i. Exterior walls of parking structures that are visible from public rights-of-way
must be architecturally designed to integrate and be compatible with other
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 9
buildings on the site. Blank walls are not allowed.
ii. Vertical and horizontal design elements, such as off-sets, reveals, or projecting
ribs at least one foot wide, must be incorporated into the exterior façade of all
sides of the parking structure not immediately adjacent to another building in
order to create a repeating pattern. Vertical design elements for this visual relief
shall be at or no greater than twenty four feet (24’).
iii. The exterior façade of the parking structure must maintain a horizontal line on
every level or floor. The sloping nature of the interior structure, necessary in the
design of parking structures, shall not be repeated on the exterior façade.
iv. Stairwells and elevator shafts shall be constructed internal to the parking
structure. The areas beneath stairwells shall be fully enclosed or have restricted
access.
v. Interior illumination shall be shielded so as to not be visible from the exterior.
b. ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS. Each level of the parking structure, including the ground
level, shall maintain a solid and continuous wall of at least forty-two inches (42”) in
height, as measured from the driving surface of each level.
c. PEDESTRIAN ENTRANCES. Pedestrian entrances to stairways, elevator lobbies, vestibules,
or passageways that lead directly to parking aisles within the parking structure shall be
clearly distinguished from vehicle entrance and exit points using architectural details,
signage, awnings/canopies, and illumination techniques.
d. Parking structures that have frontage along a public or private street shall comply with all
of the setback and appearance criteria for the district in which it is located.
e. Parking structures shall be constructed with flat parking decks for ease in re-use of all or
portions of the structure in the future.
f. All residential parking within a mixed-use development or building shall have controlled
access.
g. Public restrooms are not permitted in parking structures.
2. SPECIFIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE A PARKING STRUCTURES. Type A parking structures
may be allowed in a nonresidential Traditional or Parallel Traditional district, except not in the
HUC district, and are not recommended for pedestrian-focused environments. Type A parking
structures may be constructed to the following minimum standards:
a. Parking structures shall have a minimum setback of forty feet (40’) from the public rightof-
way and must comply with any more restrictive setback/build-to line or other yard
requirements for the district in which it is located.
b. A minimum nine foot (9’) clearance shall be maintained on the first level and any
additional level that provides disabled parking spaces and a minimum seven foot (7’)
clearance throughout the remainder of the parking structure to ensure the safe movement
of vans and emergency vehicles.
c. A minimum twenty five foot (25’) landscaping area shall be provided between the face of
the parking structure and the sidewalk. The planting area shall be landscaped as follows:
i. Large maturing trees shall be planted at a rate of one (1) tree per forty (40) linear
feet of street frontage and shall have a minimum caliper of two inches (2”)
measured six inches (6”) above ground at time of planting.
ii. Evergreen shrubs meeting the requirements of §155.606 shall be planted along
the face of the parking structure with a maximum spacing of five feet (5’) on
center.
iii. No overhead utility wires or cables shall be allowed between the parking
structure and the public street right-of-way, and lighting placement shall be
coordinated with the landscaping plan to assure full intended illumination and to
not restrict full natural growth and spread of tree canopy.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 10
3. SPECIFIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE B PARKING STRUCTURES (UPPER FLOOR SETBACK).
Type B parking structures may be found on side streets within two (2) blocks of a main
commercial or mixed-use pedestrian-focused urban center, but shall not be located within the
HUC district. Type B parking structures may form a transitional space between intense
nonresidential uses and residential settings, where they can provide shared parking areas for
surrounding uses. They may be constructed to the following standards, provided that the parking
structure is architecturally treated in a manner that avoids a monolithic appearance. This should be
accomplished by treating the facade of the parking structure as a streetwall and articulating it
through a variety of building materials and finishing that gives the parking structure a pedestrian
scale.
a. Parking structures shall comply with all setback or build-to lines and other yard
requirements for the district in which it is located.
b. A minimum nine foot (9’) clearance shall be maintained on the first level and any
additional level that provides disabled parking spaces and a minimum seven foot (7’)
clearance throughout the remainder of the parking structure to ensure the safe movement
of vehicles and emergency vehicles.
c. The streetwall of the parking structure shall be treated in such a manner as to partially
screen street level parking as well as to provide visual interest to the pedestrian. This can
be accomplished through the use of articulated precast concrete panels, or ornamental
grillwork, or other means such as utilizing a variety of building materials such as brick or
stone.
d. If more than two floors of parking are provided above street level, the third floor above
street level and higher floors shall be recessed at least twenty feet (20’) from the setback
of the first and second floors.
e. A minimum twelve foot (12’) wide landscaping area shall be provided between the
sidewalk and the face of the parking structure. The landscaping area shall be landscaped
with large maturing trees at a rate of one tree per forty (40) linear feet of street. No
overhead utility wires or cables shall be allowed between the parking structure and the
public street right-of-way, and lighting placement shall be coordinated with the
landscaping to assure full intended illumination and to not restrict full natural growth and
spread of tree canopy.
4. SPECIFIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE C PARKING STRUCTURES (NON-PARKING USE ON
GROUND LEVEL). Type C parking structures may be found on main streets in and near the core of
urban-scale commercial and mixed-use developments. Type C parking structures are intended to
retain the vibrancy of the street frontage by including pedestrian-oriented shops at the ground level
while creating convenient but visually limited shared parking areas for surrounding uses. Type C
parking structures may be constructed to the following standards, provided that at least sixty
percent (60%) of the street frontage of the first floor is used for retail sales, restaurant, service, or
office use:
a. Parking structures shall meet the setback or build-to line established for the district in
which it is located. The portion of the structure at ground level used for parking and
vehicular activity shall not incorporate more than forty percent (40%) of the building’s
streetfront wall.
b. A minimum eleven foot (11’) clearance shall be maintained on the ground level and any
additional level that provides disabled parking spaces and a minimum seven foot (7’)
clearance throughout the remainder of the parking structure to ensure the safe movement
of vehicles and emergency vehicles.
c. A minimum nine foot (9’) clearance shall be maintained on any level that provides
disabled parking spaces.
d. The streetwall of the parking structure shall be treated in such a manner as to partially
screen parking as well as to provide visual interest to the pedestrian. This can be
accomplished through the use of articulated precast concrete panels, or ornamental
grillwork, or other means such as utilizing a variety of building materials such as brick or
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 11
stone.
5. SPECIFIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE D PARKING STRUCTURES (LINER BUILDING). Type D
parking structures are intended to create convenient parking areas for high parking demand uses in
pedestrian-focused nonresidential and mixed-use urban environments, while providing visual
blockage to another structure or use without necessary pedestrian atmosphere from the street. Type
D parking structures may be constructed to the following standards, provided that at least eighty
percent (80%) of the street frontage of the ground floor is used for retail sales, restaurant, service,
or office use.
a. The portion of the structure providing vehicle parking spaces shall not front the street on
the ground floor, however the area necessary for vehicular entry, exit, and maneuvering
into aisles or to different parking levels may be located at the streetfront edge of the
structure, comprising up to twenty percent (20%) of the street level façade. The space
between the parking use area and the property line (street frontage) shall be occupied by
any combination of retail sales, restaurant, service, office, and residential uses as may be
permitted in the district in which the parking structure is located.
b. A minimum eleven foot (11’) clearance shall be maintained on the ground level. A
minimum nine foot (9’) clearance shall be maintained on any additional level that
provides disabled parking spaces and a minimum seven foot (7’) clearance throughout the
remainder of the parking structure to ensure the safe movement of vehicles and
emergency vehicles.
155.607.6 Parking Standards for Other Vehicles.
A. BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS.
1. SECURED. Bike lockers and racks shall be securely anchored to the ground and on a hard surface.
2. DIMENSIONS. Bicycle parking spaces shall be at least six feet (6’) long and two feet (2’) wide. In covered
situations, the overhead clearance shall be at least seven feet (7’) six inches (6”). An aisle for maneuvering
bicycles shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking. The aisle shall be
at least five feet (5’) wide. Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another
bicycle. Areas set aside for bicycle parking must be clearly marked and reserved for bicycle parking only.
Bicycle parking spaces and access to them shall not interfere with pedestrian circulation.
3. Where provided, bicycle lockers should be situated so there are no obstructions within five feet (5’) of the
entry door(s) of the locker.
4. SIGNS. If required bicycle parking is not clearly visible from the entrance to the building, parking structure,
transit station, or lot, a sign shall be posted at the primary entrances indicating the location of the bicycle
parking.
5. COVERED SPACES. If twenty (20) or more bicycle spaces are required, then at least fifty percent (50%) of
the required bicycle spaces shall be covered. Coverage may be provided under roof overhangs, canopies or
awnings, in bicycle lockers, or within or under other structures.
6. LOCATION. Bicycle parking should be located along a major building approach line and clearly visible from
the approach. The bicycle parking area should be no more than a 30-second walk (120 feet) from the
entrance it serves and should preferably be within fifty feet (50’). The bicycle parking area should be as
close as or closer than the nearest non-disabled parking space. The bicycle parking area should be clearly
visible from the entrance it serves. A bicycle parking area should be provided near each actively used
entrance. In general, multiple buildings should not be served with a combined, distant bicycle parking area.
It is preferred to place smaller bicycle parking areas in locations that are more convenient.
7. ILLUMINATION. Bicycle parking areas shall be illuminated and comply with the outdoor illumination
requirements in §155.609.
B. COMPACT CAR PARKING. Compact vehicles can utilize less pavement area for parking and maneuvering. Up to
twenty percent (20%) of required standard passenger vehicle parking may be designed for or converted to compact
vehicle spaces for multi-family, mixed, and nonresidential uses. These compact vehicle spaces shall be permanently
identified by signs or pavement markings for compact car use only, and are allowed only for off-street spaces. The
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 12
Town reserves the right to create on-street compact car parking spaces on Town-maintained streets where they are
determined to be beneficial to the surrounding neighborhood. Dimensions for compact car spaces and aisle widths
are given in §155.607.3.B. and C. When standard passenger vehicle and compact vehicle spaces use the same aisle
for maneuvering in and out of the individual spaces, then the aisle width requirements for standard vehicles shall be
followed.
C. MOTORCYCLE PARKING. Motorcycle parking may be provided in lieu of one (1) automobile parking space or two
percent (2%) of all required automobile parking spaces, whichever is greater, for building sites containing a
minimum of thirty six (36) parking spaces. Each motorcycle parking space shall be a minimum of three feet (3’)
wide by nine feet (9’) deep and be clearly identified by signs and pavement markings as reserved for motorcycles.
D. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING.
1. Recreational vehicle parking may be provided at nonresidential and mixed use properties. Each recreational
vehicle parking space shall be a minimum of fourteen feet (14’) wide by forty feet (40’) deep and be clearly
identified by signs and pavement markings as reserved for recreational vehicles. These spaces shall have
sufficient adjacent pavement to allow unobstructed maneuvering space.
2. In Traditional or Parallel Traditional single-family residential districts, R-MH, R-VS, CrC, SRN, R-12MF and
R-15MF Traditional and Parallel Traditional districts, recreational vehicles and overnight camping trailer
parking is allowed when the vehicle is stored unoccupied on a lot behind a line established by the front of the
dwelling structure. When spaces are created in a communal parking area, each recreational vehicle parking
space shall be a minimum of fourteen feet (14’) wide by forty feet (40’) deep and be clearly identified by signs
and pavement markings as reserved for recreational vehicles. These spaces shall have sufficient adjacent
pavement to allow unobstructed maneuvering space.
E. VALET PARKING. Valet parking is governed by Town regulations separate from this Title. Parking of vehicles in a
valet parking situation shall only be allowed in nonrestricted public parking spaces or in private off-street spaces on
nonresidential properties that have more than their required minimum parking spaces, or are not in operation during
the hours the lot is used for valet parking use.
155.607.7 Required Parking.
A. COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
1. FRACTIONS. When calculations of the number of required parking spaces results in a fraction, the number of
minimum spaces shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
2. PARKING BASED ON SEATING. When the standards use seating as a unit of measurement, all calculations shall be
based on design capacity of the areas used for seating. When no or minimal seating is intended to be placed in
the room or area to be used in calculating seating for parking requirements, and no capacity determination is
available, then ten (10) square feet of floor area per person shall be used, and minimum parking shall be based
on one (1) parking space per three (3) persons in such space
3. PARKING BASED ON FLOOR AREA. When standards use the amount of square footage in buildings as a unit of
measurement, all calculations shall be based on gross floor area (GFA).
4. PARKING BASED ON STUDENTS, STAFF, AND/OR OCCUPANTS. When standards use the number of persons, as a
unit of measurement, all calculations shall be based on the maximum enrollment (for students), largest number
of persons working on any single shift (staff), or capacity as determined by the Mecklenburg County Fire
Marshall’s office, whichever is applicable and results in the greatest number of required spaces.
5. HUC EXCEPTIONS. Certain properties within the HUC downtown core district may use alternative and reduced
parking requirements, as given in §155.607.7.C.6 below.
B. TABLE OF REQUIRED PARKING. Minimum parking must be provided and maintained as specified in the following
schedule as off-street, on-site parking unless allowed to be provided in an alternate layout in §155.607.7.C below.
These requirements will apply to all new buildings and uses and to additions to existing buildings and uses in all
districts.
Where only one set of requirements are given for a specific land use type, those requirements shall apply to that use
in any zoning district, unless exceptions at §155.607.7.C are utilized. When two (2) rows are provided for the same
land use types, then the requirements in unshaded rows apply to the Traditional and Parallel Traditional district
except HUC, and the R-VS, CrC, B-1SCD, and AU zoning districts. Requirements in the shaded rows, where
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 13
included, apply to the HUC, SRN, C-MF, MUD, TS, and ENT zoning districts.
Table of Required Parking Spaces.
1. RESIDENTIAL USES REQUIRED BICYCLE REQUIRED MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING SPACES PARKING SPACES
General Standard for Residential Units tbd Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
unless otherwise listed below
Dwelling, single-family n/a Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, manufactured home n/a Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, accessory unit n/a One (1) additional space
Dwelling, duplex or two-family n/a Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, multi-family 2, or one space per 20 Size of Unit Spaces
dwelling units Required
__________________________________
549 square feet or less 1.25
550-699 square feet 1.50
700-899 square feet 1.75
900-1,249 square feet 2.00
1.250 square feet or more 2.25
Dwelling, multi-family1 One space per 6 Size of Unit Spaces
dwelling units Required
__________________________________
549 square feet or less 0.75
550-699 square feet 1.00
700-899 square feet 1.25
900-1,249 square feet 1.50
1.250 square feet or more 2.00
1 For MUD standards, see also § 155.503.5.F.4.
Age- and Mobility-Limited Senior Housing n/a 1.1 parking spaces per each dwelling unit plus
one space for each two (2) employees on shift
of greatest employment.
Bed and breakfast guest homes n/a Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit,
plus 1 per guest room
Live/work units 1 per nonresidential Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit, plus one (1)
use space for each two(2) non-resident
employees, plus one space for each 500
square feet of the portion of the building used
for non-residential purposes.
Room renting and boardinghouses 5% of auto parking One (1) space per each room or boarder, in
addition to the normal requirements for the
dwelling unit
Group Home, Family Care Home, Adult Care Home, 1 per five persons One (1) per employee, plus one (1)
Sheltered Household per 3 child/adult residents
Dormitories, fraternities, sororities 1 space per 4 residents One (1) space for each three (3) residents
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 14
2. INSTITUTIONAL AND MUNICIPAL USES REQUIRED BICYCLE REQUIRED MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING SPACES PARKING SPACES
General Standard for Institutional and Municipal Uses tbd One (1) space per 300 sq ft GFA
unless otherwise listed below
__________________
General Standard for Institutional and Municipal Uses tbd One (1) space per 400 sq ft GFA unless
otherwise listed below
Churches and Places of Worship, and related uses 1 space per 20 seats or One space per four (4) fixed seats in
2% of auto parking largest assembly room or area; or for each
twenty-two (22) inches of fixed bench/pew
seating in largest assembly room or area; or
for each forty (40) square feet of floor area
available for the accommodation of movable
seats in the largest assembly room; or one (1)
space per each one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is needed
by the facility.
Continuing care retirement communities 1.1 parking spaces per each independent living
unit plus one space for each two (2)
employees on shift of greatest employment.
Cultural community center 4 or 10% of auto parking One (1) space per 400 square feet of building’s
GFA
Day care homes (small group), day care centers, and pre-schools 2 One (1) space per each two adult attendants
and one space per each ten children (or
remainder over the multiple of ten)
Elementary schools and middle schools 3 spaces per classroom *Three (3) spaces per each room used for
administrative offices or class instruction, or a
space for each six (6) seats in auditoriums and
other places of assembly or facilities available
to the public, whichever is greater
Elementary schools and middle schools 6 spaces per classroom *Two (2) spaces per each room used for
administrative offices or class instruction
Senior high schools, trade and vocational schools, 5 spaces per classroom *Five (5) spaces per each room used
and colleges and universities for administrative offices or class instruction,
or one space for each five seats in auditoriums
and other places of assembly or facilities
available to the public, whichever is greater
Senior high schools, trade and vocational schools, 7 spaces per classroom *Four (4) spaces per each room used
and colleges and universities for administrative offices or class instruction,
or one space for each six seats in auditoriums
and other places of assembly or facilities
available to the public, whichever is greater
Fire station, Police station 2 or 2% of auto parking One (1) space per each person on duty on a
normal shift
Hospitals 5% of auto parking One (1) space per bed intended for patients
(except bassinets or beds in student nurses'
quarters), plus one (1) space per each medical
staff member, plus one (1) space per each two
other employees on shift of greatest
employment
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 15
Post offices 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each 400 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one (1) space per each
two employees on the shift having the
greatest employment
Post offices 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each 600 square feet of
gross floor area
Public libraries 20% of auto parking One (1) space per each 150 square feet of
gross floor area for public use, plus one (1)
space per each two employees on shift having
the greatest employment
Public libraries 20% of auto parking One (1) space per each 400 square feet of
gross floor area for public use
Skilled care homes, Assisted living facility 5% of auto parking One (1) space for four (4) patient beds, plus
one space per each two employees on the
shift of greatest employment
* Bicycle parking standards may be modified for these educational institutions when connecting streets within five
thousand feet (5,000’) of any driveway access point into the facility do not include a paved or hard surface path (i.e.,
sidewalk, multi use path, greenway, bike lane) which is not shared with motorized vehicle traffic, or is not part of a
posted neighborhood Signed Route for bicycles to share local streets with motor vehicle traffic. When none of these
bike-friendly facilities are continuous in one or more directions from the educational facility for 5,000’, then the onsite
bike parking requirement shall be one (1) bicycle parking space per classroom. At such time as one or more
approaches to the educational facility includes 5,000’ of continuous bicycle improvements as outlined above, then
the institution shall have one (1) year to increase the on-site bicycle parking spaces to the amount as listed in this
table, for those classrooms permitted and built after April 11, 2016.
3. OFFICE AND SERVICE USES REQUIRED BICYCLE REQUIRED MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING SPACES PARKING SPACES
General Standard for Office Uses and Personal/Professional/ tbd One (1) space per 300 sq ft GFA
Financial/Recreational Service Uses unless otherwise listed below
General Standard for Office Uses and Personal/Professional/ tbd One (1) space per 400 sq ft GFA
Financial/Recreational Service Uses unless otherwise listed below
General Office 4, or 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each 300 square
whichever is greater feet of gross floor area
General Office 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each 400 square
feet of gross floor area
Medical and dental offices and clinics 5% of auto parking One (1) space per each 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Medical and dental offices and clinics 5% of auto parking One (1) space per each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Buildings for social, fraternal, social service, civic, and 10 % of auto parking One space for each four fixed seats
similar organizations in the largest assembly room or area, or for
each forty (40) square feet of floor area
available for accommodation of movable seats
in the largest assembly room, or one space per
150 square feet of gross floor area, whichever
is needed by the facility
Buildings for social, fraternal, social service, civic, and 10% of auto parking One space for each six fixed seats
similar organizations in the largest assembly room or area, or one
space per 300 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is needed by the facility
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 16
Banks, credit unions, and similar uses 4 or 5% of auto parking One (1) space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Banks, credit unions, and similar uses 5% of auto parking One (1) space per 400 square feet of gross
floor area
Laboratories and other facilities for research 10 or 5% of auto parking 1.1 spaces for each employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Call centers 4, or 10% of auto parking 2.5 spaces for each three employees on the
shift of greatest employment
4. GENERAL COMMERCIAL USES REQUIRED BICYCLE REQUIRED MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING SPACES PARKING SPACES
General Standard for Nonresidential Uses tbd One (1) space per 250 sq ft GFA
unless otherwise listed below
General Standard for Nonresidential Uses tbd One (1) space per 400 sq ft GFA
unless otherwise listed below
Commercial or Catering kitchens w/o 10% of auto parking One (1) space per 400 sq ft GFA, plus one (1)
in-building service space per each two (2) non-kitchen
employees (i.e., catering servers, food truck
vendors, ect.)
Commercial or Catering kitchens w/o
in-building service 15% of auto parking One (1) space per 600 sq ft GFA, plus one (1)
space per each three (3) non-kitchen
employees (i.e., catering servers, food truck
vendors, ect.)
_______________________________________________________________________________
Restaurants, diners, and night clubs 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each three (3) seating
accommodations, plus one (1) space per each
two (2) employees on shift having the greatest
employment
Restaurants, diners, and night clubs 15% of auto parking One (1) space per each five (5) seating
accommodations, plus one (1) space per each
three (3) employees on shift having the
greatest employment
Retail stores (see exceptions as follow) 4, or 10% of auto parking One (1) space per 200 square feet of floor area
used or designed for sales on ground floor,
plus one (1) space per 300 square feet of floor
area used or designed for sales on all other
floors, plus one (1) space per each two (2)
employees
Retail stores (see exceptions as follow) 15% of auto parking One (1) space per 400 square feet of floor area
used or designed for sales on ground floor,
plus one (1) space per 400 square feet of floor
area used or designed for sales on all other
floors, plus one (1) space per each three (3)
employees
__________________
Single retail store between 120,000 and 140,000 sq ft GFA 10% of auto parking One (1) space per 230 square feet
of floor area used or designed for sales.
Single retail store with floor area greater than 10% of auto parking One space per 300 square feet of
140,000 square feet floor area used or designed for sales.
Ballroom, banquet or meeting hall, or similar, when 2, or 5% of auto parking One (1) space per 250 square feet
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 17
part of another use or a stand-alone principal use, of gross floor area
routinely available for catered events or meetings
Ballroom, banquet or meeting hall, or similar, when 10% of auto parking One (1) space per 400 square feet
part of another use or a stand-alone principal use, of gross floor area
routinely available for catered events or meetings
Gas stations with convenience store 2, or 1% of auto parking One (1) space per each 200 sq ft sales floor
space, plus one space per each employee
during the period of greatest employment
Funeral homes n/a One space per each sixty (60) square feet of
floor area available for seating
accommodations
Motels and hotels, bed and breakfast inns, 10 or 5% of auto parking One (1) space per guest room, plus
and similar lodging uses one (1) space per each two (2) employees on
shift of greatest employment
Motels and hotels, bed and breakfast inns, 10% of auto parking 1.5 spaces per two guest rooms,
and similar lodging uses plus one (1) space per each three (3)
employees on shift of greatest employment
Museums and art galleries 10 or 5% of auto parking One (1) space per each four (4) seats in rooms
for public assembly or for each 150 square
feet of gross floor area for use by the public,
whichever is greater, plus one (1) space for
each two (2) employees on shift of greatest
employment
Museums and art galleries 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each six (6) seats in rooms
for public assembly or for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area for use by the public,
whichever is greater
Roadside stands, new and used car sales, house and 2, or 5% of auto parking Four (4) spaces per each salestruck
trailer sales, outdoor equipment and machinery person, plus one (1) space per each
sales, and commercial nurseries two (2) other employees, during period of
greatest employment
Railroad passenger stations, and bus terminals 10 or 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each four (4) seating
whichever is greater accommodations for waiting passengers, plus
one (1) space per each two (2) employees on
shift of greatest employment
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Drive-in facilities 4 or 5% of auto parking One (1) space per each motor vehicle served,
plus one (1) space per each two (2) employees
during period of greatest employment
Internet sweepstakes facilities and similar personal 4 or 5% of auto parking One (1) space per each patron
entertainment uses with one patron/one station station/computer/gaming
location arrangement equipment station
Animal Day Care Kennels and Commercial Kennels 2 spaces or 10% of One (1) space per 500 sq ft GFA
auto parking
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
5. RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT USES REQUIRED BICYCLE REQUIRED MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING SPACES PARKING SPACES
General Standard for Recreation and Entertainment Uses tbd One (1) space per three (3) seats, or one (1)
per 150 sq ft GFA indoor, or one (1) per 5,000
sq ft outdoor active use space, unless
otherwise listed below
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 18
General Standard for Recreation and Entertainment Uses tbd One (1) space per five (5) seats, or one (1)
per 300 sq ft GFA indoor, or one (1) per 6,000
sq ft outdoor active use space, unless
otherwise listed below
Auditoriums, stadiums, assembly halls, theaters, and 1 space per 20 seats or One (1) space per four (4) fixed seats
similar uses where patrons are primarily spectators to 5% of auto parking in largest assembly room or area; for each
activity taking place within the facility forty (40) square feet of floor area available
for the accommodation of movable seats in
the largest assembly room; 0.25 spaces for
each twenty-two inches (22”) of bench-type
(bleacher) seating; and/or for each 150 sq ft
outdoor area designed as outdoor spectator
area, whichever is/are needed by the facility
Auditoriums, stadiums, assembly halls, theaters, and 1 space per 10 seats or One (1) space per six (6) fixed seats
similar uses where patrons are primarily spectators to 15% of auto parking in largest assembly room or area; for each
activity taking place within the facility sixty (60) square feet of floor area available for
the accommodation of movable seats in the
largest assembly room; 0.20 spaces for each
twenty-two inches (22”) of bench-type
(bleacher) seating; and/or for each 300 sq ft
outdoor area designed as outdoor spectator
area, whichever is/are needed by the facility
Arcade, game room 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area devoted to use
Arcade, game room 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area devoted to use
Athletic fields, ball fields, and similar outdoor physical 25% of auto parking Twenty (20) spaces for each defined sports
recreation facilities intended for use by teams of field, diamond or court, plus one
participants (1) space for each four (4) spectator seats
when they are provided
Athletic fields, ball fields, and similar outdoor physical 25% of auto parking 15 spaces for each defined sports field,
recreation facilities intended for use by teams of diamond or court, plus one (1) space for each
participants six (6) spectator seats when they are provided
2
Community recreation centers, fitness/health centers, 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 150 square feet
YMCAs, and similar uses where multiple physically of gross floor area
involved activities can take place concurrently,
primarily indoor but may include outdoor activity
sites within the overall facility
Community recreation centers, fitness/health centers, 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 3000 square feet
YMCAs, and similar uses where multiple physically of gross floor area
involved activities can take place concurrently,
primarily indoor but may include outdoor activity
sites within the overall facility
Indoor, outdoor commercial recreation not otherwise listed 20% of auto parking One (1) space for each 150 square feet of
gross floor, building, or ground area devoted
to that use, or one (1) space per each four (4)
seats of facilities available for patron use,
whichever is needed by the facility
Indoor, outdoor commercial recreation not otherwise listed 20% of auto parking One (1) space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor, building, or ground area devoted
to that use, or one (1) space per each six (6)
seats of facilities available for patron use,
whichever is needed by the facility
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 19
Skateboard facility, ice or roller rink 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 200 square feet of building
or land area devoted to the use, plus one (1)
space per each two (2) employees on the
largest shift
Skateboard facility, ice or roller rink 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 300 square feet of building
or land area devoted to the use, plus one (1)
space per each three (3) employees on the
largest shift
Swimming pool: single neighborhood, below 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 75 square feet
Junior Olympic size, no outside memberships water surface area
Swimming pool: single neighborhood, below 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 125 square feet
Junior Olympic size, no outside memberships water surface area
Swimming pool as stand-alone facility, indoor or 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 100 square feet
outdoor; or, outdoor as part of a recreational facility, of water surface area
public or private
Swimming pool as stand-alone facility, indoor or 25% of auto parking One (1) space per 150 square feet
outdoor; or, outdoor as part of a recreational facility, of water surface area
public or private
Tennis and racket clubs, and racket sports courts not 25% of auto parking Four (4) spaces for each court
part of a community recreation center, fitness center,
or YMCA
Tennis and racket clubs, and racket sports courts not 25% of auto parking Two (2) spaces for each court
part of a community recreation center, fitness center,
or YMCA
Riding stables n/a 1.5 spaces per each stall
Bowling alleys 10% of auto parking Four (4) spaces per lane, plus one (1) per each
two employees
Bowling alleys 10% of auto parking Two (2) spaces per lane, plus one (1) per each
three employees
Drive-in outdoor entertainment/recreation use, where 4 or 10% of auto parking One (1) space per designated patrons remain
within their vehicles patron vehicle use, plus one (1) space
per each two (2) employees on largest shift
Park, predominantly passive use One (1) space per 10,000 square feet of land
area, if on-site parking is provided (example:
greenways need not incorporate off-street
parking)
6. INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING USES REQUIRED BICYCLE REQUIRED MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING SPACES PARKING SPACES
General Standard for Industrial, Warehousing, and Manufacturing Uses One (1) space per 1.5 employees
on largest shift unless otherwise listed below
Industrial, manufacturing, and wholesaling establishments 4 or 10% of auto parking One (1) space per each 1.5 employees on the
shift of greatest employment
Pilot plants and Prototype products production 5% of auto parking For each employee on the shift of greatest
employment, 1.1 spaces
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 20
('72 Code, § 2002) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 644, passed 11-5-90; Am. Ord. 667, passed 6-3-91; Am.
Ord. 781, passed 7-12-93; Ord. 1237, passed 1-14-02; Ord. 1243, passed 8-12-02); (Ord. 1338-A, passed 3-8-04),
(Ord. 1419, passed 2-24-05) (Ord No. 1532, passed 1-8-07) (Ord. No. 1550, passed 3-12-07) (Am. Ord. 2141,
passed 4-11-16) Penalty, see § 153.999
[formerly known as §153.117]
C. ASSIGNMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND REDUCTIONS OF REQUIRED PARKING.
1. OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES ASSIGNED TO ONE USE. Required parking spaces for any number of separate
buildings or uses may be combined in one lot, but the required spaces assigned to one (1) use may not be
assigned to another use at the same time. The required parking spaces for places of assembly may be
assigned to parking spaces that are otherwise assigned to other uses if the parking spaces are normally used
at different times. For institutional uses wishing to share parking spaces with adjacent or nearby properties
or to utilize public (on- or off-street) parking as a part of their required number of spaces, the following
formulas may be used:
a. For on-street space, count sixty percent (60%) of all marked spaces within eight hundred feet
(800’) of the use.
b. For off-street public parking, count seventy five percent (75%) of all spaces in lots within eight
hundred feet (800’) of the use.
c. For off-street private parking, count one hundred (100%) of all spaces in lots within eight hundred
feet (800’) of the use, and obtain written permission from the private parking lot owners for use by
the institutional use when the private owners are not open for business. A copy of this agreement
must be filed with the Zoning Administrator. ('72 Code, § 2007) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am.
Ord. 644, passed 11-5-90) Penalty, see § 153.999 [formerly known as §153.120]
2. REDUCTION AND ADDITION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
a. Off-street parking spaces may not be reduced below the minimum required for the use or facility
to which they are assigned. Off-street parking spaces for buildings and uses which existed on the
Effective Date of this Title and which were inadequate to meet the minimum parking spaces
required by this chapter shall not be reduced below the minimum required as long as those
buildings and uses continue to be in existence.
b. Additions may be made to existing buildings and uses that do not meet the minimum requirements
for off-street parking spaces if the addition does not represent an increase in additional parking
required of more than three (3) off-street parking spaces. ('72 Code, § 2008) (Ord. 477, passed 2-
8-88) (Ord. No. 1532; passed 1-8-07) Penalty, see § 153.999 [formerly known as §153.121]
3. REDUCTION FOR CARPOOL SPACES. Where these regulations require at least one hundred (100) off-street
parking spaces to serve institutional, office or industrial uses on a parcel, a reduction in required parking is
permitted provided a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of required parking spaces are dedicated for and
restricted to use by carpools. The remaining number of parking spaces can be reduced by two (2) for each
carpool space provided. The owner may restrict use of any or all carpool spaces to employees.
4. OTHER USES. For uses not listed in the Table of Parking Requirements at §155.607.7.B, parking spaces
shall be provided as required for a similar listed use, or shall follow the use grouping general standard, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
5. SHARED PARKING. Where two (2) or more nonresidential, non-institutional uses are located on the same
previously developed parcel or within a previously built multi-use development, and they can provide
adequate guarantees that their cumulative parking needs will be less than the total number of parking
spaces required for the sum of each individual current and proposed use within the parcel or multi-use
development, such as when their respective peak hours of operation do not overlap, then an Alternate
Parking Plan may be requested to be approved by the Zoning Administrator. An Alternative Parking Plan
shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a. An accurate scaled site plan drawing showing all buildings, parking spaces, driveway aisles,
vehicle and pedestrian access points, and public entrance doorways of each establishment.
b. A parking calculation of the required parking for each existing or proposed use within the site,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 21
using the parking space standards as listed in the Table of Required Parking at §155.607.7.B
above. When one or more uses are not identified in this Table, then an explanation of the
suggested minimum spaces needed shall be provided, with documentation on how those numbers
were determined to be appropriate for such use.
c. Any parking spaces proposed to be allocated to a use across a property line, such as between an
outparcel and a shopping center, shall be within four hundred feet (400’) of the main pedestrian
access doorway of the receiving use. These parking spaces shall be indicated on the scaled
drawing. No parking areas included in or impacted by any shared parking provisions for an
institutional use shall be included for any shared parking under an Alternative Parking Plan.
d. Where calculations for required parking are based on the Table of Required Parking Spaces at
§155.607.7.B, a maximum reduction in required parking spaces per business shall be fifteen
percent (15%). No more than two (2) uses within the development parcel or multi-use
development shall be granted this fifteen percent (15%) reduction.
e. A statement summarizing the reasons for the request for an Alternative Parking Plan. One (1) or
more of the following shall be included, and all that apply shall be indicated:
i. The site is an existing built-out facility (as of December 31, 2012) that has undergone
some changes in use resulting in the opportunity to reoccupy vacated commercial space
and the existing parking lot without expanding impervious land coverage.
ii. The site is a nonresidential development not involved in or impacted by institutional use
shared parking provisions of §155.607.7.C.1, or any private shared parking arrangements
with off-site establishments.
iii. One (1) or more existing or proposed uses on the site has unique parking needs
substantially different than those required for the use in the Table of Required Parking at
§155.607.7.B, and traffic engineering standards support this alternative parking demand.
iv. One (1) or existing or proposed uses within the site has peak parking demand time
significantly different than other uses within the site which clearly support a reduction in
total parking space demand for the overall site.
v. The site contains unusual natural features that are being preserved and which would be
threatened or eliminated if additional parking spaces were required to be constructed,
such as but not limited to steep slopes, stream or environmentally sensitive areas, tree
groves, open space or landscape elements in excess of required minimum standards.
vi. The site is partially built out (as of December 31, 2012) and future expansion plans are
not detailed and available at this time, but the undeveloped/underdeveloped portion of the
site is reserved for another user through an approved conditional zoning plan.
vii. One (1) or all of the land uses for which shared parking is proposed is/are not identified
in the Table of Required Parking at §155.607.7.B, and the Zoning Administrator has
determined the proposed parking calculations are appropriate for such use(s).
viii. Another reason not specified here. When this category is offered, an explanation of the
specific criteria to justify a parking reduction shall be included.
f. A signed commitment indicating agreement to an Alternative Parking Plan from all property
owners within the site. This may be in the form of a recorded cross access parking agreement
created for the multi-user site when initially developed, or may be a new agreement between all
affected property owners.
i. A previously recorded agreement shall state which parking spaces within the site,
including across internal property lines when a multi-lot development site, are not
restricted to a single user and may be available for shared parking. A copy of the
recorded agreement shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator and shall be retained
in the Planning office files of zoning conditions for the site.
ii. A new shared parking agreement shall guarantee the identified parking spaces to be
maintained and available for shared use as long as the business uses requiring them are in
existence. The agreement shall be binding on all property owners and businesses and
establishments within the overall site, and shall be recorded by the property owner(s) in
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 22
the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds, and a copy filed with the Zoning
Administrator, which shall be retained in the Planning office files of zoning conditions
for the site. The shared parking agreement shall not be amended or rescinded, unless all
the uses requiring the Alternative Parking Plan are no longer on-site and all property
owners agree to the rescission, and after confirmation by the Zoning Administrator that
the agreement is no longer necessary.
6. HUC DISTRICT EXCEPTIONS.
a. For all nonresidential uses in the HUC district fronting Trade Street, John Street, or Matthews
Station Street where the building is located at the right-of-way/front property line, or less than the
maximum build-to line, no off-street parking is required.
b. For retail, financial institution, office, and restaurant uses in the HUC district and not meeting the
minimum setback standards of 6.a. above, the number of parking spaces required in §155.607.7.B
Table of Required Parking for that specified use shall be replaced with the standard of one (1)
parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area, or reduced by onethird
(1/3), whichever is the greater reduction.
7. REDUCTION FOR, OR THE USE OF, OCCASIONAL OVERFLOW PARKING SPACES.
a. Certain uses may have sporadic need for extra parking, while their general or daily activity would
not generate that higher level demand. Such uses may request approval, through the site plan
review and approval process outlined in § 155.401.5.B, for occasional overflow parking. Typical
users may include sporting or recreation facilities that do not regularly, but occasionally, hold
large events, or retail establishments that meet the required minimum space requirements for their
type use and zoning district, but wish to have extra parking available for once or twice a year
major sales events. Uses with regularly scheduled events or activities on a weekly or monthly
basis shall not be eligible for this occasional overflow parking provision.
b. Because the extra demand for parking may occur when weather or recent maintenance work had
softened the ground surface, any overflow parking area shall be designed with an adequate
subsurface to support vehicles and limit damage to the ground surface. Occasional overflow
parking shall be designated on the facility’s site plan and the subsurface design shall be approved
by Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Engineer. No occasional overflow parking or maneuvering
area shall be located within tree root protection zones designated on the approved landscape plan
for the property, and the overflow parking plan shall indicate how tree root protection zones shall
be protected from vehicular activity.
c. Uses which desire to reduce a portion of their required parking spaces due to the limited times
they need their full required amount, such as a stadium which only is fully occupied on a less
than once a month basis, may request a permanent parking reduction by designing additional
open space which can also serve as occasional overflow parking. In these cases, the use shall
conduct a parking needs study that shall determine the typical peak parking load for various
events, showing actual counts (if available) for recent past events, or estimated demand figures
based on similar facilities and events. The study shall provide counts of the maximum actual or
anticipated attendance and maximum actual or anticipated parking space need for various events
and activities at the facility, and indicate the frequency (actual or anticipated) of each type activity.
The study shall show conclusions as to the amount of permanent paved parking the facility
should have, and the amount of occasional overflow parking spaces that can be accommodated to
provide the facility’s required parking, per the table at §155.607.7.B. This parking needs study
shall be submitted with design construction details and site plan drawings for the overall parking
layout for the facility. Staff and Town Board of Commissioners may request additional data to
assist in making a final determination. Site plan review and decision shall follow the procedures
given at §155.401.5.B. Approval of reduction in any required parking spaces through occasional
overflow parking shall be at the discretion of the Town Board of Commissioners, based on the
information provided for site plan review and approval.
155.607.8 Additional Off-Street Loading Requirements
A. LOCATION REQUIREMENTS. Loading and unloading spaces shall be located at a minimum of sixty feet (60’) from
property zoned and developed for single-family use. Distances shall be measured from the closest edge of the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 23
loading berth to the property line of the residential property. (Ord. No. 1532, passed 1-8-07) [formerly known as
§153.129]
B. DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
1. CONSTRUCTION AND SURFACING. The construction design of all off-street loading berths, and any area
necessary for their access, shall be capable of bearing the weight of anticipated delivery vehicles. A
concrete surface shall be required for each loading berth which serves a dock, ramp or elevator.
2. CIRCULATION AND ACCESS. Off-street loading areas shall be designed such that any area needed to
maneuver a vehicle into or out of a loading space shall be located entirely on the same lot as the use it
serves. Adequate space to accommodate the turning radii of trucks and trailers, exclusive of any parking
spaces, pedestrian walkways, storage, dumpster areas, and landscaping shall be provided. [formerly known
as §153.129]
C. USE OF OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth and its surrounding
vehicular maneuvering space shall not also be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facilities or any dumpster or garbage/recycling storage facilities.
D. COMPUTATION. When determination of the number of off-street loading berths required by this schedule results in a
requirement of a fractional berth, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of
one-half shall be counted as one loading berth.
E. CENTRAL LOADING. Off-street loading berths for separate uses, different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed
uses, may be provided collectively in any zoning district in which separate loading berths for each constituent use
would be required, provided that the total number of loading berths so located together shall not be less than the sum
of the separate requirements for each use.
F. YARDS. No off-street loading berth in any zoning district may be located within a required front or corner side yard.
Off-street loading berths may be located in required side or rear yards when outside of and not in conflict with any
required landscaping areas, except no loading berth may be located within sixty feet (60’) of adjacent single-family
residential property as explained in §155.607.3.A above.
G. SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
1. For special exceptions other than prescribed for hereinafter, loading berth adequate in number and size to
serve such uses shall be provided as determined by the Planning Director.
2. Uses for which off-street loading berth are required, but which are located in buildings of less floor area
than the minimum prescribed for such required berth, shall be provided with adequate off-street receiving
facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any abutting street, driveway, or service drive on the same zoning
lot.
3. EXEMPTIONS. No off-street loading is required for free-standing buildings that have less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet in gross floor area.
4. SCHEDULE FOR INDIVIDUAL OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES. The loading requirements for individual
establishments or buildings (single- or multi-tenant) using their own dedicated loading facilities in any
nonresidential or mixed use development shall be based on the floor area of the building(s) as follows,
when loading spaces are located on individual parcels off-street:
__________________
LAND USE GROSS FLOOR AREA OFF-STREET LOADING SIZE OF
(SQ. FT.) SPACES REQUIRED SPACE
10,000 - 99,000 1 10 ft x 25 ft
Office, restaurant, hotel or motel 100,000 - 149,000 1 10 ft x 25 ft
150,000 and over 2 10 ft x 25 ft
Retail establishment, 10,000 - 19,999 1 10 ft x 50 ft
shopping center or any 20,000 - 49,999 2 10 ft x 50 ft
industrial use 50,000 - 79,999 3 10 ft x 50 ft
80,000 – 100,000 4 10 ft x 50 ft
For predominately retail or industrial uses, each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, or
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 607 - 24
portion of this amount greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, which is in excess of the first one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall require one additional loading berth. As an example, 150,001
through 249,999 square feet shall require 2 additional spaces. (Ord No. 1532, passed 1-8-07) [formerly
known as §153.130]
5. SCHEDULE FOR SHARED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES. Where loading spaces are designed to be shared
by multiple parcels within a development in any B-1SCD, MUD, TS, or ENT district, and a participating
user will not have its own loading facilities (i.e., a grocery store in a shopping center has its own dedicated
loading dock), a shared use and cross access agreement shall be signed by all property owners and recorded
at the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds. Shared loading spaces shall not be located further than six
hundred feet (600’) from the service door for any participating user. The following schedule may be used
for shared loading spaces:
SHARED USES GROSS FLOOR AREA OFF-STREET LOADING SIZE OF
(SQ. FT.) SPACES REQUIRED SPACE
Office, restaurant, hotel Less than 59,999 2 10 ft x 50
or motel, retail, and/or any 60,000 - 99,999 3 10 ft x 50 ft
industrial use 100,000 – 150,000 4 10 ft x 50 ft
150,000 and over 5 10 ft x 50 ft
6. When a nonresidential or mixed use development can use either of the above schedules, the developer or
property owner(s) may choose which option to use.
155.607.9 Parking Fee-In-Lieu for Conversion of Surface Shared Lots to Future Structured Parking
In the TS and ENT Conditional-Only zoning districts where future land use projections would assume the need for structured
parking which is not justified in the short-term, a provision may be made for financial preparation for such conversion of
surface parking to multi-level structured parking.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 1
155.608. Signs.
155.608.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this § 155.608 is to:
A. Establish standards for the erection, alteration and maintenance of signs that are appropriate to various
zoning districts;
B. Allow for adequate and effective signs for communicating identification and other messages while
preventing signs from dominating the visual appearance of the area in which they are located;
C. Protect and enhance the view of properties from public rights-of-way;
D. Avoid distracting, confusing or misleading a driver or obstructing necessary vision for traffic safety;
E. Insure that permitted signs do not become a hazard or nuisance;
F. Advance the economic stability, preservation and enhancement of property values; and
G. Ensure and advance the positive visual impact and image of the town.
H. Provide flexibility for individual needs of business identification and for general communication
opportunities. ('72 Code, § 24-2100) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93)[formerly §
153.140]
155.608.2. Scope.
The regulations of this section shall govern and control the erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation,
maintenance, relocation and removal of all signs within the Town and any sign not expressly permitted by these
regulations shall be prohibited.
155.608.3. Indemnification.
Any person erecting or displaying a freestanding sign shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town and its officers,
agents and employees from any claim arising out of the presence of the sign on Town property, rights-of-way, or
private property.
155.608.4. Prohibited Signs.
The following signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district:
A. Signs which constitute a hazard to public health or safety. See § 155.608.5.I.
B. ROOF SIGNS.
C. FLASHING SIGNS, which shall include signs in which all or any portion flashes; use lights of intermittent
illumination; or use lights of changing degrees of intensity. That portion of a sign which only shows date,
time, and/or temperature is allowed. Changeable copy signs shall not be considered flashing or moving
signs, and therefore prohibited, only when their copy does not change more than one (1) time every four (4)
hours.
D. VEHICULAR SIGNS.
E. MOVING SIGNS, including, but not limited to inflatable, moving, rotating or undulating signs designed to be
regularly set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or are animated or appear to move by electrical or
mechanical means, or light beams except as otherwise permitted in this Title.
F. Signs displaying obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
G. Signs which, by reason of size, location, content, color, or manner of illumination, obstruct the vision of
motorists or interfere with the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on public
streets.
H. Signs which make use of words such as "Stop", "Look", "One-Way", "Danger", "Yield", or any similar
word or phrase, or any geometric shape and color that typically corresponds to a traffic control message, or
any other symbol or light which may interfere with or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
I. Signs displayed within or extended over public right-of-way, including signs attached to sign posts or
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 2
utility poles, except those allowed by other provisions of this Title and are erected or authorized by the
appropriate state or local government agency.
J. Signs which obstruct ingress or egress from any fire escape, door, window, or other exit or entrance.
K. V-shaped or triangular permanent signs, although double-faced signs are permitted when the signs are
mounted back-to-back parallel to each other, or at less than a seventy degree (700) angle, and both sign
faces are essentially identical or mirror images.
L. Signs painted directly on trees, rocks and fences and other structures or objects, except walls, and except
boulders placed at public school locations for ongoing decoration and messages by the student body.
M. Signs situated on an artificially created berm.
N. AIRBORNE SIGNS.
O. PENNANTS.
P. PYLON SIGNS.
Q. ADVERTISING SIGNS.
R. BILLBOARD SIGNS.
155.608.5. General Provisions.
A. SIGN AREA. The area of a sign shall be the smallest square, rectangle, or circle which physically or visually
encloses the separate elements, and entire perimeter, of a sign, but excluding the supporting structure which
by itself does not contribute to the message of the sign proper or of the display. Where a sign is designed to
be double-sided, the area computed shall include only the largest single display surface which is visible
from any one (1) side or position. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be
considered to be a single display surface or display containing elements organized, related, and composed
to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship to elements,
where there is reasonable doubt as to the relationship of elements, or where there is an obvious change in
background surface material, color, or design, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
B. SIGN HEIGHT. The height of a freestanding sign shall be the distance measured from the average grade of
the finished ground surface at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign. Freestanding signs shall
not be located on an artificially created berm. For other signs, the distance shall be measured between
average finished grade adjoining the wall where a sign such as a wall, projecting, suspended, awning,
canopy, or building identification sign is located and the highest point of said sign.
C. DISTANCEMEASUREMENT. The location of a sign shall be measured as the distance between the point of
reference specified and the closest point on the sign.
D. SIGN ILLUMINATION. An illuminated sign is any sign from which artificial light emanates: i) by means of
exposed lighting on the surface of the sign, such as neon tubing (internal illumination); ii) through
transparent or translucent material from a source within the sign (internal illumination); iii) by a hidden
light source directing light onto the background surface which creates a halo effect of opaque lettering or
other message elements (external illumination); or iv) a sign which reflects artificial light from a source
intentionally directed upon it (external illumination). Signs and other sources of illumination adjacent to
public streets are subject to the provisions of the North Carolina General Statutes 136-32.2. [formerly in §
153.144 and 155.608.4]
1. Illuminated signs permitted in single-family residential districts or within one hundred feet (100’)
of a single-family residential district shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 PM and
8:00 AM, unless the use to which the sign pertains is open.
2. No illuminated sign shall be positioned or maintained so as to permit light beams and illumination
from it to be directed or beamed off-site, causing glare or reflection that may constitute a nuisance
or traffic hazard as regulated at § 155.609.
E. SIGNS CLOSE TO SIDEWALKS. Freestanding signs over five feet (5’) in height or greater than twenty four
(24) square feet in size shall be located at least ten feet (10’) from any sidewalk or multimodal pathway.
See also § 155.608.14 for signs in the Downtown Overlay.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 3
F. ELECTRICAL ELEMENTS. All wiring, fittings, and materials used in the construction, connection and
operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of the adopted
Electrical Code and shall be contained in rigid conduit or enclosed in poles or raceways. No wiring may be
exposed on the surface of any element of the sign.
G. STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS. The construction and structural components of all signs shall be in accordance
with the standards and regulations of the applicable adopted Building Code.
H. SIGHT TRIANGLE. Signs, and any concealed support elements supporting a sign, shall not be located within
any sight triangle as defined in this Title.
I. SIGNMAINTENANCE REQUIRED. The owner of a sign or the premises on which such sign is located shall be
liable for maintenance of such sign, including its source(s) of illumination, in neat and orderly condition
and in good working order at all times, and for preventing deterioration of the physical appearance or safety
of such sign as follows:
1. All signs, together with their supports, braces, anchors, and messages, shall be kept in good repair.
2. Signs that are structurally unsafe and thereby endanger the public safety must be removed unless
they are repaired and made to otherwise comply with the requirements of this subchapter. Such
removal or repair shall be at the expense of the property owner. [formerly § 153.142]
J. OVERHANG. Unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this Title, no portion of a sign may overhang or
extend over any part of a public right-of-way or public use realm.
K. OBSOLETE SIGNS. Signs identifying businesses no longer in existence, products no longer being sold,
services no longer being rendered, or signs and sign structures which have been abandoned shall be
removed by the property owner from the premises within ninety (90) days from the termination of such
activities.
1. Where the sign face is obsolete but the sign structure is conforming, the sign face may be either
covered or removed in order to retain the sign structure for future reuse at the same location.
2. Where the sign face is obsolete and the sign structure is nonconforming, the sign face alone may
be either covered or removed for a period not to exceed one (1) year, at which time such sign
structure must be reused or removed. ('72 Code, § 24-2102) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord.
789, passed 10-25-93) Penalty, see § 153.999 [formerly § 153.142]
L. WINDOW SIGNS. Signs may be painted, stenciled, etched or otherwise adhered to the interior or exterior
surface of windows. In order to retain the primary purpose of glass to allow light and visibility to pass
through it, a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the glass area may be covered by signage if it is
opaque or translucent, or a maximum of fifty percent (50%) if the sign is composed of open symbols
without background.
155.608.6. Special Criteria for Signs Other Than Primary Identification and Advertising.
Certain types of signs may be suitable in most areas of the Town jurisdiction, when meeting the provisions of §§
155.608.4 and 155.608.5, applicable provisions of adopted building codes and Matthews Town ordinances separate
from this Title, and the following criteria. These signs will generally not be counted toward the maximum number
or size of signage allowed by the individual use or as any permitted joint identification sign, unless specifically
listed.
A. Flags displaying symbols, crests, and/or names of the United States of America, the State of North
Carolina, Mecklenburg County, the Town of Matthews, and other governmental units which include part or
all of the Town of Matthews, or of religious, civic, or nonprofit organizations, provided the number of such
flags does not exceed four (4) per lot. Flags shall not be considered moving signs. All flags shall be flown
in accordance with Flag Code protocol established by the Congress of the United States. The maximum
flagpole height allowed is ten feet (10’) over the underlying zoning district's maximum permitted building
height or fifty feet (50’), whichever is less.
All other flags may be allowed on a pole a minimum of fifteen feet (15’), and not to exceed twenty five feet
(25’) in height, or on a pole extended from the first or ground story of the structure. Up to two (2) such
flags may be displayed on a lot or for a use. Flags that are clearly decorative in nature, such as illustrations
of the season, and without identifying or advertising copy, will not be considered signage for maximum
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 4
number of signs or sign area. All other flags shall not count as a freestanding sign for purposes of
maximum number of freestanding signs, but the area of the flag’s surface shall be deducted from the total
permitted sign area for freestanding signs on the property.
B. Decorations customarily and commonly associated with a national, local or religious holiday, or recognized
local special event, provided that such decorations shall not be displayed for more than sixty (60) days.
C. Incidental signs, located within any required setback or yard or within ten feet (10’) of any property line,
which direct or regulate the movement of pedestrians or vehicles into or within the premises provided that:
1. No more than one such sign is displayed per driveway;
2. The sign does not exceed four (4) square feet in area or three feet (3’) in height from finished
grade; and
3. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the sign is used to identify the business or service
provided on the lot.
D. Incidental signs, when located to the interior of a building site and outside of any required setback or yard
and greater than ten feet (10’) from any property line, which contain information for persons on-site only,
are not easily visible off-site, and are not used to primarily identify establishments or advertise products or
services, may be up to twelve (12) square feet in sign area or exceed six feet (6’) in height. This includes
directory signs which identify only the names and locations of occupants or uses within buildings or
complexes, although directory signs in vehicular use areas may not exceed eight feet (8’) in height.
E. One (1) menu board sign per drive-through window lane not to exceed forty eight (48) square feet in area
or eight feet (8’) in height is allowed. When more than one (1) menu board sign is used by the
establishment, then each menu board shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area. Menu boards shall not
be readable from off-premise.
F. Real Estate and Construction Signs.
1. Real estate or construction signs advertising property for sale, lease, rent, or development, on
private property provided such signs are located only on the property being advertised. One (1)
real estate sign advertising individual single-family lots or dwellings or individual units within
attached or multi-family housing shall not exceed six (6) square feet. For tracts of land or
nonresidential properties, one (1) real estate sign not to exceed one (1) square foot for each twenty
(20) lineal feet of the advertised property which abuts a street, with a minimum of six (6) and
maximum of eighteen (18) square feet is allowed. One (1) construction sign on a lot up to onehalf
(1/2) acre in size is allowed and shall not exceed six (6) square feet. One (1) construction sign
on a parcel over one-half (1/2) acre shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each twenty (20) lineal
feet of the project site which abuts a street, with a minimum of thirty two (32) and maximum of
one hundred (100) square feet. On a four (4) lane or greater highway, one (1) real estate or
construction sign of the given dimensions will be allowed every five hundred feet (500’). One (1)
real estate or construction sign will be allowed per street frontage when a property fronts more
than one street. Such signs shall be set back fifty feet (50’) from an intersection of two (2) rightsof-
way when on a corner lot. [formerly § 153.145]
2. Real estate and construction signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale is closed,
rent or lease transaction is finalized, or construction project/phase is completed.
3. When an individual property does not have road frontage, then a real estate sign meeting the size
and time provisions of subsections 1 and 2 above may be located within the associated access
easement for the parcel, subject to the underlying property owner’s approval.
4. Temporary off-premise real estate signs providing information on, and directions to, property that
is for sale or rent when meeting the following provisions:
a. No more than two (2) signs per advertised property shall be placed no further than one (1)
mile from the advertised property
b. No sign shall exceed three (3) square feet in area or four feet (4’) in height.
c. No sign shall be located closer than eleven feet (11’) from the edge of pavement or back
of curb of any public street and shall not be placed within fifty feet (50’) of an intersection
or within twenty feet (20’) of a private drive. Signs shall only be placed in
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 5
the ground and not on trees, poles, permanent signs, or other equipment or items within
the right-of-way.
d. No sign shall be placed before 8:00 PM the evening before a holiday or a Saturday or
remain after 5:00 AM the morning following a Sunday or a holiday.
e. For purposes of this off-premise real estate sign provision, “advertised property” shall
mean one individual parcel for sale or lease, or one development/group of properties
owned or being sold by the same person or company.
G. Temporary signs involving political issues and campaigns not exceeding six (6) square feet in single-family
residential districts and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in other zoning districts, identifying issues
on a ballot or candidates for public office are allowed when located on private property. Such signs may be
located within required setbacks and yards, but shall not be placed within any required sight triangle or in
the right-of-way of any street. These signs shall not be placed on property more than sixty (60) days prior
to the campaign completion date or election date, and must be removed within five (5) days following the
final date of voting.
H. Temporary signs announcing special events or activities of limited duration, such as team registration
periods, of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, and similar organizations, on private property. Such signs
may be located within required setbacks and yards, but shall not be within a required sight triangle on a
corner lot or in the right-of-way of any street. These signs shall not be placed on property more than thirty
(30) days prior to the special event date or close of short-term activity, and must be removed within seven
(7) calendar days of such ending date. These temporary signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in
size, or six feet (6’) in height.
I. Temporary signs for the seasonal sale of farm products are allowed on private property for the duration of
the harvest season of those products to be sold, subject to the following provisions:
1. One (1) sign limited in area to twenty (20) square feet is permitted only on the premises where the
products are produced and sold.
2. Directional signs limited in area to two (2) square feet each may be erected on- or off-premises, on
private property, provided the total number of such directional signs relating to any one premises
is limited to three (3).
3. Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the termination of the sale of activities.
J. Off-premise signs for public assembly uses and farmers’ markets may be allowed on private property not
part of the associated use. Maximum sign size will be thirty six (36) square feet, and the sign may not
exceed six feet (6’) in total height. These sign are permitted when the assembly facility meets the following
standards:
1. The use must have consistent daily and/or weekly events which have fifty (50) or more persons in
attendance, and must be open to the general public, such as public or nonprofit users but not a
membership only venue or for-profit business.
2. The public assembly facility must be located such that the building or main assembly area, if
indoor, or a combination of indoor and outdoor, is greater than four hundred feet (400’) from the
closest non-minor residential street access point and is partially or completely blocked visually by
buildings, significant topographic changes, or natural vegetation.
3. If an outdoor facility, it must be partially or completely blocked visually by buildings, significant
topographic changes, or vegetation from its primary pedestrian access point.
4. An off-premise sign for a qualified assembly use shall not be within a sight triangle or within fifty
feet (50’) of an intersection of two (2) thoroughfares, and must have written documentation of the
property owner’s permission for the placement of the sign.
K. Signs that are erected for intermittent uses that occur on a regularly scheduled weekly basis, such as a
church using space each weekend in a school, shall not be placed on the property more than twenty four
(24) hours prior to the scheduled event and shall be removed within twelve (12) hours of the closing of the
event and shall comply with land uses in that specific zoning category. Temporary signs allowed for such
intermittent uses shall not exceed three (3) signs on-premises only, each one not to exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in size and six feet (6’) in height.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 6
L. Signs established by government agencies, including but not limited to wayfinding signs and building/site
historical markers, providing public instruction, warning, historical details, directions, or similar messages on
public or private property. Such signs shall be located so as not to obstruct cross-visibility at intersections or
driveways. When off-premise signs for local government uses are located on private property, a sign easement
documenting the property owner’s permission shall be required. The maximum sign area for an off-premise
wayfinding monument sign shall be forty (40) square feet and shall not exceed seven feet (7’) in total height.
Wayfinding signs not to exceed forty (40) square feet in sign area may be part of a gateway or gazebo
structure without respect to any height limit for sign or its support structure. Off- premise wayfinding
signs elevated on streetside posts shall meet NCDOT standards for ground clearance, and shall not exceed
twenty four (24) square feet in sign size, exclusive of ornamental trim. Government established signs included
in this category other than wayfinding signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. Freestanding kiosks or
wall displays in the downtown or in the ENT district intended to provide current information to the public
about the immediate vicinity, including but not limited to directory maps, upcoming events, and related
information regarding area streets, businesses and public amenities, authorized by the Town at specific
locations shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in sign area. (Ord 1877, passed 5-14-12; Am. Ord.
2038, passed 5-11-15; Am. Ord 2231, passed 6-12-17)
M. For a nonprofit farmers’ market in the HUC district, off-premise signage giving identification and direction to
the site may be incorporated into a mural which has no other advertising. Only the portion of a mural which
includes identification or direction will be considered sign area for purposes of this subparagraph, and shall
not exceed forty (40) square feet. (Ord. No. 1490-A, passed 4-10-06; Ord. No. 1877, passed 5- 14-12)
N. Sponsorship signs as defined in § 155.101 are allowed without limitation to number and may be erected on
the premises of properly established recreational or institutional facilities. Such signs must meet the
following standards.
1. Be located behind the minimum setback requirements for the district.
2. Be placed in such a fashion so that the sign face is inwardly oriented relative to the perimeter of
the recreational or institutional facility.
3. Be limited to a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet.
4. Not be illuminated.
O. Temporary signs identifying a contractor or nonresident individual hired to undertake structural,
mechanical, property maintenance, real property renovation or expansion, or some similar physical
improvement on residentially used private property where such construction is actively being conducted.
Such signs are limited to only one (1) per property, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, and may be
located within required front setbacks and yards, but not within a required sight triangle on a corner lot.
These signs must be registered with the Town Planning office as provided in § 155.608.8. These signs
shall only be on a residentially-used property for the duration of the project, not to exceed thirty (30)
calendar days. Signs shall not be placed on site until the work has begun, which may include delivery of
materials, and may not remain more than two (2) days after work is completed. (Ord. No. 1648, passed 10-
27-08)
P. Street addressing numbers, including ranges of numbers or suites for multi-address complexes. Such
identification shall meet the requirements of theMatthews Ordinance 130.08 Posting of Street Addresses.
Q. Signs required to be posted by law on public or private property. Signs to regulate traffic in public rights- ofway,
indicating bus stops, taxi stands, and similar transportation facilities on public rights-of-way or private
property, or identifying vehicular or bicycle parking on public or private property.
R. Works of art that do not include a commercial message, graphic or logo, or religious symbols and
identification emblems of religious orders.
S. Except in the Downtown Overlay District which has separate regulations (see § 155.608.14.A.5), feather
signs no greater than thirty (30) square feet in size and twelve feet (12’) in height, not to exceed five (5)
signs per property, on private property only, and at least ten feet (10’) away from any public right-of-way,
driveway, sidewalk or multi-use path, and not obstructing visibility of drivers, pedestrians, or other
businesses. Such a sign shall not convey a message that identifies or advertises a product, service, or
establishment that would otherwise qualify it as a temporary advertising sign at § 155.608.8 except for size
limitations. Feather signs shall not be placed on a property longer than five (5) consecutive days, and there
shall be a minimum of five (5) days between placements of feather signs on the same property. Feather
signs shall not be used more than sixty (60) days total during a calendar year on a property. Feather signs are
not allowed within the Downtown Overlay, as indicated at § 155.608.14.A, or within the undisturbed
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 7
highway buffer along NC51 in the Highway NC51 Overlay district as indicated at § 155.504.B.13.
T. Signs no greater than two (2) square feet in area giving warning, e.g. beware of dog, no trespassing, and no
dumping, and not to exceed four (4) per lot, except that the Zoning Administrator may permit additional
such signs under proven special circumstances.
U. Except in the Downtown Overlay District which has separate regulations (see § 155.608.14.H), portable
signs in the configuration of a two-sided A-frame, which is generally molded plastic or similar durable
material with flat space on each side for display of a continuing change of information. A-frame signs shall be
no larger than eight (8) square feet in area (per sign face) and four feet (4’) in overall height, and may be
displayed outside a nonresidential use only while such use is open for customers or clients. Because an Aframe
portable sign’s primary intent is to offer quickly changing details related to the business enterprise,
like daily meal specials, which often require individuals to stop to take in the full message, these signs need to
be located near the pedestrian entrance, and must not prohibit pedestrian flow or safety around them. A- frame
portable signs may be located only on the same parcel as the associated use, not within any paved vehicular
use or parking area, not within any sight triangle, and at least ten feet (10’) away from any public right-of-way
line or sidewalk generally parallel to the street. So that it does not in essence become an additional
identification sign, the information included on an A-frame sign must be more than identification of the
establishment. One (1) A-frame sign per establishment is allowed. ('72 Code, § 24-2105) (Ord. 477, passed 2-
8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93; Ord. No. 1532, passed 1-8-07) [formerly § 153.145]
V. Residential Development Message Board signs may be located within or at a main entrance to a residential
subdivision, development, or complex, whether single-family detached, attached, multi-family or a
combination, when such subdivision, development, or complex utilizes an established name for the designated
residential component. The geographic area shall be the residential project as identified on an approved
preliminary subdivision plan (not just a phase of a larger subdivision), or on an approved zoning plan or site
plan for a residential development not involving subdivision of individual dwelling parcels. No more than one
Residential Development Message Board sign may be located at each main vehicular entrance to a subdivision,
development, or complex to provide information to the residents within that area. No Residential Development
Message Board shall be larger than twelve (12) square feet or more than five feet (5’) in overall height. Such
signs shall not be located within any sight triangle. These signs shall either be out of the right-of-way, or must
receive approval of a Town encroachment agreement when proposed to be located on a Town-maintained
street. They may be placed near clustered mail box units, a community recreational amenity (pool, walking
trail entrance, etc.) near a main street entry, or similar location where many residents would likely see it on a
recurring basis. (Am. Ord. 2038, passed 5-11-15)
155.608.7 Special Sign Regulations.
A. A building or group of buildings unified as a shopping center, office complex, mixed use development, or
any multi-tenant nonresidential property, with two (2) or more businesses may have one (1) joint business
and/or identification sign, freestanding, per street front, not to exceed the sign area as given in §§
155.608.12.C, 155.608.13.C, and 155.608.15. Such sign must be located behind the street right-of-way and
not within any sight triangles of intersecting streets or intersecting drives with streets. Up to one-half (1/2) of
the maximum allowed sign area, per sign, may include the center or complex identification, with the
remainder of the allowable sign area available for identification of individual tenants. Individual businesses
within a multi-tenant property shall not be allowed individual freestanding signs. A multi-tenant property
may request approval of a master sign plan, as outlined in § 155.608.9.
B. Where a permitted sign is required to be behind the required setback or behind the right-of-way, and the
wall of the related building is at or in front of the setback line or right-of-way line respectively, the sign
may project eighteen inches (18”) from the building wall, provided that if such sign projects over a
vehicular or pedestrian area or into the street right-of-way, the bottom of the sign must be a minimum of
seven feet six inches (7’6”) above the finished grade at that point and an encroachment agreement must be
obtained from the State or Town, as appropriate.
C. Uses established on through lots, or lots fronting on two intersecting streets but which do not control the
corner property (at least twenty feet (20’) along the right-of-way line on each street away from their
intersection), will be permitted to have two (2) freestanding signs, providing such signs are located on and
oriented toward two (2) different streets. Lots having frontage on three (3) or more streets may have three
(3) freestanding signs, providing such signs are no closer to each other than one hundred feet (100’) in a
straight line distance.
D. GATEWAY IDENTIFICATION SIGNS FOR MIXED-USE ORMULTI-USE DEVELOPMENTS. Developments over ten
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 8
(10) acres in size that are designed at time of initial site plan approval to include a combination of buildings
and /or parcels for multiple uses, such as general or professional offices, service or personal businesses,
distribution warehouses, industries and manufacturing facilities, recreational services, and residential uses, but
not exclusively retail. The property may be under single or multiple ownership when initially designed, and
parcels may be sold into separate ownership or condominium units upon their completion. Mixed use and
multiple use developments place special attention on common design elements, shared access, parking and
circulation, common utility needs, and compatibility of tenants, and often have a unified management system.
Signs at exterior development boundaries are allowed with the following standards:
1. One (1) freestanding identification sign is allowed for any property fronting one (1) public street.
(Figure 1)
2. One (1) freestanding identification sign per street front is allowed for any property fronting two
(2) or more public streets, when such development does not encompass property on opposite sides of
such public street. (Figure 2)
3. One (1) freestanding identification sign per public street corner at an intersection shall be allowed
when such development includes property on both block faces of an intersecting street. (Figure 3)
4. Signs are limited to fifty (50) square feet each and to six feet (6’) in height
5. Signs may be illuminated and in compliance with § 155.609.
6. Signs must be located behind the right-of-way line, and not within any sight triangle.
('72 Code, § 24-2104) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93) [formerly § 153.144]
E. WAYFINDING SIGNS. In order to improve pedestrian and motorist ability to locate landmarks, public
facilities and public parking, and to create a unique yet unified look for the Town, and to increase public
safety by combining various pieces of information at single locations, the Town will determine where
wayfinding signs may be placed. The Town may specify the size, style, material, colors, letter height, and
similar criteria for each sign. The Town will be responsible for installation and maintenance of wayfinding
signs.
155.608.8 Temporary and Portable Signs.
A. TEMPORARYADVERTISING SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. Temporary signs conveying a message to identify or
advertise a product, service, or establishment, other than those regulated at § 155.608.6.G, H, I, K, S, and U
may be located on private property for up to sixty (60) days total during any calendar year, provided that there
be a minimum fourteen (14) days between display of different temporary signs. Signs may be attached
or freestanding and must be located on the same site as the business, product, service, activity, or land use
identified and/or advertised by the sign. The sign area for these temporary signs shall not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet, and if freestanding shall not exceed six feet (6’) in height, or may be attached to the principal
building within the ground or first story façade. Temporary signs do not require a sign permit, but must be
registered with the Town Planning office, as explained at § 155.608.8.C. below. Temporary signs displayed
beyond dates provided to the Town shall be in violation and will be subject to civil citation and fines without
a warning notice. (Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14)
B. TEMPORARY SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY (RIGHTS-OF-WAY). Temporary banners may be permitted in public
rights-of-way over streets, subject to other state and local laws and policies. Temporary banners, post
signs, vehicular signs, posters, portable signs, and similar displays may be permitted on public property,
subject also to other state and local laws, for up to seventy two (72) hours. Such signs allowed here shall be
limited only to those relating to special events as listed in § 155.608.6.H, and do not have to be
contiguous to the property on which such special event is located. Such signs shall be registered with the
Town Planning office, as explained in § 155.608.8.C below, and shall have written approval from the Town
Public Works Director and Chief of Police as to location, size, and method of lighting. Any unregistered
temporary sign on public right-of-way shall be in violation and subject to immediate confiscation and/or
citation and fine without a warning notice.
C. TEMPORARY SIGN REGISTRATION PROCESS. Prior to display of any temporary sign requiring registration, a
registration form shall be completed and submitted to the Town Planning office, stating start and stop
display dates, address, location within the site, sign type, number of signs when appropriate, and size and
height of temporary sign(s). Signs subject to registration include those described here in § 155.608.8, and
those at § 155.608.6.O for contractor signs at residences. ('72 Code, § 24-2106) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88;
Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord. 796, passed 1-10-94; Ord. No. 1049, passed 5-10-99; Ord. No.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 9
1532, passed 1-8-07, Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14) [formerly § 153.146]
155.608.9 Master Sign Plan.
A. MASTER SIGN PLAN. For individual properties with more than one existing or proposed principal
nonresidential structure or use, individual properties with more than one (1) existing or proposed
nonresidential tenant or two (2) or more nonresidential properties designed and/or developed jointly,
including properties under a single zoning petition, a master sign plan shall be submitted by the owner(s)
prior to any sign permit being issued on any of the property. A master sign plan shall, at a minimum,
include the following:
1. A site plan of the land parcel(s), drawn to scale, showing the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, parking lots, loading zones, driveways, internal vehicular access drives, and required
landscaped areas;
2. Computation of existing total sign area, showing dimensions and locations of each freestanding
sign, and dimensions of each attached sign;
3. A list of any existing signs not requiring a permit;
4. Anticipated sign area, in square feet, of proposed attached signage, and general location where
such future signs may be located;
5. Anticipated sign area, in square feet and overall maximum dimensions, of proposed detached
signage, and general location where such future signs may be located;
6. A statement regarding if a bonus of fifteen percent (15%) in total sign area is being requested, as
allowed in § 155.608.9.C.
B. WINDOW SIGNS IN A MASTER SIGN PLAN. A master sign plan which includes existing or potential window
signs shall indicate the area of window(s) to be covered by window signs per building or business
establishment.
C. BONUS SIGNAGE FOR AMASTER SIGN PLAN.
1. A property or group of properties may be eligible for a bonus of fifteen percent (15%) extra sign
area total when the following additional standards are met:
a. The master sign plan provides no more than one (1) freestanding sign per street front for
the development, incorporating any unified identification of the entire tract and individual
tenant identification.
b. The owner(s) impose design restrictions which may include such items as: color scheme;
lettering or graphic style; lighting; material; location of each sign on the building(s); and
sign proportions.
c. The master sign plan includes a schedule for bringing all existing nonconforming signs
into compliance within one year. If any existing signs conform to the requirements of this
§ 155.608 but not to the owner's additional restrictions, a schedule for bringing such signs
into compliance shall also be included.
2. The bonus signage may be in one or more signs, and may be on freestanding or attached signs.
However, no sign shall exceed the maximum height limit for the particular type of sign.
D. PROCEDURE FOR MASTER SIGN PLAN APPROVAL. A master sign plan may be prepared as a part of a zoning
application, or may be separately submitted at any time to the Board of Commissioners for review. When
made a part of a zoning application, the master sign plan shall be processed simultaneously with the zoning
request. When a master sign plan is submitted independently from a zoning application, the Board of
Commissioners shall review it at a regular public meeting within sixty (60) days of submission.
E. AMENDMENT OF A MASTER SIGN PLAN. A master sign plan may be amended by filing a new master sign
plan which conforms with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect. An amended plan will be
processed the same as an initial master sign plan.
F. BINDING EFFECT. After approval of a master sign plan, no sign shall be erected or revised, except in
conformance with such plan, and any such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this
Title. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any provisions of this Title, this
Title shall control. ('72 Code, § 24-2109) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93)
[formerly § 153.149]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 10
155.608.10 Signs in all Residential Districts, Including Single-Family, Multi-Family, and Mixes
of All or Predominately-All Residential Uses.
A. ILLUMINATION LIMITATION. Only externally lighted signs are permitted in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-9, RMH,
R-15MF, R-12MF and R-VS Districts. Internally or externally lighted signs are permitted in the CrC,
SRN and C-MF Districts. See § 155.608.5.D for categories of internal and external illumination. (Ord. 2460,
passed 12-9-19)
B. LOCATION PERMITTED. All signs for uses allowed within the various residential districts must be located
behind the street right-of-way and out of any sight triangles.
C. SIGN HEIGHT. No freestanding sign may be over ten feet (10’) in height, except where a lesser maximum
height is given in other portions of this Title. See § 155.608.5.E. (Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00)
D. TABLE OF SIGN REGULATIONS FOR USES IN THE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
USE TYPE NUMBER MAXIMUM SIGN AREA
PERMITTED PERMITTED(1) (SQUARE FEET)
Arboretum Identification 1 per major entrance 6
Bed and breakfast guest home Identification 1 3
Church or place of worship, elementary or secondary
schools, and similar uses; convents, monasteries,
dormitories, colleges and universities,
Identification
1 per street front,
freestanding OR 40 for first sign(4) ;
1 per building, 25 for others
and similar uses attached 6
Bulletin board 1 18
Day care home Identification 1 3
Day care center Identification 1 6
Electric and gas substations, repeater huts, sewage treatment
plants, control houses, pressure regulator stations, buildings Identification 1 6
house pumps and lift stations, and similar structures
Fire or police station Identification 1 per street front 40 monument (4)
freestanding and 40 attached
1 per building attached
Farm, urban farm Identification 1 1½
Golf courses, country clubs, swimming clubs, tennis clubs, Identification 1 6
community recreation centers, and similar outdoor recreation
facilities
Group homes Identification 1 1½
Home based business Identification 1, attached 1½
Manufactured home park Identification 1 per major entrance 6
Miscellaneous nonresidential uses, not otherwise defined Identification 1 freestanding and 24 (4)
In this table and allowed within the specific zoning district 1 attached 24
Mobile radio towers, radio relay towers, microwave Identification 1 6
towers, elevated water storage tanks, antennas,
and similar structures
Multi-family dwellings (development up to 10 du/ac) Identification 1 per street corner
per major entrance 9
Multi-family dwellings (development greater than 10 du/ac) Identification 1 per street corner
per major entrance 24 (4)
Parks and playgrounds Identification 1 per major entrance 40 (4)
Room renting Identification 1 1-1/2
Single and two-family dwellings, incl manufactured homes Identification 1 1-1/2
Subdivision/development sales office (temporary) Identification 1 3
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 11
Subdivision entrance Identification 1 per street corner 9
per major entrance
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of § 155.608.7.C.
(2) Behind street right-of-way and no illumination. ('72 Code, § 24-2110) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed
10-25-93; Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14) [formerly § 153.150]
(3) Internally illuminated signs are only allowed in freestanding identification signs 24 sq ft or grater. (Ord. 2460, passed
12-9-19)
(4) Electronic Message Centers (EMC) shall have a day maximum of 5000 NITS and night maximum of 2000 NITS. and
shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the principle freestanding sign. . (Ord. 2460, passed 12-9-19)
155.608.11 Signs in the Residential/Institutional District.
A. Identification and bulletin board signs are permitted on premises of permitted uses conducted in buildings or
with buildings associated. Such signs will be regulated as provided in § 155.608.11.D, the Table of Sign
Regulations for Uses in the Residential/Institutional District.
B. Identification and bulletin board signs are permitted on premises of permitted uses not conducted in or
associated with buildings. Such signs are regulated as provided in § 155.608.11.D, the Table of Sign
Regulations for Uses in the Residential/Institutional District.
C. SIGN HEIGHT. No freestanding sign may be over ten feet (10’) in height, except attached signs where
allowed. See also § 155.608.5.E.
D. TABLE OF SIGN REGULATIONS FOR USES IN THE RESIDENTIAL/INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
(Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00)
TYPE NUMBER MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LOCATION
PERMITTED PERMITTED SIGN AREA PERMITTED PERMITTED
(SQUARE FEET)(3)
Identification 1 per building 20 Externally lighted only Mounted on building
(attached) for
single use site
Identification 1(1)(2) per 500 lineal feet 40 Luminous
(freestanding) of street frontage OR Behind street R-O-W
for single use 1 per public street
site vehicular access
Bulletin board for
entire property(3)
1 18 Luminous Behind street R-O-W
Campaigns/civic Temporary 1 per lot OR 12
or special events(2) 1 per business, as 12
as regulated at applicable
§155.608.6.G & H
Business use(2) Temporary 1 per lot OR 16
on private property 1 per business, as 16
as regulated at § 155.608.8.A applicable
Government/Wayfinding
and intermittent uses occurring on a regular scheduled
weekly basis
na See § 155.608.6 L and K
Residential Subdivision Development or Complex Residential
Development
Message Board
as regulated at
155.608.6.V
N.A. 12 sq ft
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 12
Temporary for 1 per lot OR 12 none Behind street R-O-W
campaigns/civic 1 per business, as 12
or special events applicable
as regulated at
§155.608.6.G & H
Temporary for 1 per lot OR 16 none Behind street R-O-W
business use 1 per business, as 16
on private property applicable
as regulated at
§ 155.608.8.A
Government/Wayfinding See § 155.608.6.L and K
and intermittent uses occurring on a regular scheduled
weekly basis
Separate Designated Uses Within Single Site or Complex
TYPE
PERMITTED
NUMBER
PERMITTED
MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
ILLUMINATION
PERMITTED
LOCATION
PERMITTED
(SQUARE FEET)(3)
Identification 1 per separate 20 Externally lighted only Mounted on building
(attached) when designated principal at primary doorway
separate designated use (i.e. sanctuary, 40 when separate Luminous to separate designated
uses exceed 50,000 gymnasium, classroom, designated principal principal use
sq ft or office wing, hospital, use is greater than
medical clinic, etc.) 10,000 sq ft
Identification 1(1)(2) per 500 lineal feet 40 Luminous
(freestanding) of street frontage OR Behind street R-O-W
for site or complex 1 per public street
as a whole, when vehicular access
such site includes
separate designated uses
which exceed 50,000
sq ft (3)
Identification
(freestanding
internal, for site
or complex when
such site includes
separate
designated uses
1 per separate
designated principal use
(i.e., sanctuary,
gymnasium, classroom
or office wing, hospital,
medical clinic, etc.)
12 Externally lighted Within 30’ of primary
building doorway to
separate designated
principal use, and 50’
in from all exterior
property lines
which exceed 50,000
sq ft (3)
Directory or
bulletin board, 1 per separate 12 Luminous Mounted on building,
attached or designated principal OR freestanding and
freestanding for use within 30’ of primary
each separate building doorway to
designated principal separate designated
use principal use, and 50’
in from all exterior
property lines
Temporary for 1 per lot OR 12 none Behind street R-O-W
campaigns/civic 1 per business, as 12
or special events applicable
as regulated at
§ 155.608.6.G & H
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 13
Temporary for 1 per lot OR 16 none Behind street R-O-W
business use 1 per business, as 16
on private property applicable
as regulated at
§ 155.608.8.A
Government/Wayfinding See § 155.608.6.L and K
and intermittent uses occurring on a regular scheduled
weekly basis
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of § 155.608.7.C.
(2) Freestanding signs for multi-tenant properties are regulated by the provisions of § 155.608.7.A. See also § 155.608.9
regarding a master sign plan.
(3) The maximum height limit of freestanding signs is ten feet (10’), unless further limited elsewhere in this Title.
('72 Code, § 24-2111) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-
14) [formerly § 153.151]
155.608.12 Signs in the Office District.
A. ILLUMINATION LIMITATIONS. Only “externally illuminated” signs as defined in § 155.608.4.D are permitted
for all single- and multi-family uses in the Office District. Non-residential uses or mixed-use developments
in the Office District may be externally or internally illuminated. See § 155.608.5.D for types of
illumination.
B. LOCATION PERMITTED. All signs for uses allowed within the Office District must be located behind the
street right-of-way.
C. SIGN HEIGHT. No sign may be over ten feet (10’) in height, except attached signs where allowed. See also
§ 155.608.5.E. (Ord. 1127, passed 7-10-00)
D. TABLE OF SIGN REGULATIONS FOR USES IN OFFICE DISTRICTS.
USE
TYPE
PERMITTED(3)
NUMBER
PERMITTED
ATTACHED (A) OR
FREESTANDING (F)(4)
MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET)
Single- and Two-Family Dwelling Identification 1 A or F 1½
Multi-Family Building/Complex Identification 1 A or F 9
Other single tenant(1) uses less than or Identification 1 A or F 50
equal to 150 lineal feet of lot frontage
Other single tenant(1) uses Identification 1 A or F 80
over 150 lineal feet of lot frontage
Other uses, all sizes(1) Directory of 1 per major A(2) 12
Bulletin board entrance
Multiple tenant and/or multiple Identification 1 per major F 50
building parcel entrance,
PLUS
Identification 1 per business A 24
establishment
Temporary, as 1 per lot A or F 12
All uses regulated at OR
§ 155.608.6.G 1 per business, A 12
and H as applicable
Temporary, as 1 per lot A or F 16
All uses regulated at OR
§ 155.608.8.A 1 per business A 16
as applicable
Government/Wayfinding and intermittent
uses occurring on a regular scheduled weekly
basis
See §
155.608.6.L
and K
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 14
TABLE OF SIGN REGULATIONS IN HUC, B-1, B-3, B-D, B-H, I-1, I-2, MUD, TS, B-1SCD, ENT, AND AU
DISTRICTS.
NUMBER LOT TOTAL MAXIMUM
TYPE OF SIGN PERMITTED FRONTAGE
(LINEAL FEET)
SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET)(4)
0 – 39 50
Freestanding identification or business 1(1)(2) 40 – 99 75
100 and over 100
0 – 39 40*
Attached identification or business 3 per establishment 40 – 99 60*
100 and over 80*
*Within the total sign area for attached signs, certain types of attached signs are further regulated as follows:
Projecting, up to 4 feet from face of building na na 24
Awning na na 1 sq.ft. per 1 l.f. of front wall
Canopy 1 na 1 sq.ft. per a l.f. of front wall
25% of glass area if opaque;
Window na na 50% of glass area if open
symbols without background
Temporary for 1 per lot OR none 12
campaigns/civic 1 per business, 12
or special events as applicable
as regulated at
§ 155.608.6.G and H
Temporary for 1 per lot OR none 16
business use 1 per business, 16
on private property as applicable
as regulated at
Residential Subdivision Development or
Complex
Residential
Development Message
Board as regulated at
155.608.6.V.
N.A. A or F 12 sq ft
(1) See § 155.608.7.A for provisions regarding multi-tenant properties, and § 155.608.9 regarding master sign plans.
(2) One (1) directory or bulletin board sign of up to twelve (12) square feet may be freestanding per major entrance in
place of an attached directory or bulletin board sign only when such sign is behind the required setback.
(3) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of § 155.608.7.C.
(4) The maximum height limit of freestanding signs is ten feet (10’), unless further limited elsewhere in this Title.
('72 Code, § 24-2112) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93) (Ord. No. 1490-A, passed
4-10-06) [formerly § 153.152]
155.608.13 Signs in Mixed Use and Nonresidential Districts (HUC, B-1, B-3, B-D, B-H, I-1, I-2,
MUD, TS, B-1SCD, ENT, AND AU).
A. ILLUMINATION LIMITATION. All signs, except temporary and portable signs, may be illuminated. See §
155.608.5.D for categories of internal and external illumination.
B. LOCATION PERMITTED. All signs for permitted uses must be located behind street rights-of-way, except as
provided elsewhere in this § 155.608.
C. SIGN HEIGHT. No sign may be over ten feet (10’) in height, except attached signs where allowed, and
where elevated monument signs may be permitted in specific designated sign corridors. (Ord. 1127, passed
7-10-00)
D.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 15
Government/Wayfinding See §155.608.6 L and K
and intermittent uses
occurring on a regular
scheduled weekly basis
Residential na na 12 sq ft
Development Message
Board as regulated at
§155.608.6.V
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of § 155.608.7.C.
(2) Freestanding signs for multi-tenant properties are regulated by the provisions of § 155.608.7.A. See also §
155.608.9 regarding a master sign plan.
(3) If a directory or bulletin board sign is freestanding, it must be located behind the setback line.
(4) The maximum height limit of freestanding signs is ten feet (10’), unless further limited elsewhere in this Title.
('72 Code, § 24-2113) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-
14; Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4/11/16)[formerly § 153.153]
155.608.14 Signs in Downtown Overlay District.
Identification, business or other signs on private or public property in the Downtown Overlay District must comply
with the requirements of this § 155.608, except where specifically exempted below. In addition, certain signs that are
not permitted in other districts may be allowed in the Downtown Overlay District only as specifically provided in this
§ 155.608.14.
A. SIGNS PROHIBITED IN THE DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT. The following signs are prohibited in the
Downtown Overlay District:
1. Any structure or any material for a sign face which is designed to be an internally illuminated
wall, projecting, awning, or freestanding sign, whether or not it has any electrical or mechanical
components that create internal light;
2. Any sign containing more than three (3) colors;
3. Signs placed in or extending over the public right-of-way, except when otherwise regulated in this
§ 155.608.14;
4. Signs listed at § 155.608.4, except when specifically permitted in this § 155.608.14; and
5. Feather signs.
B. SIGNS PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC LOCATIONS IN THE DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. The following sign elements are prohibited in the 100 block of N Trade Street, the 100 block of E
Charles Street between Trade Street and Cotton Gin Alley, the northeast side of the John Street
between Cotton Gin Alley and Library Lane (the historic core), and any buildings designated as a
local historic landmark dating from before 1920: any neon on a building face, projecting from a
building, displayed on or through a window, or in a freestanding sign.
2. The following signs are prohibited for buildings that were initially residential dwellings:
a. Attached signs for residential structures which have been converted to non-residential
use.
b. Freestanding signs over five feet (5’) in height for buildings that have been converted
from residential to nonresidential uses.
c. Neon is not permitted in any sign for residential structures converted to non-residential
use.
C. ADDITIONAL SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT. The following signs are
encouraged and favored in the Downtown Overlay District:
1. Signs painted or stenciled on or through windows or doors to complement the architectural period
or style of the building;
2. Individual sculpted or carved letters/logos/number of metal or
wood applied to the building face;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 16
3. Painted wood or metal signs applied to building face;
4. Projecting signs made of wood or metal and painted, and having at least seven and one-half feet
(7.5’) clearance when encroaching over a street, sidewalk or pedestrian use area, and having an
agreement with the Town or NCDOT when encroaching a public right-of-way;
5. Awning or canopy sign when the sign is same or similar material and same plane as the awning or
canopy, and not built up;
6. Canopy top signs composed of individual elements such as letters or digits placed on top of and at
the front edge of a canopy over a ground level walk-in entryway. The canopy must be an existing
architectural feature of the building, and may provide protection from adverse weather to an
existing porch or patio immediately adjacent to the main ground level building entrance. The lower
horizontal surface of the canopy shall not exceed fourteen feet (14’) above the bottom of the ground
level door opening. A canopy top sign shall not exceed twelve feet (12’) in width, or seventy-five
per cent (75%) of the width of the canopy whichever is less. For any canopy top sign up to six feet
(6’) in width, the individual elements of the sign shall not exceed twelve inches (12”) in height. For
any canopy top sign over six feet (6’) and up to nine feet (9’) in width, the individual elements of
the sign shall not exceed sixteen inches (16”) in height. For a canopy top sign greater than nine feet
(9’) in width, the individual elements of the sign shall not exceed twenty inches (20’) in height. A
canopy top sign shall be measured from the canopy’s top horizontal surface at the front edge of the
canopy. These canopy top signs shall not be considered roof signs, which are otherwise prohibited.
For the purpose of allowing placement of canopy top signs only, an existing rigid and permanent
horizontal extension to a building that can provide protection from adverse weather may also serve as
a canopy. To comply, the architectural extension must be connected to and extend horizontally a
minimum of four feet (4’) and maximum of twelve feet (12’) perpendicular to the front façade of the
building, centered over the ground level pedestrian entrance, with the lower horizontal surface of the
extension being no greater than fourteen feet (14’) above the bottom of the door opening, and having
a permanent weather-resistant surface on top that is generally flat or with a pitch not to exceed two in
twelve (2:12).
7. Neon signs displayed on or through a window area only and not occupying more than ten (10)
square feet, when complementing the architectural period or style of the building, and not
exceeding two (2) colors;
8. Portable signs in compliance with the regulations of this § 155.608.14.H; and
9. Externally illuminated identification signs in keeping with the architectural style and age of the
surrounding structures. Direct light of white or yellow from a shielded source is the preferred
method of illumination, although white or colored halo lighting, where individual opaque
letters/symbols are displayed in front of a background which reflects a hidden light source, is
permitted.
D. ATTACHED SIGNS. Attached signs, except as limited in § 155.608.14.B.2 above, are permitted in the
number and total sign area specified in §§ 155.608.10 through 155.608.13.
E. FREESTANDING SIGNS. Freestanding signs may be allowed in association with a use within a building or a use
when no building is present, subject to the limitations provided here and in other portions of §
155.608.14. Only one (1) freestanding sign is allowed per lot, except as allowed at § 155.608.7.C. When the
associated building is at or extends into the street right-of-way for the entire frontage, then no
freestanding sign is allowed. The size of freestanding signs shall comply with the following:
Lot Frontage Maximum Sign Area Maximum Sign Height
0-39 24 sq ft 5’
40-69 36 sq ft 6’(1)
70 and over 50 sq ft 8’(1)
(1) Allowed when sign is at least ten feet (10’) from edge of public right-of-way and sidewalk
F. TEMPORARY SIGNS. Temporary signs as regulated at §§ 155.608.6 and 155.608.8 are permitted. Feather
signs, however, as a specific style of temporary signs, are inconsistent with the overall character of the
Downtown and are therefore prohibited.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 17
G. DIRECTORY OR BULLETIN BOARD SIGNS. Directory or bulletin board signs are permitted as outlined in §§
155.608.11 through 155.608.13.
H. PORTABLE SIGNS. Certain portable signs, up to eight (8) square feet in sign area and not more than five feet
(5’) in total height, may be allowed in the Downtown Overlay. Due to the specific character of subsections of
the Downtown (historic core, arts-focused, contemporary, etc.), the use of differing shapes and materials for
portable signs is allowed, and signs that match or complement the architectural theme, age, materials, and
colors of the associated building are strongly encouraged. Acceptable forms may include but are not limited
to: a two-sided A-frame configuration; an upright single or two-sided structure with a weighted foot or pedestal;
a two- or three-dimensional shape or statue that provides hanging or fixed support for a flat message surface
message area; or a chalkboard or board of other material with a weighted foot or pedestal. The use of molded
plastic A-frame signs is not consistent with the character of downtown and is strongly discouraged. Because a
portable sign’s primary intent is to offer regularly updated details related to the business enterprise, like daily
meal specials, the information included on an A-frame sign must be more than identification of the
establishment. Such signs are intended to provide information to pedestrians, who may stop to take in the full
message, so these signs need to be located near the pedestrian entrance, and must not prohibit pedestrian flow
or safety around them. They may be displayed in front, and within twenty feet (20’), of the associated use’s
front door or front gate entrance. Where the associated use has a side or rear public entrance as well, then a
second portable sign of the same type, size, and location relative to side/rear door may be permitted. When
there is sufficient space between the wall of the building or use and the street right-of-way, then such portable
sign must be located behind the right-of-way line. When the building is located at the street right-of-way, the
portable sign may be located within the street right-of- way, provided the sign does not prohibit pedestrian
flow, block drivers’ visibility, and has approval from the Town or NCDOT, as appropriate. [formerly §
153.064.I]
I. MURALS. Murals may or may not be classified as signs based on whether they incorporate any advertising
message for contemporary establishments and/or contemporary merchandise/services. Even though not
technically signs, they are highly visible in the public realm. The Town Board of Commissioners has
determined it is advantageous to the community to establish the following design requirements for nonsign
mural placement within the downtown area. [formerly § 153.064(O)]
1. PURPOSE. To increase community identity and foster a unique sense of place in downtown
Matthews, murals are encouraged on buildings located within the Downtown Overlay District.
For the purpose of these requirements, murals are purely artistic forms of expression that do not
incorporate any advertisement for products, services or businesses. These forms of expression are
generally regulated on a content-neutral basis and no mural will be permitted that contains
language or design elements deemed offensive to the community.
2. REQUIREMENTS. No person shall paint a wall mural on the exterior of any structure or change any
existing mural on the exterior of any structure prior to the issuance of a wall mural permit. The
following design criteria shall apply to any mural artwork commissioned in the Downtown
Overlay.
a. The proposed wall mural shall be well integrated with the building and neighboring
structures and be harmonious with the surrounding environment. The proposed wall
mural, by its design, scale, construction and location, shall not have a substantial adverse
effect on abutting property or the permitted use, and will contribute to Matthews unique
character and quality of life.
b. The proposed wall mural shall exhibit exceptional design quality that enhances the
overall development and appearance of both the site and Downtown Matthews. The paint
and/or materials to be used and applied on the structure shall be appropriate for use in an
outdoor locale for an artistic rendition and shall be of a permanent or long lasting variety.
3. MAINTENANCE. Maintenance of the wall mural is the responsibility of the property owner. It shall be
the property owner’s responsibility to remove the wall mural if it is not maintained as required.
Graffiti shall be removed in accordance with the Graffiti Abatement Ordinance requirements for
graffiti removal in Chapter 94A. While natural aging is acceptable, murals that are not maintained
sufficiently may be considered a public nuisance.
4. ANTI-GRAFFITI COATING REQUIRED. An anti-graffiti coating shall be applied to all murals at the
time of installation and reapplied at intervals determined by the manufacturer.
5. PERMIT REQUIRED. A mural permit application shall be completed by the applicant and submitted to
the Town Planning office to be referred to the appropriate committee for review and approval. The
application shall include at aminimumthe intended location of the mural, size, subjectmatter,medium
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 18
and a summary of the general color palette to be used. A visual representation shall also be included
in the application. The responsible Town representative shall issue a permit upon finding that all
standards have been met.
(Am. Ord. 2279, passed 2-12-18)
155.608.15 Special Sign Corridors Created.
A. Certain geographic corridors exhibit, or have the potential of exhibiting, unique signage needs due to the
higher speed and high volume traffic generated by major highways. Special sign corridors may be established
with differing regulations from the rest of the jurisdiction in order to establish, enhance, and preserve the
property values and economic viability of such corridors. Such special sign corridors shall meet the
following:
1. The area shall follow on each side of a major highway carrying average daily traffic in excess of
thirty thousand (30,000) vehicles.
2. The boundaries set for the special sign corridor shall include only those properties whose visibility is
directly impacted by the major highway. These boundaries shall be established at the time the special
sign corridor is adopted, and the criteria for inclusion into the special sign corridor shall be clearly
defined.
3. The Board of Commissioners shall determine, upon recommendation by Planning Board, that the
corridor exhibits, or has the potential to exhibit, unique signage needs related to the speed and
volume of traffic which makes it different from other commercial or industrial corridors in the
jurisdiction. In making such determination, these findings should be made:
a. That the proposed special sign corridor will preserve or enhance the special character of
the corridor;
b. That the modifications to the sign regulations will follow the spirit and overall intent of §
155.608; and
c. That the provisions in the special sign corridor will not cause disturbance or economic
hardship to neighboring property outside the proposed district.
4. Regulations which may be modified shall take into consideration those factors causing the unique
signage needs, including but not limited to: horizontal distance of the affected property from the
major highway right-of-way, natural and man-made topography and road grade changes, road
overpasses and underpasses, limited access for drivers, the greater than normal length of road
frontage and/or building frontage along the major highway, the total building area covered by a
single use or group of uses on a property, and the average speed of vehicles traveling on the major
highway.
B. PROCEDURE FOR CREATING A SPECIAL SIGN CORRIDOR. The Planning Board, either on its own
determination or by request from the Board of Commissioners, shall prepare documentation satisfying the
review criteria listed in division (A) of this section and report its findings to the Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners may set a public hearing date to discuss the findings and receive public input.
Property owners in and adjacent to the proposed district shall be notified of the pending action by first class
mail. The special sign corridor shall become effective only after the Board of Commissioners makes
adequate findings, as listed in division (A) of this section, following the public hearing.
C. SPECIAL SIGN CORRIDORS LISTED. Special sign corridors are created for:
1. US 74/Independence Boulevard.
('72 Code, § 24-2115) (Ord. 477, passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord. 803, passed 3-
14-94) [formerly § 153.154]
155.608.16 Special Regulations for the US74/Independence Boulevard Sign Corridor.
A. The sign regulations for properties in the US74/Independence Boulevard corridor shall be the same as those
specified in the tables for the various zoning districts, at §§ 155.608.10 through 155.608.13, unless they can
meet one (1) or more of the special provisions given below. ('72 Code, § 24-2116)
The US74/Independence Boulevard sign corridor shall include: all properties fronting on Independence
Boulevard; and all properties immediately adjacent to (not across a public street from) properties touching
Independence Boulevard up to a maximum one thousand foot (1,000’) depth from the centerline of
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 19
Independence Boulevard right-of-way. When the boundary of the sign corridor splits a property, the
regulations of the sign corridor in division (A) of this Section shall apply to the whole parcel if more than
fifty percent (50%) of the principal building(s) is(are) located within the corridor boundaries. (Ord. 477,
passed 2-8-88; Am. Ord. 789, passed 10-25-93; Am. Ord. 803, passed 3-14-94; Am. Ord. 873, passed 9-12-
94)
B. US 74/INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD SIGN CORRIDOR.
1. For the US74/Independence Boulevard sign corridor, increased signage will be allowed for B-1, B-
3, B-H (Traditional or Parallel Traditional) districts, MUD, TS, ENT, and B-1SCD Conditional- Only
zoned properties with large single or individual tenant spaces, large acreage tracts, and buildings
set further away from the highway, as defined below.
a. Properties in the Independence Boulevard sign corridor which include a single-user
business greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area shall be
allowed attached and freestanding signage as shown on Table 1, § 155.608.15.B.5.
b. Properties in the Independence Boulevard sign corridor which are greater than five (5)
acres and developed for one (1) use, or for multiple users as a unified development shall be
allowed attached and freestanding signage as shown on Table 2, § 155.608.15.B.6.
c. Properties in the Independence Boulevard sign corridor with direct lot frontage on US 74
of at least one hundred feet (100’) and which have all principal buildings and/or uses
more than one hundred fifty feet (150’) from the near edge of the US 74 right-of-way
shall be allowed attached signage as shown on Table 3, § 155.608.15.B.7. Where the
right-of-way line is not a straight line across the lot width of the affected property, an
average right-of-way line will be determined for purposes of this § 155.608.15. It is not the
intent of this provision to encourage buildings to be set far off the highway with a large
intervening parking lot, but it is understood that some properties require a greater building
setback.
d. Properties in the Independence Boulevard sign corridor which include a single-user
business housed and actively conducting business in two (2) buildings each greater than
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet gross floor area shall be allowed attached and
freestanding signage as shown in Table 4, § 155.608.15.B.8. (Ord. 1376-A, passed 8-9- 04)
e. Indoor or outdoor public and commercial recreational facilities in the ENT District only
that can accommodate more than five hundred (500) persons at one time as participants
and/or spectators shall be allowed freestanding signage as shown in Table 5, §
155.608.15.B.9.
f. Properties in the Independence Boulevard sign corridor which meet more than one (1) of
the above categories shall be allowed the least restrictive (largest and/or tallest) set of
sign regulations for that property. It is not the intent of this section to permit the sign
regulations of Tables 1 through 5 to be combined, except that the provisions of Table 3
for attached signs may be used where appropriate along with the provisions for
freestanding signs in Tables 1, 2, or 5 when they also apply. (Ord. 1376-A, passed 8-9- 04)
2. In the US74/Independence Boulevard sign corridor, elevated monument signs are permitted where
freestanding signs greater than one hundred (100) square feet are allowed for B-1, B-3, B-H
(Traditional or Parallel Traditional) districts, MUD, TS, ENT, and B-1SCD districts. An elevated
monument sign is the combination of a freestanding sign and its raised base or background
support, which extends from and is directly attached to the ground, and whose base or background
support is generally solid, having no more than fifteen percent (15%) of its base or background
support pierced through and open, and provided the width of the base or background support is at
least eighty percent (80%) of the width of the message portion of the sign. The maximum width of
an elevated monument sign shall not exceed two times its height.
3. In the US74/Independence Boulevard sign corridor, super signs may also be permitted where
freestanding signs greater than one hundred (100) square feet are allowed within the ENT district.
Super signs are signs which identify a public assembly facility with a capacity of more than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) participants and spectators, for a single activity, such as a sports
stadium. Due to the regional significance and economic impact of the use, identification of the
facility may exceed sign area and height limits allowed elsewhere within the Town’s jurisdiction.
4. In the US74/Independence Boulevard sign corridor, off-premise directional signs may be allowed on
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 20
private property for parcels within the designated corridor without direct lot frontage on
Independence Boulevard or with less than thirty feet (30’) of lot frontage on Independence
Boulevard. Such directional signs shall be no larger than twenty four (24) square feet, no higher
than ten feet (10’), not placed on an artificially created berm, and shall be either a ground or post
sign. Any property in a B-1, B-3, B-H (Traditional or Parallel Traditional), MUD, TS, ENT, or B-
1SCD district may have a maximum of two such directional signs situated so as to direct traffic on
US74 to the most appropriate exit or driveway to the property. Such directional signs for multitenant
properties may list more than one business. Off-premise directional signs shall not be
located within any sight triangle, or within fifty (50’) of any other permanent sign on private
property. Any off-premise signs allowed by this provision shall be separated from one another by a
minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150’). The Town may provide wayfinding signs at appropriate
exit locations which would serve the same purpose, and then any identified use would not also be
eligible for this off-premise sign option within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the wayfinding
sign.
5. INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD SIGN CORRIDOR TABLE 1. Properties with single-users greater than
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (B-1, B-3, B-H,MUD, TS, ENT, AND B-1SCD DISTRICTS)
TYPE OF SIGN
NUMBER
PERMITTED
SINGLE USER
GROSS FLOOR AREA
(SQUARE FEET)
TOTAL MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET)
40,000–74,999 150
Freestanding identification or business (3) 1(1) (2) 75,000–99,999 200
100,000 and over 240
Attached identification only (4) 3 per use 20,000—39,999 135 (maximum 100
square feet on front of
building and 35 square
feet on side of building)
3 per use 40,000—74,999 150
1 unless
one or more
side(s) face
thoroughfare
75,000 and over 225 on front facade,
plus 150 on side
when side faces
thoroughfare
Attached business 2 per 40,000 and over 50, front facade only
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of §
155.608.7.C.
(2) Freestanding signs for multi-tenant properties are regulated by the provisions of § 155.608.7.A. See also
§ 155.608.9 regarding a master sign plan. The larger sign area provisions here may be applied only one
(1) time to a multi-tenant, joint freestanding sign when more than one (1) single-user on the property is
greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet GFA.
(3) Freestanding identification signs allowed under this table may be either ground signs or elevated
monument signs, not to exceed twenty feet (20’) in total height, and not located on an artificially created
berm.
(4) The maximum vertical dimension of attached signs shall not exceed six feet (6’).
(Ord. 2044, passed 10-13-14)
6. INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD SIGN CORRIDOR TABLE 2. Properties greater than five (5) acres (B-1,
B-3, B-H,MUD, TS, ENT, AND B-1SCD DISTRICTS)
TYPE OF SIGN
NUMBER
PERMITTED
LOT SIZE
(ACRES)
TOTAL MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET)
Freestanding identification or business (3) 1 (1) (2) 5.0–7.49 150
7.5–14.99 200
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 21
15.0 and over 240
Attached identification or business 3 per 5.0–11.9 100
establishment 12–23.9 100
24.0 and over 150
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of §
155.608.7.C.
(2) Freestanding signs for multi-tenant properties are regulated by the provisions of § 155.608.7.A. See also
§155.609 regarding a master sign plan. The larger sign area provisions here may be applied only one (1)
time to a multi-tenant, joint freestanding sign when more than one (1) single-user on the property is
greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet GFA.
(3) Freestanding identification signs allowed under this table may be either ground signs or elevated
monument signs, not to exceed twenty feet (20’) in total height, and not located on an artificially created
berm.
7. INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD SIGN CORRIDOR TABLE 3. Properties with principal structures/uses in
excess of one hundred fifty feet (150’) from US 74 right-of-way and minimum of one hundred feet
(100’) of frontage on US 74 (B-1, B-3, B-H,MUD, TS, ENT, AND B-1SCD DISTRICTS)
TYPE OF SIGN
NUMBER
PERMITTED
DISTANCE FROM
RIGHT-OF-WAY
(FEET)
TOTAL MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET)
150–299 150
Attached identification only 3 per establishment 300–499 225
500 and over 250
Attached business 2 per establishment 150–299
300 and over
na
50, front facade only
8. INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD SIGN CORRIDOR TABLE 4. Properties with single-users housed in two
(2) buildings, each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet (B-1, B-3, B-H,MUD, TS, ENT, AND B-1
SCDDISTRICTS)
NUMBER SINGLE USER IN TOTAL MAXIMUM
TYPE OF SIGN PERMITTED TWO BUILDINGS SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET) (SQUARE FEET)
Freestanding identification or
business(3)
1 (1) (2) 15,000 each
and over
150 (all freestanding signs
combined)
Attached identification only (4) 3 per building, 15,000 each 180 total; not to exceed 100 sqft on
6 total and over any of the buildings
Attached business 2 per building 15,000 each 100 - 50 per building
and over
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of §
155.608.7.C.
(2) Free standing signs for multi-tenant properties are regulated by the provisions of § 155.608.7.A. See also
§ 155.609 regarding a master sign plan. The larger sign area provisions here may be applied only one (1)
time to a multi-tenant, joint freestanding sign when more than one (1) single-user on the property is
housed in two (2) buildings each greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet GFA.
(3) Freestanding identification signs allowed under this table may be either ground signs or elevated
monument signs, not to exceed ten feet (10’) in total height, and not located on an artificially created
berm. (Ord. 1376-A, passed 8-9-04).
(4) The maximum vertical dimension of attached signs shall not exceed six feet (6’)
[formerly § 153.155]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 608 - 22
9. INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD SIGN CORRIDOR TABLE 5. Properties with indoor or outdoor public or
commercial recreation use that exceeds five hundred (500) person capacity (ENT DISTRICT ONLY)
TYPE OF SIGN
NUMBER
PERMITTED
CAPACITY OF
FACILITY/USE
(PERSONS)
TOTAL MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
(SQUARE FEET)
Freestanding identification (3) 1 (1) (2) 500 to 999 150 .
1,000 to 1,499 200 .
Attached identification 3 per building 500 to 749 150 .
(indoor use only) (4) 750 to 999 200 .
1,000 and over 225 .
Freestanding identification 2 per facility (5) 1,500 XXXXXX
and over
(1) Two (2) freestanding identification signs may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of §
155.608.7.C.
(2) Free standing signs for multi-tenant properties are regulated by the provisions of § 155.608.7.A. See also
§ 155.609 regarding a master sign plan. The larger sign area provisions here may be applied only one (1)
time to a multi-tenant, joint freestanding sign when more than one (1) single-user on the property has a
capacity of five hundred (500) or more persons.
(3) Freestanding identification signs may be either ground signs or elevated monument signs, not to exceed
ten feet (10’) in total height, and not located on an artificially created berm.
(4) The maximum vertical dimension of attached signs shall not exceed six feet (6’).
(5) Freestanding identification signs may be super signs, not to exceed XX sq ft in size, and XX feet in height,
and be located within the ENT District, either on-or off-premise, but within XX feet of its associated
facility.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 1
155.609. Outdoor Illumination
155.609.1. Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose and intent of this Outdoor Illumination Section to accomplish the following:
A. To encourage the use of lighting design practices and systems that will: i) minimize glare, light trespass
and light pollution; ii) conserve energy and resources while maintaining nighttime safety, security and
productivity; and iii) to curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment.
B. To establish clear and comprehensive outdoor lighting standards with an emphasis on reducing glare and
light trespass by requiring, in most circumstances, full cut-off (preferred) lighting fixtures.
C. To allow for outdoor lighting that is appropriate for the task and to establish light fixture height, wattage,
distribution and illumination limits that will help prevent light trespass to adjacent properties.
D. To establish specific standards for certain land uses that typically have unique lighting requirements, such
as (but not limited to) automotive dealerships, service stations, and outdoor sporting facilities.
155.609.2. Applicability
This outdoor lighting standard applies to any development, expansion or improvement within non-residential
districts and non-residential uses in residential districts, any multi-family housing or mixed development which
incorporates residential units, athletic fields, and the construction of parking lots where such developments include
the installation of new outdoor lighting fixtures or the replacement of existing lighting fixtures. All new construction
projects shall have enough exterior lighting to meet the minimum safety and security requirements of the ICC, the
National Electrical Code (NEC) and the North Carolina Building Code (NCBC) family of codes including the NC
Energy Conservation Code. The replacement of an existing lighting fixture is defined as a change of the type of
fixture; a change in the mounting height of a fixture on a pole, building, or other structure; or a change in the
location of a lighting fixture. All of these applications require compliance with this section. Routine lighting fixture
maintenance such as replacement of lamps, ballast, starter, photo control, or similar components will not constitute
the need to comply with this ordinance, and is permitted provided such changes do not result in a higher wattage or
higher lumen output.
155.609.3. Definitions
Direct Glare – The effect causing visual discomfort resulting from insufficiently shielded light sources in the field
of view.
Direct Illumination – Center of a beam, or main beam angle of a lighting fixture.
Fixture – A gas-powered, battery-powered, solar-powered or electrically powered device that is secured to a wall,
ceiling, pole, or post that is used to hold one or more lamps (or jets) and is intended to emit light.
Flood Light – Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate light output into a
directed beam in a particular direction.
Footcandle (FC) – A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto a given point, measured as one
lumen per square foot.
Full Cutoff Fixture – An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that it emits no light above
the horizontal plane of the fixture.
IESNA – The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a non-profit professional organization of lighting
specialists that has established recommended design standards for various lighting applications.
Initial (Burn-in) Illumination – The measured amount of illumination after approximately one hundred (100)
hours of burn-in time.
Lamp – The component of a luminaire that produces the light.
Light Source – The element of a lighting fixture that is the point of origin of the lumens emitted by the fixture.
Light Trespass – Effects of light that strays from the intended purpose and becomes an annoyance, a nuisance, or a
deterrent to visual performance. As such, light trespass should always be considered negative, unlike spill light,
which can have positive or negative attributes. Light trespass is the encroachment of light causing annoyance, loss
of privacy, or other nuisance.
Lumen – A unit of luminous flux.
Luminaire – A complete lighting system including a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 2
Maintained Illumination – The amount of illumination below which the light level is not supposed to fall
throughout system life measured at seventy percent (70%) of rated lamp life.
Mounted Fixture Height – The height of a complete fixture from the top point of any part of the fixture to the
ground directly below where the supporting pole or wall or other support structure meets the ground surface.
Outdoor Lighting – The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located
outdoors that produces light by any means.
Outdoor Performance Area – A facility other than a sports field or stadium predominantly or completely without
roofed structures intended for spectators to observe educational, recreational, or cultural programming, and where
tickets may be sold or fees collected for the activity. This may include but is not limited to an outdoor amphitheater,
an outdoor movie theater, or similar facility with seating around the perimeter.
Shielding – A design feature or a device that is applied to a luminaire to prevent its luminous output from being
visible from selected locations or horizontal and/or vertical angles.
Sky Glow – The brightening of the night sky that results from the reflection of radiation (visible and non-visible)
scattered from the constituents of the atmosphere (gaseous molecules, aerosols, and particulate matter), in the
direction of the observer. It comprises two separate components:
Natural sky glow – that part of the sky glow, which is attributable to radiation from celestial sources and
luminescent processes in the earth’s upper atmosphere.
Artificial sky glow - that part of the sky glow which is attributable to man-made sources of radiation (e.g., outdoor
electric lighting), including radiation that is emitted directly upwards and radiation that is reflected from the earth’s
surface.
Spill Light – Visible light (usually unwanted) which extends beyond the limit of the area which the light is intended
to illuminate.
Temporary Light – Any lighting fixture or instrument producing light that can be moved or relocated in a moments
notice.
Wall Pack – A type of light fixture typically surface-mounted on a vertical wall surface.
Watts – The measure of the amount of energy (electricity) an incandescent fixture uses. Lamps are typically rated
for efficiency by noting lumens per watt.
155.609.4. General Exemptions
The following lighting applications are exempt from the requirements of this section:
A. Emergency Lighting: Lighting required for public safety, in the reasonable determination of the inspection
official holding authority.
B. DOT Lighting: Department of Transportation highway signage luminaires, which must comply with federal
DOT standards.
C. Decorative Lighting: Low wattage fixtures (lamps under eight [8] watts or one hundred [100] lumens) used
for holiday decorations and annual civic events, or temporary or permanent building tubing fixtures which
follow architectural features on buildings.
D. Individual residential lighting that is not reviewed as part of a development plan.
E. Illumination being installed for temporary usage only, refer to § 155.609.10.G.
F. Municipal lighting installed within public rights-of-way, for the principal purpose of illuminating streets,
sidewalks, bicycle facilities, or multi-modal pathways within or adjacent to a public street, refer to §
155.609.10.H. No exemption shall apply to any lighting fixture located within a public right-of-way when
its purpose is to illuminate areas within or outside the right-of-way not directly associated with providing
safety for one or more modes of transportation by the general public.
155.609.5. Light Measurement Technique
Measurements shall be made at three feet (3’) above finished grade, with the light registering portion of the meter
held parallel to the ground, pointing up for horizontal readings (for spill light) and at the brightest light source for
maximum vertical light readings (for glare). The meter shall have an accuracy tolerance of no greater than plus or
minus five percent (5%). Measurements shall be taken with a light meter that has been calibrated within two (2)
years. Light levels are specified, calculated and measured in footcandles (FC), and should be taken after a one
hundred (100) hour burn-in time, which will more accurately register the lighting levels affecting the subject site and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 3
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
155.609.6. Outdoor Illumination Plan Required
Any development activity that proposes outdoor illumination shall include a detailed outdoor illumination plan as
part of the Landscape Plan submission. When no landscape plan would be necessary, an outdoor lighting plan shall
be submitted and approved prior to any permit for lighting installation. This outdoor illumination plan shall at a
minimum include:
A. Lighting fixture cut sheets for all exterior lighting fixtures such as: type of unit, color of unit, wattage of
unit, lumen output of unit, and the cut-off classification of the unit. Any lighting fixture requiring a pole on
which to be mounted shall include the pole specification, clearly stating the proposed pole height (including
concrete base).
B. A photometric (ISO foot-candle) site plan that shows typical foot-candle contours within all property lines.
The submitted lighting plan shall be in accordance with IESNA standards for uniformity, and show all
maximum/minimum and average/minimum light levels. Points of light shown on the plan shall be a
maximum of ten feet (10’) apart. The light grid diagram may show the locations a maximum of thirty feet
(30’) apart within that portion of a site which is designed for and utilized as an existing or proposed vehicle
loading or maneuvering area, outdoor storage area not accessible to the general public, or outdoor sports
fields, courts, pools, or similar facility, any of which covers three (3) acres or more in area. The scaled site
plan drawing shall show locations of all existing and proposed exterior lighting in relation to all property
lines, building outlines, parking and curbing, required preserved or new landscape areas, and above ground
storm water detention areas. If any proposed lighting fixture is indicated as being within close proximity to
an existing or proposed tree, or that an existing or proposed tree may partially or completely block light
from the fixture onto the intended surface, now or in the future, then a written explanation for the lighting
fixture location must be included.
C. When a phased plan is proposed such that one or more building sites may not be clearly determined or the
architecture of a building may not be confirmed, but grading or other land disturbing activity is proposed,
then a note on the lighting plan must be included to state this plan is a partial compliance document, and
must clearly indicate what is included here and what remains to be submitted at a future date.
D. When a single-family subdivision includes common areas such as common open space, pathways, parking
lots and clubhouses, a lighting plan as defined here is required as part of the preliminary plan review
process for any subdivision of land. See § 155.405.9.A. Proposed Conditions.
E. Plan certification by a licensed illumination professional holding the PE, LC or CLEP certification, or
similar certification that indicates proficiency in the design of outdoor illumination, a lighting
manufacturer, or the local electric utility. The designer shall verify the plans meet the Town’s design
requirements and illumination standards.
155.609.7. General Illumination Design Standards
A. All new lighting installations and renovations to existing lighting fixtures adjacent to a residentially zoned
or used property shall show the intent to limit horizontal light levels at property lines to one (1) footcandle
initial (burn-in) illumination. All new lighting installations and renovations to existing lighting fixtures
adjacent to a commercial property shall show the intent to limit footcandle (FC) levels at property lines to
two (2) footcandles initial illumination. In addition, vertical light readings shall not exceed one and one half
(1.5) FC at any point along the site perimeter. When the horizontal initial illumination level exceeds these
standards at any given point, then the average illumination level at the property line within fifty feet (50’)
of that point shall not exceed one (1) FC for adjacent residential or two (2) FC for adjacent nonresidential,
and a written explanation why the limit cannot be met shall be provided on the plan. The applicant shall
incorporate additional evergreen plant materials at the place where the perimeter lighting level exceeds the
given standards.
B. The maximum horizontal light level allowed at any point on a given parcel or property (with the exception
of automobile dealerships, service stations and sporting facilities) shall not exceed twenty (20) footcandles
initial. The minimum light level within any portion of a property, other than single-family residential,
which is intended to be utilized by residents, employees, customers or visitors shall be maintained at 0.50
footcandles. The maximum light level allowed at any point on an automobile dealership (display or parking
area) shall not exceed fifty (50) footcandles initial. The maximum light level allowed under a canopy on a
service station property shall not exceed thirty (30) footcandles initial. All outdoor sporting facilities shall
be illuminated to IESNA standards, with great care taken to minimize spill light at the property lines. Refer
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 4
to § 155.609.10.C for guidelines applying to outdoor sporting facilities.
C. All lighting fixtures rated one hundred fifty (150) watts (incandescent lamp or appropriate lumen
equivalent) or less may be used without restriction to light distribution (non-cutoff classification) except
when the luminaire creates direct glare perceptible to persons on a public right of way, or into the window
openings of a residential dwelling unit. Care should be taken to minimize light trespass across property
lines. Internal louvers or “glare shields” should be provided where the emitted light becomes a hindrance.
House side shields may also be effective in reducing light trespass.
D. All lighting fixtures rated between one hundred seventy five (175) watts and four hundred (400) watts
(incandescent lamp or appropriate lumen equivalent) shall be rated as a “full cutoff” type when placed in
the aiming position for which they are designed.
E. All lighting fixtures rated above four hundred (400) watts (incandescent lamp or appropriate lumen
equivalent) shall be listed as a “full cutoff” distribution only, and shall not emit any light above the
horizontal plane of the fixture when placed in the aiming position for which they are designed. With
exception of sporting facilities, the light source should not be visible (within reason) from adjacent
properties or the public street right-of-way.
F. All building wall mounted lighting fixtures, or wall packs, shall be of the full cutoff type.
G. All lighting fixtures illuminating building facades, steeples, trees, billboards, signs, flags, etc. (vertical
surfaces lighted from the bottom up) shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) watts (incandescent lamp or
appropriate lumen equivalent), with the exception of Department of Transportation highway signage
luminaires, which must comply with federal DOT standards. Lighting fixtures shall be selected, located,
aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the item being illuminated, and
away from adjacent properties and the public street right-of-way. Only US, State or local Government flags
may be lit with uplight.
H. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10’) from a property or right-of-way
line, and should be kept out of and at least two feet (2’) away from any required perimeter or streetscape
buffer, and tree save area. Where the required separation from a property or right-of-way line cannot be
achieved due to on-site improvements, a written explanation of the alternative spacing shall be included on
the plan drawing.
I. The layout of outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed so that the poles do not interfere with other
elements of the approved site plan such as trees, landscaping or parking. In general, poles shall be kept at
least twenty feet (20’) away from the trunk of any large maturing tree and at least ten feet (10’) away from
any small maturing tree. When a fixture is proposed near an existing preserved tree, the pole shall be no
closer to the trunk than ten feet (10’) from a small maturing tree or twenty feet (20’) from a large maturing
tree, or the tree’s root protection zone, whichever is greater.
J. All floodlights shall include top and side shielding, and be aimed at least forty five degrees (45o) below the
horizontal.
K. To eliminate unneeded lighting, exterior lighting systems are encouraged to include automatic timers,
dimmers, sensors, or similar controls that will turn off lights during daylight hours and when the site is not
occupied or open for business.
L. All fixtures and lamps shall be maintained in good working order, and replacement lamps and fixtures shall
match approved plans. Landscaping shall be maintained in a manner that does not obstruct security lighting
while not damaging or removing required landscape materials. Dark pockets on developed portions of any
site other than single-family residential should be corrected. The property owner and occupant shall be
jointly responsible for lighting system maintenance. The provisions of NCGS 136-32.2 shall also be the
responsibility of the property owner and occupants.
155.609.8. Special Design Requirements
The following criteria shall be followed for all outdoor lighting designs. Submission of lighting plans providing
documentation that all of the following applicable criteria are met is necessary for approval. When any of these
criteria cannot be met, or when sufficient documentation is not provided to clearly show compliance, then the
Planning Director may request further documentation prior to plan approval.
The maximum mounted fixture height (grade to top of fixture) for all ground mounted or building mounted lighting
fixtures, except those used for sporting facilities, shall be as follows:
A. Commercial and mixed use property – 32 feet
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 5
B. Residential property (single or multi-family) – 20 feet
C. Pedestrian pathways or sidewalks separate from road rights-of-way – 16 feet
D. Public right-of-way for non-transportation-related lighting (i.e., signs) – 16 feet
155.609.9. Prohibited Uses of Lighting
A. Unshielded flood lights, except for residential floodlights rated one hundred (100) watts (incandescent lamp
or appropriate lumen equivalent) or less, that are permitted but must be aimed towards the ground, and not
towards adjacent properties.
B. Unshielded lamps or fixtures, except those used for private residential swimming pools, hot tubs, semienclosed
decks or porches and similar accessory structures. See also § 155.609.7.C and G for further
standards.
C. Any flashing, moving, or twinkling within lighting fixtures. Changing of colors in architectural accent
lighting only may occur when each hue displayed is constant for a minimum of eight (8) seconds and the
change between colors is gradual, not immediate. Such fixtures shall be carefully aimed so as not to spill
over onto signs or other features.
155.609.10. Standards For Specific Uses
A. GAS AND SERVICE STATION CANOPIES
All lighting fixtures mounted on the underside of canopies must be “full-cutoff” classified, being either
completely recessed/flush in the canopy, or having solid sides on a surface mounted fixture (canopy edges
do not qualify as shielding).
The light source shall be metal halide, ceramic metal halide or LED.
Lighting levels under the canopy shall be no greater than thirty (30) footcandles. Areas outside the pump
island canopy shall be illuminated as to provide proper safety to customers, but shall be limited and not
exceed twenty (20) footcandles initial.
B. MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERSHIP STANDARDS
All lighting within a dealership display area shall be automatically reduced in light level by twenty five
percent (25%) after 11:00 PM or within one (1) hour after close of daily business, whichever is earlier, and
shall not return to full intensity before 8:00 AM.
Outdoor areas where nighttime motor vehicle sales activity takes place and where accurate color perception
of the vehicles by customers is required are allowed specific lighting level provisions. The display areas for
new and used vehicles available for sale which are accessible to the general public during business
operating hours shall not exceed fifty (50) foot candles. Other areas of the dealership property, such as
inventory storage or repair vehicle storage, which are not intended for vehicle display, shall be designed to
not exceed twenty (20) foot candles, although some portions within the site may slightly exceed this limit
due to close proximity to a display area.
C. GENERAL OUTDOOR SPORTING FACILITY/PERFORMANCE AREA LIGHTING STANDARDS
The mounting height of outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall not exceed
eighty feet (80’) from finished grade unless approved prior to construction by the Board of Adjustment
through a variance process.
All outdoor sports field and outdoor performance area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with the
manufacturer’s maximum glare control package (louvers, shields, visors or similar devices). The fixtures
must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing field or performance
area. Other on-site improvements, such as parking lots and concession or restroom facilities, should not
rely on lighting from the playing fields or performance area, but shall have separate lighting designed not to
exceed twenty (20) foot candles initial lighting levels when combined with any spill light from the fields,
and not create any areas of public access and use which are void of a minimum of 0.5 FC maintained while
the facility is open to the public.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 6
The hours of operation for the sports field lighting system for any game or event shall not exceed 8:00AM
to 11:00PM. An exception to this time limit may be granted for tournament play which has been weatherdelayed,
or when a tournament or production is scheduled in advance with a final game or program to occur
beyond 11:00 PM. The facility’s property owner and management/production authority for the tournament
or event are jointly responsible for providing notice of potential time extension to the Town Manager and
adjacent property owners/occupants. Written notice may be distributed to adjacent property
owners/occupants by first class mail postmarked forty eight (48) hours in advance or door hang tags at least
twenty four (24) hours in advance of the event. Written notice shall be provided to the Town Manager by
e-mail and first class mail postmarked forty eight (48) hours in advance of the event.
Lighting of playing fields or performance areas shall only be turned on when activity is scheduled and
occurring. When scheduled activities are completed prior to 11:00 PM, the field or performance area lights
shall be turned off (when egress lighting is separate) or reduced in light level by at least fifty percent (50%)
within one (1) hour after conclusion of play or other activity. When there are no scheduled activities at a
sports field or performance area, then the lighting of them shall not be turned on.
The security and egress illumination lighting systems may remain turned on for any amount of time
deemed necessary to remove people safely.
Light levels for sports field illumination shall comply with, but not exceed IESNA standards. Where new
sporting facility lighting is installed adjacent to an existing residential property, the intent shall be made for
all installations to limit property line light levels to a maximum horizontal level of three (3) foot candles
initial, and a maximum vertical level of one and one-half (1.5) foot candles at the property line of any
developed residential parcel. When not installed adjacent to a residential property, light levels at the
property line shall not exceed a maximum horizontal level of four (4) foot candles initial and a maximum
vertical level of two (2) foot candles at the property line of any developed parcel or right-of-way. All
possible means of shielding must be applied if this level has not been met. Owner must prove to the
appropriate permitting authority that these means have been exhausted, and the intent has been made to
meet these goals.
Additional landscape screening may be necessary at select locations in order to reduce spill light on
adjacent property. The lighting plan shall include a notation that the owner shall be responsible for
providing additional landscaping or other visual screening within nine (9) months of the verified light
readings at identified points along the property line which are in excess of intended limits. This additional
screening shall be approved as an amended landscape plan prior to installation.
D. STANDARDS FOR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS WITH MULTIPLE PARCELS
When a mixed use development exists or is proposed which would include two or more parcels sharing
infrastructure improvements such as driveway curb cuts, parking lots, dumpster enclosures, and internal
private drives, then the light level limits at interior perimeter property lines between nonresidentially used
parcels do not apply. All lots within the mixed use development which are not designed for exclusive
residential use and not bisected by a public street shall be treated as a single tract for purposes of perimeter
light levels. The light levels listed at § 155.609.7.A will apply to any property line within the mixed use
development adjacent to a public right-of-way or adjacent to any parcel zone or used exclusively for
residential purposes.
E. SECURITY LIGHTING
Outdoor security lighting should be designed to provide safety to a building occupant, while effectively
allowing proper surveillance, though not to exceed lighting levels described in § 155.609.7.A and B.
The use of motion sensors, timers, photocells or other means to activate lighting during nighttime hours is
required to conserve energy, provide safety, and promote compatibility between different land uses.
In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of spill light, all security lighting fixtures shall
be shielded and aimed so that the main beam is directed toward the ground or designated area where
security lighting is needed.
F. ARCHITECTURAL ACCENT LIGHTING
Lighting fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping or
art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall
be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill from the source in conformance with the luminaire standards.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 609 - 7
Accent lighting shall not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the façade onto
neighboring properties, streets or night sky.
US, State or Government flags may be illuminated from below provided such lighting is focused primarily
on the individual flag or flags, and to limit light spill into the night sky. These fixtures must conform with
§ 155.609.7.G.
G. TEMPORARY OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Any temporary outdoor lighting that conforms to the requirements of this section shall be allowed. Any
temporary lighting that does not conform to these outdoor lighting standards may be permitted after
considering: i) the public and/or private benefits that will arise from the temporary lighting; ii) any
annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of the temporary lighting, and iii) the duration of
the temporary nonconforming lighting. The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed
temporary outdoor lighting to the Planning Director for review and approval.
H. PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ROADWAYS
Where lighting is provided, all streets, sidewalks, bicycle facilities, and multi-modal pathways should be
sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of the street right-of-way and safety of pedestrians present in
the area.
Street lighting must be included on all new residential and commercial streets. In addition, street lighting
must be installed on the perimeter of the development along a thoroughfare or boulevard, as well as any
collector road.
For a new subdivision, a lighting layout and overall design is required in the subdivision design submittal
documents as a part of the preliminary plan review process. Lighting plan submittals shall include the
fixture, lamp, pole height and the method of shielding being used.
Subdivision developers are required to have the roadway lighting design approved by the Public Works
Department with design assistance from the appropriate power company, and shall then submit the
approved design to the power company prior to installing the assemblies. An accurate scale reference must
be included on all layout drawings.
When lighting is provided, private roads and drives, and public or private off-road pathways and greenways
shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure users’ safety and security.
All new lighting fixtures must be installed on new steel, fiberglass, aluminum, wood or concrete poles.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 1
Chapter 7. Public Improvement Standards
155.701. Streets [formerly § 152.30]
A. RIGHT-OF-WAY.
1. A proposed street right-of-way must be of
sufficient width to accommodate the
required cross section. However, the
right-of-way shall not be less than the
standards listed below unless allowed
through Flexible Design Provisions at §
155.401.7 or through a public
improvement variance outlined at §
155.712.
TABLE OF MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY
REQUIREMENTS
Street Type Feet
Freeway or Expressway (Class I) 3501
Limited Access Arterial (Class II) 2001
Commercial Arterial (Class III-C) 1501
Major Arterial (Class III) 1001
Minor Arterial (Class IV) 701
Collector (Class V) 602
Local (Class VI) 503
Local Limited (Class VI-L) 443
Alley 304
1 See § 155.701.B. and § 155.707.A.
2 See § 155.701.C.3. and § 155.707.A.6.
3 See § 155.707.A.7.
4 See § 155.707.A.8.
2. The Town Public Works Director, after consulting applicable plans and programs, and after
consulting with appropriate county, state and/or federal officials will be responsible for the
determination of the classifications of streets or segments of streets. These standards represent the
normally required rights-of-way. Additional right-of-way may be necessary in the area of
interchanges, intersections, cut/fill areas or areas where horizontal or vertical alignments must be
improved and will be determined on a case by case basis.
3. When a subdivider or developer elects to establish a roadway divided with a center strip or median,
the right-of way must be increased over the width given in the table above by the width of the median
and any curb and gutter adjacent to the median. See also § 155.701.D.
4. The Class VI-L street may only be used subject to the following conditions:
a. It serves no more than ten (10) dwelling units and does not exceed five hundred feet (500’)
in length.
b. All land which touches the street must be subdivided into lots or is otherwise platted so
that a further extension is not possible. [Formerly § 152.30(A)
B. ARTERIAL STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY (CLASS I, II, III, III-C, OR IV). Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided
or developed includes any part of an arterial street shown on the Comprehensive Transportation Plan and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 2
whenever such a right-of-way has been further defined by acceptable locational procedures sufficient to
identify properties to be affected, a right-of-way for the arterial street must be platted in the location and to
the width specified in the plan. The subdivider or developer is responsible for the dedication of the right-of
way up to one hundred feet (100’) (fifty feet (50’) on either side of the centerline) and the reservation of
greater right-of-way in accordance with the provision of § 155.707.A. The remainder of the minimum
required right-of-way over one hundred feet (100’) must be reserved and may be dedicated for future rightsof-
way use and must be shown as such on the final plat. All measurements involving minimum lot standards
under these regulations shall be made at the edge of the right-of-way whether dedicated or reserved and must
be shown as such on the final plat. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
1. FREEWAYS AND EXPRESSWAYS. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided or developed includes
any part of the proposed right-of-way as shown on Comprehensive Transportation Plan adopted by
CRTPO or adopted by the North Carolina Board of Transportation, and whenever those proposed
rights-of-way have been further defined by acceptable locational procedures sufficient to identify
property to be affected, the right-of-way for the freeway or expressway shall be reserved and remain
undeveloped pending future acquisition by the State of North Carolina or other governmental unit.
The subdivider or developer shall reserve the proposed right-of-way for a period not to exceed three
years from the date of obtaining the approval of the preliminary subdivision plat, after which the
land shall be considered as free of reservation. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
2. ADDITIONAL ROADWAYS. The provision of this section shall also apply to additional roadways that
are specifically approved for right-of-way protection by the Board of Commissioners. [Formerly §
152.30(B)]
C. DESIGN CRITERIA. The following criteria shall be followed for all improvements within or adjacent to public
streets in conjunction with any proposed rezoning, preliminary subdivision, expansion of an existing
development (40% or more increase in building square footage or outdoor use area), any new development,
or any redevelopment project. The provisions listed at § 155.405.4. shall also be utilized for these types of
projects, unless they clearly do not apply. (Am. Ord. 2059, passed 12-8-14)
1. STREET CONNECTIVITY. The purpose of this section is to support the creation of a highly connected
transportation system within the Town in order to provide choices for drivers, bicyclists, and
pedestrians; promote walking and bicycling; connect neighborhoods to each other and to local
destinations such as schools, parks, shopping, and service/employment centers; reduce vehicle
miles of travel and travel times; increase effectiveness of municipal service delivery; to reduce
response times for first responders; and free up arterial capacity to better serve regional long distance
travel needs. It is the intent of this Title to build streets that are integral components of community
design. Streets shall be detailed to complement neighborhoods and commercial centers and shall be
pedestrian in scale. In addition to these standards, streets shall conform to the provisions in this
Chapter 7. In certain situations, streets are encouraged to be designed with on-street parking.
Specific care shall be taken to buffer existing developments from substantial changes in street
classification. When existing Class VI streets are extended by new development, traffic calming
methods such as speed humps shall be considered to reduce potential increases in traffic speeds and
volumes.
2. COMPLIANCEWITH ADOPTED STREET PLANS. The street layout shall conform to the arrangement,
width and location of public streets indicated on the adopted Comprehensive Transportation Plan
(CTP), and/or small area plan that includes a street network layout, when one or more exists for the
area. Whenever a tract of land included within any proposed development plan embraces any part
of the street system as designated on the CTP or small area plan, the development shall be required
to dedicate and plat the right-of-way, and shall be responsible for the cost and the installation of the
improvements in accordance with the Town’s standards for roadways. Developments which
embrace only one (1) side of an existing or planned arterial or collector right-of-way will only be
required to dedicate and plat additional right-of-way for that portion of roadway on which the
development has frontage, and shall be responsible for the cost and the installation of the
improvements in accordance with the Town’s standards for roadways. When this Chapter calls for
reservation rather than dedication of larger arterial road rights-of-way, then reservation is required.
(Am. Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
3. COLLECTOR (CLASS V) STREETS. The determination for, and the designation of, a collector street
shall be based on the criteria below. New developments will be required to provide a collector street
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 3
to or at the outer perimeter boundaries of the development based on the criteria below. If the street
in question meets at least two (2) of the criteria, then the street must be built to an appropriate
collector street standard:
a. The street intersects directly with an arterial street (Class IV or higher) and provides access
to an area with an overall density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre, or provides access to
more than one hundred fifty (150) dwelling units.
b. The street by its general configuration, in relationship to the existing development of the
area, in effect serves a collector function.
c. The street extends into an undeveloped area in such a manner as to serve a future collector
function.
d. The street serves as primary access to a significant nonresidential, institutional, or
recreational land, as well as an access to a residential area of twenty (20) or more
acres.[Formerly § 152.30(H)]
4. VEHICULAR CONNECTIVITY.
a. STREET ARRANGEMENT. Streets should be designed and located so that they relate to the
topography, preserve natural features such as streams and tree growth and provide for
adequate public safety and convenience, and shall adhere to the approved CTP or small
area plan that includes a street network layout. Vehicular connections from adjacent
property (street stub-outs, temporary dead-ends) must be utilized unless the Public Works
Director deems the connection impractical due to topographic conditions, environmental
constraints, property shape or property accessibility.
Where a through street or a series of streets establishes a connection between two (2) public
streets, such street shall be a public street. A developer may submit written justification
that such connecting street(s) can appropriately function as a private street, including a
provision for funding and implementation of ongoing maintenance to be recorded at the
Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds (at time of final plat approval or prior to issuance
of grading permit where no plat is involved. This written documentation shall be reviewed,
and if it is found to be accurate and that no public access may be impeded if such street
segment(s) are not public, then it may be accepted by the Public Works Director, in
consultation with the Planning Director. Local public and private streets may incorporate
traffic calming devices. Streets should be designed so pedestrians have convenient and
safe means to cross streets. Allowable treatments may include, but are not limited to,
roundabouts, raised pedestrian cross walks, multi-way stops, bulb-outs, alternative
pavement treatments, and signals at cross walks when warranted. (Am. Ord. 2231, passed
6-12-17)
b. BLOCK LENGTH. Maximum block lengths inside proposed developments should be in
accordance with lengths shown in the following table. Short block lengths are strongly
encouraged in order to create a better pedestrian-scaled environment. The Public Works
Director may waive this requirement if it is determined that this requirement is impractical
due to topographic conditions, environmental constraints, property shape, or property
accessibility.
Block widths within neighborhoods should be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots except
where single tiers of lots will facilitate nonresidential development and the separation of
residential and nonresidential developments or the separation of residential developments
from arterials, railroad rights-of-way, linear greenways or parks.
MAXIMUM BLOCK LENGTH BY ZONING DISTRICT
R-20 R-15 O, B-3, I-1, I-2, B-1SCD R-12 R-9, R-MH, R-15MF, R-
12MF, R/I, R-VS, CrC, B-1,
B-H, B-D, SRN, C-MF,
MUD, TS, ENT
1100 FT 900 FT 800 FT 700 FT 660FT
HUC, AU
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 4
NA
NA = Not Applicable [Formerly 152.30(D)]
c. CONNECTIVITY INDEX. Within any new development project that includes new public
and/or private streets, a Connectivity Index shall be used to determine the adequacy of
street layout design. This is calculated as the ratio of the number of street links (road
sections between intersections) in the project's street layout divided by the number of street
nodes (intersections and cul-de-sac heads). For comparison purposes, a perfect grid has a
Connectivity Index of 2.0 or higher. The Connectivity Index for a conventional cul-de-sac
subdivision is often 1.0 or less.
Example 1 in the accompanying illustration exhibits a connectivity index of 1.18 (13 links
and 11 nodes). With minor additions to adjoining property, Example 2 in the
accompanying illustration exhibits a connectivity index of 1.45 (16 links and 11 nodes).
Any development shall be required to achieve a connectivity index as shown in the
following Table of Minimum Street Connectivity Index.
The Public Works Director in consultation with the Planning Director may assign
connectivity index reductions or bonuses for certain site-specific criteria. A reduction as
indicated in the table below may be granted if it is determined that more than sixty (60)
percent of any “side” of a development (4 sides total) faces impracticalities for connectivity
to adjacent properties due to the presence of controlled-access highways, railroad rightsof-
way, stream buffers, existing developments that have not provided street stub-outs for
connection purposes, or similar significant physical limitations. A bonus as indicated in
the table below may be granted where pedestrian and/or bicycle pathways/trails are
constructed to link any cul-de-sac to another street or cul-de-sac within the development
or to another pedestrian or bicycle facility at the exterior edge of the development. Street
links on existing adjacent streets that are not part of the proposed development are not
included in the connectivity index calculation.
Table of Minimum Street Connectivity Index.
MINIMUM CONNECTIVITY INDEX BY ZONING DISTRICT
R-20, R-15, R/I, I-1, I-2, B-3, R-12, R-9, R-MH, R-15MF, HUC, R-VS, CrC, SRN,
B-D, B-H, B-1SCD R-12MF, O, B-1, C-MF MUD, TS, ENT
0.85 0.95 1.3
16
15
14
11
9
12
8
7
10
1
2
3
4
13
5
6 11
12 9
8
7
10
1
2
3
4
13
5
6
(13 LINKS/11 NODES) = 1.18 CONNECTIVITY RATIO (16 LINKS/11 NODES) = 1.45 CONNECTIVITY RATIO
EXAMPLE 1 EXAMPLE 2
WHERE = NODE WHERE = NODE
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 5
AU
NA
NA = Not Applicable
REDUCTION BONUS
INDEX REDUCTIONS VALUE INDEX BONUSES VALUE
Controlled-access highway, railroad -0.05 Pedestrian or bicycle path +0.025
right-of-way, gated street, or adjacent (a minimum of 20 FT
developments with no street stub-outs easement with 8 FT path)
(temporary dead-ends)
McAlpine Creek, Four Mile Creek, -0.025 Pedestrian or bicycle access +0.05
or North Fork of Crooked Creek to other improved public use
stream buffer/any SWIM buffer 50’ amenity (park, plaza, etc.)
or wider
_______________________________________________________________________________
Extra-long street segment without any -0.025
intersecting street: >1,000ft in residential
area; >800ft in nonresidential or mixed
use area
d. CUL-DE-SACS. In general, permanent cul-de-sac streets and permanent dead-end streets are
discouraged in the design of street network systems, and they should be used only when
topography, the presence of natural features, and/or vehicular safety factors make a
vehicular connection impractical. Where cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets are unavoidable,
developments shall incorporate provisions for future vehicular connections to adjacent,
undeveloped properties, and to existing adjacent developments where existing connections
are poor. No system of multiple branching cul-de-sacs from a single junction within a
connected street network is permitted, unless the Public Works Director in consultation
with the Planning Director deems it unavoidable due to environmental constraints.
Any permanent dead-end streets or cul-de-sac shall comply with the length limits shown
in the following table, and shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end of the
street as set forth in § 155.707.C.5.
MAXIMUM CUL-DE-SAC LENGTH (1)
R-20, R-15, R-12, R-15MF, R-9, R-MH, I-1, I-2 R-VS, CrC, SRN, C-MF
R-12MF, R/I, B-1SCD
800 FT 700 FT 400 FT
O, B-1, B-3, B-D, B-H, MUD, HUC, TS, AU
ENT
250 FT NA
(1) Measured from center point of closest intersection to center point of turnaround
NA = Not Allowed
Reference to a “cul-de-sac” does not restrict design to the use of a fully-paved circular
turnaround area. See also §155.707.C.5. The design of a permanent turnaround may be a
circular area with or without a center island, a hammerhead or “Y” design, or other
alternative that will allow a typical motor vehicle using such dead-end roadway to make a
curved movement or multiple-point back and forth angles to turn the vehicle around. The
specific design of the turnaround area shall be approved by the County and Town Engineer.
When lots along a proposed cul-de-sac are adjacent to an undeveloped parcel, a
pedestrian/bike easement at least twenty feet (20’) in width shall be created from the culde-
sac to the adjacent property line for future connection. [Formerly § 152.30(E)]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 6
e. CLOSES AND OTHER ALTERNATIVES TO CUL-DE-SACS. Alternative designs, such as closes,
hammerhead turn arounds, and other configurations that allow vehicles to maneuver at the
end point to reverse direction may be approved on a case by case basis.
f. CROSS ACCESS. Traffic studies have shown that highly connected street networks provide
much greater traffic throughput and mobility for a community, at less cost. A high degree
of connectivity should occur not only at the level of arterials, but also on collector, local
and other secondary roads. Such connectivity vastly improves a street network's
performance. The street pattern should not force short trips of one (1) or two (2) miles
onto Class I or II roads; it should be possible to make trips of this sort by using collector
or other secondary streets. With a highly connected street network, cross-town trips should
be possible using fairly direct secondary roads.
All development in nonresidential and mixed use zoning districts shall be designed to allow
for cross-access to adjacent properties within these zoning districts to encourage shared
parking and shared access points on public and private streets. When cross access is
deemed impractical by the Public Works Director on the basis of severe topography,
environmental constraints or vehicular safety factors, and is not detailed by the CTP or any
small area plan which includes a street network layout, the requirement may be waived
provided that appropriate bicycle and pedestrian connections are provided between
adjacent developments or land uses. Development plans should provide a cross-access
easement and complete the connection if completing the link can derive an immediate
benefit. If no immediate benefit can be derived, development plans should provide cross
access and construction easements and arrange the site design so when the adjoining
property owner extends the connection to the property line, the link will be completed, and
a financial guarantee equivalent to the cost of construction on a per lineal foot basis in
current dollar value shall be provided to the Town. If the link is to be completed in the
future, the grade and angle of the connection, as well as the location of parking,
landscaping, and other improvements must be set at the time of development of the
premises to allow for reasonable and feasible extension into the adjacent property. (Am.
Ord. 2231, passed 6-12-17)
g. SECOND AND ADDITIONAL POINTS OF ACCESS REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS. At a minimum, a second point of open and functioning vehicular access
from the existing public street system (not a stub-out or a temporary dead-end) is required
for developments that exceed one hundred (100) residential units, and a third shall be
required for developments that exceed three hundred fifty (350) residential units. These
second and third points shall be open and functioning prior to the issuance of the 101st and
351st Certificate of Occupancy respectively for the development. The number of further
open and functioning vehicular access points shall be controlled and determined by the
development’s Town-approved Traffic Impact Analysis, described in § 155.701.C.9. If a
Traffic Impact Analysis should establish a higher standard for the number of open and
functioning vehicular access points from the existing public street system, the requirement
of the Traffic Impact Analysis shall prevail. These requirements shall not preclude a
development from also meeting the connectivity index required in § 155.701.C.4.c. For
purposes of this Section, a median-divided vehicular access point counts as a single
vehicular access point. This Section does not preclude any development from connecting
to existing street stubs and/or street stub right-of-ways abutting their property.
5. PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY. Pedestrian circulation and connectivity should be placed adjacent to
planned streets. All sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be designed to comply with the
standards in § 155.707.D. Pedestrian crossings shall be made safer for pedestrians whenever
possible by shortening crosswalk distance with curb extensions, reducing curb radii, and eliminating
free right-turn lanes. Traffic calming devices may be installed to help facilitate safer pedestrian
crossings.
Pedestrian walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes conflict between
pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances.
Pedestrian walkways shall connect building entrances to one another and from building entrances
to public sidewalk connections and existing or planned transit stops. All developments that contain
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 7
more than one building shall provide walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings and
to adjoining streets.
Multi-purpose paths may be used to enhance pedestrian and bicycle travel where the existing
vehicular circulation system does not serve these patrons well. The paths shall connect to the street
system in a safe and convenient manner. See also § 155.707.D.6.
6. BICYCLE CONNECTIVITY. Bicycle accommodations in the form of bike lanes, wide outside lanes or
shared lane markings should be incorporated in the design of all arterials and collector streets.
Sidewalks are not encouraged as substitutes for bike lanes, although multi-use paths at least ten feet
(10’) in width may replace standard sidewalk adjacent to streets. In addition, streets with bicycle
routes must incorporate a marked bike lane that shall be a minimum four feet (4’) in width
(excluding curb and gutter), or may utilize shared lanes with motorized vehicles when a Class VI
Local or Class V residential Collector street.
Nonresidential and mixed use developments shall provide appropriate bicycle amenities to
encourage cyclists. Signage indicating the presence of such amenities shall be scaled for easy
reading by bicyclists, pedestrians and motorists. Bicycle parking shall be provided according to the
requirements established in § 155.607.D.
Bicycle connections within and through all developments are encouraged and may also be designed
separate from on-street improvements. Off-street bicycle facilities may include bicycle-only
pathways or multi-use trails, and shall comply with the standards in §155.707.D.
7. DRIVEWAY ACCESS MANAGEMENT. Guidelines for driveway access points along non-local streets
and thoroughfares (Classes I and II when allowed, and Classes III through V) are as follows:
a. NUMBER OF DRIVEWAY ACCESS POINTS. While all lots or parcels are entitled to at least one
driveway on an adjacent public street, new development should minimize or eliminate
individual curb cuts along arterials. Where possible, vehicular access should be shared
with adjacent properties and/or alleys should be utilized for access. The artificial division
of a single parcel or development site to increase the number of access points is not
permitted.
All lots, parcels, or any other division of land adjacent to non-local streets may be allowed
driveways or street connections in accordance with the following, except where access is
otherwise limited or controlled.
PARCEL NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS
FRONTAGE ALLOWED
< 350 ft 1
351 – 600 ft 2
>601 ft 3
b. Special Provisions for Wide Street Frontage. Additional driveways may be possible on
properties with six hundred feet (600’) or more of street frontage, when there is a clear
need to provide separate access points for different types of traffic, such as emergency
vehicles, large tractor trailers, buses, and private passenger vehicles, to the same property,
and/or when topography or street configuration cause an insufficient sight distance for the
design speed of the roadway. When additional driveway locations are requested the
following elements shall be submitted jointly to the Town Planning Office, Town Public
Works Department, Mecklenburg County LUESA, and NCDOT (if applicable):
i. A written explanation of the need to separate different types of vehicular traffic
as it enters the site, including a description and anticipated number of different
types of vehicles entering and exiting the site, and the time of day any conflicts
may be anticipated;
ii. A written explanation with accompanying scaled drawing of the current road
configuration, outlining the design speed of the road, all public or private
vehicular access pints within three hundred feet (300’) of the proposed new
driveway location, any curve that creates a reduction in sight distance for drivers,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 8
any topographic changes, any groves of trees, buildings, signs, other structures,
or other visual impairments for traffic either entering or exiting the site which
would indicate the need for additional driveways;
iii. A description of the pavement material and cross section for construction of each
existing and proposed driveway;
iv. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of all existing and proposed
improvements to the site (building footprints, parking lots, curb lines, trash
dumpster location, signs, landscaping, detention facilities, etc.); any public or
private driveways, streets or curb cuts (used or unused) within three hundred feet
(300’) of the site; location of any off-site structures, landscaping, etc., that may
cause a reduction in sight distance; and topography lines at ten foot (10’) intervals
minimum, or four foot (4’) intervals if visibility is indicated as restricted due to
existing land contours or proposed grading.
A request for any additional driveway shall be jointly submitted to the Town Public Works
and Planning offices, Mecklenburg County LUESA, and NCDOT (if applicable). If all
involved agencies determine the need has been accurately defined, then a driveway permit
for such additional driveways will be allowed. [Formerly §153.096(A).]
c. LOCATION OF DRIVEWAY ACCESS POINTS ON NONLOCAL (CLASS V OR HIGHER)
ROADWAYS.
i. No driveway may be located within fifty feet (50’) of the corner of two
intersecting streets.
ii. No driveway may be located at the road right-of-way within twenty feet (20’) of
any property line for any nonresidential or multi-family uses.
iii. For any nonresidential or multi-family uses, if a driveway exists on an adjoining
lot, no new driveway may be located at the road right-of-way within forty feet
(40’) of the existing driveway either on that lot or an adjoining lot except where
both property owners agree to have a single driveway for joint usage.
iv. Driveways for detached single-family, two-family/duplex, or single-family
attached uses shall be located at least ten feet (10’) from a property line at the road
right-of-way.
v. Within the Downtown Overlay, the twenty foot (20’) distance from a property
line may be reduced when a parcel’s lot width is insufficient for a driveway to be
placed completely to the side of a building (existing, expanded, or new) when the
building’s front wall dimension parallel to the street is at least forty five percent
(45%) of the lot width, and the lot width is less than one hundred feet (100’). Any
request for reduction of this provision shall be written on the parcel’s Downtown
Overlay compliance site plan, and shall be approved as a part of the Downtown
Overlay plan, subject to approval by the Town Engineer, Mecklenburg LUESA
and NCDOT (if applicable). [Formerly §153.096(C)]
d. EMERGENCY ACCESS DRIVEWAYS. Emergency access driveways may be created when
such locations will allow for a necessary alternate access into a site specifically included
as part of approved zoning conditions in a Parallel Traditional or Conditional-Only zoning
district. Emergency access driveways may be paved within the right-of-way, when
required by NCDOT on state maintained roads. Emergency access driveways shall
primarily use a solid subsurface with natural cover, such as concrete porous blocks
subsurface and grass cover, and may be crossed with a removable or breakaway barricade,
gate, bollards, or other method to prevent general public use. Where a gate is employed, it
shall meet the Town’s Gated Communities Ordinance. [Formerly § 153.096(D)]
e. DRIVEWAY PERMIT REQUIRED. Any person desiring to construct a driveway or other
connection within the right-of-way of a public street must secure a permit prior to start of
construction. Failure to secure a permit prior to construction may result in the removal of
the improvements at the expense of the property owner and/or developer, and may result
in the denial of access at that location. All driveways must conform to design and
construction standards established by the Town and NCDOT if applicable. Nothing in this
section exempts any person from complying with any regulations or requirements of the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 9
state regarding driveway connections to state maintained roads, nor does compliance with
all state regulations exempt any person from the provisions of this section. In cases where
these regulations may overlap or conflict, the more restrictive provision shall control. The
granting of a driveway permit by the Town Public Works Department does not insure the
granting of a state permit; however Mecklenburg LUESA will evaluate all applications
under both sets of regulations and advise the applicant if a problem exists which may result
in the rejection of the request. [Formerly § 153.096 initial paragraph and § 153.096(F)]
8. MEDIAN CROSS-OVER SPACING. Crossovers along median divided streets Class IV and higher
should be spaced no closer than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’). For all other streets, the
spacing should be no closer than six hundred sixty feet (660’). In general, if the left turn lane storage
requirements for adjacent intersections overlap, the minimum spacing shall be increased to provide
adequate left turn lane storage in both directions. Where the NCDOT Driveway Manual or Median
Crossover Guide conflicts, the stricter of the two standards should prevail.
9. TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS. The Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) is a specialized study that evaluates
the effects of a development’s traffic on the surrounding transportation infrastructure. It is an
essential part of the development review process to assist developers and government agencies in
making land use decisions involving subdivisions, rezoning, site plan reviews, expansions of
existing development, and other development reviews. The TIA helps identify where the
development may have a significant impact on safety, traffic and transportation operations, and
provides a means for the developer and government agencies to mitigate these impacts. Ultimately,
the TIA can be used to evaluate if the scale of development is appropriate for a particular site and
what improvements may be necessary, on and off the site, to provide safe and efficient access and
traffic flow.
a. THRESHOLD FOR TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS. A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) is required
for any proposed rezoning, preliminary subdivision, expansion of an existing development,
or site plan, if the nature of the proposed rezoning or development is such that the number
of trips it can be expected to generate equals or exceed one hundred fifty (150) new peak
hour trips. Trips are those occurring on peak days on the adjacent roadway(s). Trip
generation shall be measured based on the current edition of the Institute for Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. In the case of a plan review submittal where the
uses are not known, trip generation calculations shall assume the permitted use that
generates the highest number of peak hour trips or a likely mix of uses as identified by the
applicant and accepted as appropriate by the Public Works Director.
A TIA shall also be required if the proposed development activity is for, or could
accommodate, fifty (50) or more dwelling units, or for any nonresidential use meeting one
or more of the following: covering more than two (2) acres; including more than three (3)
building lots; providing an assembly area for more than four hundred (400) persons;
involving office or sales floor area over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; within one
hundred fifty (150) lineal feet of any intersection of two (2) designated thoroughfares;
within five hundred (500) lineal feet of any public road intersection currently operating as
a Level of Service D or E; and/or involving service or delivery vehicles in excess of one
(1) ton. Where a proposed development site undergoing review does not identify specific
proposed uses and/or buildings, the applicant must identify the capacity of the property to
be used for any of the above situations. it is determined that a new project’s traffic will
substantially affect an intersection or a roadway segment already identified as operating at
a failing level of service, that a project may create a hazard to public safety, or that a project
will substantially change the off-site transportation system or connections to it.
b. A multimodal analysis may also be allowed or required, when a proposed development
meets any of the following: includes one or more uses that complement each other and
could be commonly expected to generate cross use, such as residential uses and daily
commercial activities, or offices and food services, etc.; has development site(s) totaling
two (2) acres or more which may be developed; is located along one or more nonlocal
streets (Class V or higher) where sidewalk and/or bike facilities are or are planned to be
located; is located adjacent to one or more parcels which are designated on an approved
pedestrian or bicycle plan or CTP for some pedestrian or bicycle improvements; if any
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 10
portion of the development site is located within one quarter (1/4) mile of a bus or transit
stop; if the development site will connect to an existing or planned residential development.
A multimodal analysis shall at a minimum include an estimate of the persons which could
logically be assumed to walk or bicycle internally in the development site and from within
the development site to a location beyond the boundary of the development site. This
estimated count may be broken down into appropriate age groups and between modes of
nonmotorized transit. The Plan Review Committee, at the Presubmittal Conference, shall
determine if a multimodal analysis is desirable or required.
c. DETERMINATION OF SCOPE. The applicant shall arrange for a Presubmittal Conference,
which may be in person or via conference call with digital connection for display and
delivery of documents, to discuss the rezoning or development project with the Plan
Review Committee, and NCDOT when appropriate, and the developer’s traffic engineering
consultant. The applicant shall supply the following information for consideration and
discussion at or prior to the Conference: traffic analysis base information, site location map
and all intersections within one quarter (1/4) mile of the site, any bus or transit stops or
daily bus routes within one quarter (1/4) mile of the site, site layout, data on existing and
proposed land uses, projected timing of construction and build-out year, and description of
project. The Presubmittal Conference will determine the appropriateness and extent of the
individual TIA and/or multimodal analysis requirements as outlined here for each project.
An applicant may request a waiver of the TIA by providing documentation at the
Presubmittal Conference that the amount of newly generated traffic would not be of
sufficient volume to warrant a full traffic study. If all participants at the Conference concur,
the TIA may be waived.
10. PUBLIC STREETS. The criteria listed in the following table shall be the minimum requirements for
streets intended to be dedicated to the Town for maintenance. Where streets may be accepted for
maintenance by NCDOT, and NCDOT has adopted different criteria, the more restrictive standards
shall be utilized.
CLASSES VI & VI-L CLASS V
Level* Rolling Hilly* Level* Rolling Hilly*
a. Terrain Classification 0-8% 8.1-15% 15%+ 0-8% 8.1-15% 15%+
b. Minimum Sight Distance (ft.) 200 150 110 250 200 150
c. Maximum Grade 6% 10% 12% 4% 8% 10%
d. Minimum Radius (ft.) 250 150 90 350 250 175
e. Minimum Tangent Between
Reverse Curves 50 50 50 100 100 100
f. K Values (crest/sag) 28/35 20/20 15/20 45/45 28/35 20/20
11. INTERSECTIONS: The criteria listed in the following table shall be the minimum requirements for
streets intended to be dedicated to the Town for maintenance. Where streets may be accepted for
maintenance by NCDOT, or would intersect NCDOT streets, and NCDOT has adopted different
criteria, the more restrictive standards shall be utilized.
Level* Rolling Hilly*
a. Terrain Classification 0-8% 8.1-15% 15%+
b. Clear Sight Distance (feet) 35 35 35
c. Vertical Alignment within
50 feet of intersection 1% 3% 4%
d. Minimum Angle of Intersection 75o 75o 75o
e. Minimum Curb and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 11
Right-of-way radius (ft.)
i. Classes VI & VI-L 20 20 20
ii. Class V 30 30 30
f. Minimum Street Offsets for
Adjacent Intersections (ft.)
i. Classes VI & VI-L 125 125 125
ii. Classes V 200 200 200
*Use of level or hilly terrain criteria not permitted without prior approval of the Town Engineer and
Mecklenburg County LUESA. [Formerly § 152.30(C)]
12. ARTERIAL STREET (CLASS IV AND HIGHER) DESIGN CRITERIA. Design Criteria for arterial streets
shall be established by Mecklenburg County LUESA on a case by case basis using the latest edition
of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) A Policy
on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and/or NCDOT Roadway Design Manual and any
local design policies. [Formerly § 152.30(C)(3)]
13. INTERSECTION CORNER. A minimum thirty five feet (35’) by thirty five feet (35’) sight triangle
(measured along right-of-way lines) shall be provided at each intersection corner. An additional ten
feet (10’) by seventy feet (70’) sight triangle shall be provided at intersections connecting to
NCDOT maintained roadways. Additional sight distance requirements may be required by the
NCDOT or the Town of Matthews. Commercial drives connecting to public streets shall be
designed in accordance with the NCDOT "Policy on street and driveway access to N.C. Highways"
and/or the Town of Matthews requirements as provided in the Mecklenburg County Land
Development Standards Manual, as applicable. [Formerly § 152.30(C)(4)]
D. ROADWAY DIVIDED BY A CENTER STRIP.
1. Where a subdivider or developer elects to establish a roadway divided with a planted center strip,
the median shall be at least five feet (5’) wide when intended to be permeable and may accommodate
storm water detention facilities. The roadway on either side of the median may incorporate curb
and gutter with occasional breaks for storm water inlets, or may be designed without interior raised
curbs, when approved by Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Engineer as necessary for proper flow
of storm water. Streets with planted center medians may be designed to direct surface water runoff
to the center median. The roadway pavement, width, outside curbs, bicycle and pedestrian facilities
adjacent to a center median shall be at least equal to the required cross section design for the
designated street type from centerline out. (See the Mecklenburg County Land Development
Standards Manual for details.)
2. A subdivider or developer may elect to incorporate a narrow center strip which serves to limit or
prohibit crossover traffic movement through employment of a raised barrier (curb) or paved median
of any width. The center median shall not have any permeable materials, planting beds, or surface
drainage improvements. Inlets and subsurface drainage facilities may be allowed. [Formerly §
152.30(A)(4)]
155.702. Lots [formerly §152.31]
A. FRONTAGE ON STREETS. Each lot shall have frontage on a street except where allowed by this Title. However,
lots designed for one-family attached dwellings need not front on a street provided that all portions of the
dwelling unit proposed for those lots shall be located within three hundred feet (300’) of a public street that
furnishes direct access to the property and that access to each lot be made available via either a public rightof-
way or a private vehicular or pedestrian way owned by the individual lot owner in fee or in common
ownership. Lots designed for cottage cluster housing developments need not front on a street, provided that
the overall development site has frontage on a street and that access to each dwelling unit is made available
via either a public right-of-way or a private vehicular or pedestrian way owned by the individual lot owner
in fee or in common ownership.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 12
B. SIDE LINES. Side lot lines shall, as nearly as practicable, be at right angles to or radial to street lines. Where
side lot lines intersect at the rear of the lot, the angle of intersection shall not be less than sixty degrees (60o).
C. MINIMUM SIZES. Lots shall meet the required widths, depth and area requirements of this Title when they are
provided for the applicable zoning district.
D. LOTS SUBJECT TO FLOODING. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 9 Floodplain Regulations, lots that are
subject to flooding shall not be established in subdivisions for the purpose of creating building sites except
as provided in this paragraph. Lots shall be construed to be subject to flooding when a flood crest recurring
with a probable frequency of one (1) time in one hundred (100) years would inundate any part of a proposed
lot. If any part of a proposed lot is subject to flooding, the subdivider shall make a determination of the crest
elevation of the flood expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, of one (1) time in one hundred
years (the "100 year flood") in accordance with generally accepted engineering practice, which is to be
submitted with the seal and signature of a professional engineer to Mecklenburg County LUESA. This
determination must reflect the actual conditions imposed by the completed subdivision, and must give due
consideration to the effects of urbanization and obstructions. No proposed building lot that is subject to
flooding shall be approved unless there is established on the final plat a line representing an actual contour
as determined by field survey, at an elevation one foot above the one hundred (100) year flood crest. Such
line shall be known and identified on the final plat as the "Building Restriction Flood Line." All habitable
buildings or structures shall be located outside the Building Restriction Flood Line. All lots subject to
flooding as defined here may be approved only if there will be available for building a usable lot area of not
less than two thousand (2,000) square feet. The usable lot area shall be determined by deducting from the
total lot area the area of all yards and setbacks required by the applicable zoning district regulations and any
remaining area of the lot lying below the building restriction flood line. During the construction of a
subdivision, the developer shall maintain the stream bed of each stream, creek or backwash channel
contiguous to the subdivision in an unobstructed state and shall remove from the channel and banks of the
stream all debris, logs, timber, junk and other accumulations of a nature that would, in time of flood, clog or
dam the passage of waters in their downstream course. Installation of appropriately sized storm water drains,
culverts, bridges or erosion control devices will not be construed as obstructions in the stream. The developer
shall take all necessary measures to stabilize the stream bed at end of construction.
155.703. Street Name Signs and Barricades [formerly § 152.32]
A. Standard street name signs shall be installed at a minimum at one corner of all street intersections. The
design, material, location, and installation of the signs shall be in accordance with standards specified by the
Town Public Works Department.
B. Barricades shall be installed at the end of all dead-end streets, except cul-de-sacs which have been improved
with permanent turnaround as required by this Chapter 7. These barricades shall have a minimum length of
twenty-five (25) feet, plus end sections. Design, material and installation of the barricades shall be in
accordance with standards as specified in the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual.
Reflectorized material shall be placed on the barricade in accordance with the standards.
155.704. Design Standards for Storm Water Collection and Drainage
155.704.1 Design Standards for Storm Water Provisions on All Development Projects
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to control the peak flow of less-common storm events and should
be used in conjunction with Chapter 8, the Post Construction Ordinance, and/or SWIM buffer provisions in
§ 155.704.2, when they also apply, to any parcel of land.
B. PLAN REQUIRED. No development or use of land that involves or would create more than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of impervious groundcover shall be permitted without the submission and approval of a
storm water management plan. Division of a parcel on or after July 10, 2000 into two (2) or more parcels
that, when combined, would create impervious surface areas of twenty thousand (20,000) or more square feet
shall be required to provide a storm water management plan for the combined total built-upon surface. No
certificates of occupancy or building permits for such development shall be issued until the storm water
management plan is approved by the County Engineer and/or Town Engineer, whichever is appropriate.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 13
Built-upon ground cover in existence prior to July 10, 2000, and not altered or removed after that date, shall
not be used in measuring the twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
C. CONTENTS OF A STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. The storm water management plan shall include: a site
plan showing existing and proposed buildings or other built-upon impervious surfaces; existing on-site and
adjacent storm water drainage facilities; site construction plans, grading plans, and proposed storm water
management system; and any other appropriate information requested by the Town Engineer or Mecklenburg
LUESA. Storm water facilities shall be required to control the peak runoff release rate for both the two (2)
year and ten (10) year six (6) hour storms, with an emergency overflow capable of safely discharging flow
from the fifty (50) year twenty four (24) hour storm event. All storm water management systems shall
conform to the standards and specifications as provided in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Storm Water Design
Manual (latest revision), Charlotte-Mecklenburg BMP Design Manual (latest revision), Mecklenburg County
Land Development Standards Manual (latest revision), or the more restrictive of any standards that conflict.
D. PLAN APPROVALS. Neither the Town Engineer nor Mecklenburg LUESA shall approve a storm water
management plan if the built-upon ground cover proposed in the plan would increase the peak level of the
storm water runoff from the site for both the two (2) year and ten (10) year six (6) hour storms, unless the
storm water management plan identifies measures to control and limit runoff to peak levels as detailed in §
155.704.1.C. no greater than would occur from the site if left in its existing condition. Furthermore, if
documented downstream flooding concerns exist, the storm water management plan shall not be approved if
the built-upon ground cover proposed in the plan would increase the peak level of the storm water runoff
from the site for both the two (2) year and ten (10) year six (6) hour storms, or less common storms at the
discretion of the Town Engineer or Mecklenburg LUESA, unless the storm water management plan identifies
measures to control and limit runoff to peak levels for such storms no greater than would occur from the site
if left in its natural, undeveloped, good condition; or, if currently undeveloped, its existing condition.
E. Requirement waiver. The Town Engineer may waive any requirements under this section when storm water
from the site would drain via an approved, permanent easement recorded at the Mecklenburg County Register
of Deeds, or directly to a FEMA flood plain when within the same parcel of land. A written request for waiver
shall be submitted to the Town Engineer which must be supported by a downstream flood analysis using the
criteria specified in Chapter 3, Section 5 of the Charlotte-Mecklenburg BMP Design Manual (latest revision).
In order to grant a waiver, the Town Engineer shall determine that the supplied flood analysis provides
sufficient documentation that a waiver of storm water detention will not create increased flooding potential
at, above, or below the subject location.
F. Conflict of Laws. This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or
other provision of law, including the Post Construction Ordinance. The requirements of this section are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where
any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective
standards for human or environmental health, safety, and welfare shall control.
G. Inspections. Inspections shall be in accordance with the procedures outlined in § 155.710. [Formerly §
153.101]
155.704.2 Design Standards for Surface Water Improvement and Management (SWIM)
Buffers [formerly § 152.33]
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of a stream buffer network is to ensure that the stream and adjacent lands will fulfill
their natural functions. Stream systems are comprised of the stream and their drainage basins. Streams have
the primary natural functions of conveying storm and ground water, storing floodwater and supporting
aquatic and other life. Vegetated lands adjacent to the stream channel in the drainage basin serve as a "buffer"
to protect the stream system's ability to fulfill its natural functions. Primary natural functions of the buffer
include:
1. Protect water quality by filtering pollutants;
2. Provide storage for floodwaters;
3. Allow channels to meander naturally; and
4. Provide suitable habitats for wildlife.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 14
B. APPLICABILITY.
1. All properties shall comply with the buffer requirements of this Section except those which, as of
the effective date February 14, 2000, have previously secured a right to proceed by:
a. Being subject to a recorded subdivision plat;
b. Being subject to a preliminary subdivision plan approved by the Board of Commissioners
prior to the effective date of this Section;
c. Having otherwise secured a vested property right under state law.
2. Redevelopment or expansion of structures, uses, or other development projects included in §
155.704.2.B.1 above, shall comply with the buffer requirements of this Section; however uses and
structures previously approved and constructed in a buffer may remain.
3. A site specific development plan amended by action of the Board of Commissioners subsequent to
adoption of this Section shall comply, in its amended form, with the SWIM buffer requirements,
however uses and structures previously approved for construction in a buffer may remain.
C. BUFFER STANDARDS
1. BUFFER DESCRIPTION. Buffer function, vegetation and use vary according to the different buffer
zones and are described in the following table.
TABLE OF BUFFER TREATMENT BY BUFFER ZONE
Stream Side Zone Managed Use Zone Upland Zone Notes
-----
Provide natural filter;
Function Protect the integrity provide distance between Prevent encroachment
of the ecosystems upland development and and filter run-off
the streamside zone
-----
Limited clearing (no
UNDISTURBED grading). Existing tree Herbaceous ground (1)
(no cutting, clearing density must be retained cover, including grass,
Land or grading). If to a minimum of 8 is allowed; maintenance
Disturbance/ existing tree density healthy trees of a of existing forest or
Vegetative is inadequate minimum 6-inch caliper reforestation is
Requirements reforestation is per 1,000 square feet. If encouraged
required. existing tree density is
inadequate, reforestation
is encouraged.
-----
VERY RESTRICTED RESTRICTED RESTRICTED
Permitted uses limited Permitted uses limited Permitted uses limited
to flood control to those allowed in the to those allowed in (2)(3)
structures and bank Stream Side Zone, as Stream Side Zone and
stabilization (where well as bike paths and Managed Use Zone, as
Uses permitted) as well as greenway trails up to well as gazebos, noninstallation
of parallel 10 feet in width commercial storage
or near parallel (>75o) buildings less than 150
water and sewer square feet, limited
utilities and near grading that does not
perpendicular road change the functionality
crossings (>75o)with or extent of the floodplain,
stabilization of and storm water structural
disturbed areas as best management practices
specified in § 155.704.2.E. (BMPs) if approved in
accordance with §
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 15
155.704.2.F.2. as a
condition of a buffer
width variance
-----
Notes:
(1) When reforestation of disturbed buffers is required, tree planting shall be as specified in the
Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual (§s 40.01, 40.02, and 40.03 or as
revised).
(2) Fill material cannot be brought into any required buffer. In the Upland Zone only, limited
grading that does not change the extent or functional characteristics of the floodplain is
permitted. Uses permitted in the buffer zones should be coordinated to ensure minimal
disturbance of the buffer system. For example, if it is necessary to install utilities within the
buffer, then if greenway trails are built they should follow these cleared areas instead of
necessitating additional clearing.
(3) Notwithstanding the uses and structures permitted in the "Upland Zone", the stricter standards
of floodway regulations, if applicable, shall apply.
2. MINIMUM BUFFER WIDTHS. Minimum stream buffer widths vary based on the size of the upstream
drainage basin, as described in the following table. Mecklenburg County's Geographic Information
System will locate streams and delineate the size of drainage basins associated with each.
TABLE OF MINIMUM BUFFER WIDTHS BY BASIN SIZE AND BUFFER ZONE
Area Stream Side Managed Use Upland Total Buffer
Designation Zone Zone Zone Width each Notes
Side of Stream
>640 acres 30 feet 45 feet Balance of Floodway (1)(2)
floodway PLUS PLUS 100% of
100% of flood flood fringe, but
fringe, but no no less than
less than 25 feet 100 feet
>300 acres 20 feet 20 feet 10 feet 50 feet (1)
>50 acres 20 feet None 15 feet 35 feet (1)
Notes:
(1) Buffer widths are measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the surface water, landward
from the top of the bank on each side of the stream.
(2) Floodplain and buffer calculations will be based upon the flood fringe and floodway
encroachment lines, as locally adopted and as may be amended from time to time.
3. DIFFUSE FLOW REQUIREMENT. Diffuse flow of runoff shall be maintained in the buffer by
dispersing concentrated flow and reestablishing vegetation. Techniques for providing diffuse flow
are specified in the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 16
a. Concentrated runoff from ditches or other manmade conveyances shall be diverted to
diffuse flow before the runoff enters the buffer.
b. Periodic corrective action to restore diffuse flow shall be taken by the property owner as
necessary to impede the formation of erosion gullies.
4. PONDS. Ponds that intersect the stream channel shall have the same buffers as the original stream
measured from the top of the bank of the pond. Buffer requirements do not apply to wet ponds used
as structural BMPs.
5. BUFFER DELINEATION. The following buffer delineations are required:
a. Stream and buffer boundaries including all buffer zones must be clearly delineated on all
site specific plans for Board of Commissioner approval, on all construction plans, including
grading and clearing plans, erosion and sediment control plans, and site plans.
b. Buffer boundaries including all buffer zones must be clearly marked on-site prior to any
land disturbing activities. Where existing trees are to be preserved in a buffer zone, limits
of grading shall maintain a minimum twenty foot (20’) separation from the base of each
tree of eight inch (8”) DBH or larger on the upland side of the buffer.
c. The outside boundary of the buffer must be permanently marked on each parcel following
the completion of grading activities and prior to occupancy.
d. Separate buffer zones must be permanently marked at highway stream crossings.
e. Buffer boundaries including the delineation of each buffer zone as well as all buffer
requirements must be specified on all surveys and record plats, on individual deeds, and in
property association documents for lands held in common.
E. BUFFER IMPACTS ALLOWED. The following buffer impacts are permitted, but design and construction shall
comply with the specifications provided in the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual
for stabilization of disturbed areas to minimize negative effects on the quality of surface waters.
1. Near perpendicular (seventy five degrees (75°) or greater) road crossings for connectivity or
transportation links.
2. Near perpendicular (seventy five degrees (75°) or greater) utility crossings as approved by
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utilities.
3. Parallel water and sewer utility installation as approved by Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utilities, where
a logical and appropriate basis for the impact is demonstrated, where disturbance of the Stream Side
Zone is minimized to the maximum extent practicable, and where guidelines for restoring vegetation
within buffers disturbed as a result of parallel utility installation are met. These guidelines are
specified in the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual.
4. Public paths and trails parallel to the creek outside the Stream Side Zone and near perpendicular
stream crossings in any zone. Pathways must use existing and proposed utility alignments or
previously cleared areas and minimize tree cutting to the maximum extent practicable. To the extent
possible, pathways shall preserve existing drainage patterns and avoid drainage structures that
concentrate storm water.
5. Incidental drainage improvements/repairs for maintenance.
6. Individual pedestrian paths connecting homeowners to the stream in the form of narrow, pervious
footpaths with minimal tree disturbance.
7. New domesticated animal trails (farming) where existing trails are lost as a result of action beyond
the farmer's control. Stream crossings should be constructed to minimize impacts to the Stream
Side Zone and be maintained with fencing perpendicular to and through the buffer to direct animal
movement.
8. Mitigation approved by a state or federal agency acting pursuant to §§ 401 or 404 of the federal
Clean Water Act.
F. APPEALS AND SWIMBUFFER VARIANCES,WITH MITIGATION.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 17
1. APPEALS. An appeal to reverse or modify the order, decision, determination, or interpretation of
any authorized Town or County official shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 4 of this
Title.
2. VARIANCE PROVISIONS.
a. When a difficulty or hardship would result from adherence to the buffer width requirements
and/or buffer treatment standards, a request for subdivision variance may be filed with the
Planning Board in compliance with the procedures of § 155.712.B. Such request shall not
be deemed complete for consideration until a written report with recommended actions,
including preferred mitigation techniques, from Mecklenburg LUESA is provided. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant requesting the SWIM buffer variance to obtain this
report.
b. The standards for granting a variance, as set out in § 155.712 of these regulations shall be
met. Site specific mitigation plans using the techniques below, and approved by the
designated agency, shall constitute conditions relating to the intent and standards of this
Chapter, and may be attached to variance approval by the Town Board. Specifications for
these mitigation techniques are provided in the Mecklenburg County Land Development
Standards Manual, and provisions outlined for PCO compliance may also be applied, when
determined to be appropriate by the Storm Water Administrator. These techniques are not
construed to offset the requirement of § 155.704.C.3 for diffuse flow.
3. MITIGATION TECHNIQUES. The following techniques are available to landowners for mitigation of
buffer impacts, in association with the granting of a SWIM buffer variance to specific buffer
requirements of § 155.704.A through E, inclusive.
a. INSTALLATION OF STRUCTURAL BMPS. The installation of an on-site structural BMP
designed to achieve specified pollutant removal targets will allow for all proposed stream
buffer impact on the specific site. The BMP must remain outside of the Stream Side Zone
and Managed Use Zone. A detailed BMP design plan must be submitted to the
Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection for approval based on
specifications contained in the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards
Manual. This plan must also include a long term maintenance strategy for the BMP,
complete with the establishment of adequate financing to support the proposed
maintenance practices.
b. STREAM RESTORATION. The owner may restore and preserve the buffer area on any stream
of equivalent or greater drainage area the condition of which is determined to be qualified
for restoration by the Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection on a
1:1 basis in linear feet of stream. This restoration shall include stream bank improvements
and Stream Side and Managed Use Zone re-vegetation, in accordance with the
Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual and receive approval by
Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection.
c. STREAM PRESERVATION. The owner may purchase, fee simple, other stream segments at
equivalent or greater drainage area on a 1:1 linear foot basis and convey fee simple and
absolute title to the land to the Town of Matthews, Mecklenburg County, or conservation
trust, with a plan approved by the Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental
Protection.
d. WETLANDS RESTORATION. On a 2:1 acreage basis for disturbed stream and buffer area (2
acres of wetland for each acre of disturbed area), the owner may provide a combination of
the preservation and/or restoration of wetlands with protective easements and the
implementation of structural or non-structural BMPs to achieve specific pollutant removal
targets within the impacted area. Restoration plan must be approved by the Mecklenburg
County Department of Environmental Protection.
e. BOTTOM LAND HARDWOOD PRESERVATION. On a 2:1 acreage basis for impacted stream
and buffer area (2 acres of bottomland hardwood for each acre of disturbed area), the owner
may provide a combination of the preservation of existing bottom land hardwood forest or
other specifically approved natural heritage area by conservation easement or other legal
instrument, and the implementation of structural or non-structural BMPs to achieve
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 18
specific pollutant removal targets within the impacted area. Plan to be approved by
Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection.
f. CONTROLLED IMPERVIOUS COVER FOR DISTURBANCE LANDWARD OF STREAM SIDE ZONE.
The owner may commit to, and provide, a specific site development plan for the parcel
with requested buffer disturbance. The plan shall limit overall site impervious cover to less
than or equal to twenty four percent (24%). Preservation of the Stream Side Zone is still
required. Plan to be approved by Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental
Protection.
g. OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT. The submission of a site specific development plan that
preserves fifty percent (50%) of the total land area as undisturbed open space. Plan to be
approved by Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection.
h. MITIGATION CREDITS. The purchase of mitigation credits through the Stream Restoration
Program on a 1:1 basis, utilizing linear feet of stream impacted and the prevailing rate of
purchase as established by the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual.
Mitigation credits purchased under any other program, i.e., U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
shall not cover this requirement unless the issuing agency agrees to relinquish the funds to
the appropriate local government agency.
i. ALTERNATIVE MITIGATION. The list of mitigation techniques shall not prevent the creative
development of alternative mitigation plans that achieve the purposes of this section. The
owner shall submit such plan with proposed buffer impacts and detailed mitigation
information to the Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection for
approval. The criteria used to judge acceptability of any alternative plan shall be the degree
to which the plan addresses the preservation of the four primary natural functions of stream
buffers given in § 155.704.A. When considering proposed mitigation alternatives, the
Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental Protection shall give equal weight to
proposals which utilize the preservation of unique or endangered habitat or natural areas
against proposed buffer impacts. Plans may be submitted in conjunction with a mitigation
plan submission to the US Army Corps of Engineers and NC Department of Environment
and Natural Resources for proposed stream or wetlands impacts.
G. FINANCIAL SECURITY REQUIRED. When structural BMPs (wet detention ponds and other BMPs) are
approved for mitigation of a buffer disturbance, the approval will be subject to the owner filing a surety bond
or letter of credit or making other financial arrangements which are acceptable to the Mecklenburg County
Department of Environmental Protection, in a form which is satisfactory to the County Attorney,
guaranteeing the installation and maintenance of the required structural BMPs until the issuance of
certificates of occupancy for seventy-five (75) percent of all construction which might reasonably be
anticipated to be built within the area which drains into the BMPs, allowing credit for improvements
completed prior to the submission of the final plat. At such time that this level of occupancy is achieved,
written notice thereof must be submitted by the owner to the Mecklenburg County Department of
Environmental Protection. The owner must also verify the adequacy of the maintenance plan for the BMPs,
including the necessary financing to support the proposed maintenance practices. The Mecklenburg County
Department of Environmental Protection will inspect the structural BMPs and verify the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan; if both are found to be satisfactory, the department will notify the owner within thirty (30)
days of the date of notice.
H. MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR STRUCTURAL BMPS—CIVIL PENALTIES. Maintenance of all structural
BMPs will be the responsibility of the property owner or his designee. Any person who fails to maintain the
required BMPs in accordance with the approved maintenance plan will be subject to a civil penalty of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. No penalties shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified in writing
of the violation by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by other means which are
reasonably calculated to give actual notice. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation with
reasonable particularity, specify a reasonable time period within which the violation must be corrected, and
warn that failure to correct the violation within the time period will result in assessment of a civil penalty or
other enforcement action. (Ord. 1124, passed 2-14-00)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 19
155.705. Dedication of Open Space and Recreational Land [formerly § 152.40]
A. GENERAL PROVISION. The subdivider or developer of any site which includes a residential component with
single dwelling per lot (detached or attached) shall dedicate a portion of such land in accordance with this
Section or pay a fee in lieu thereof, in accordance with § 155.706, for public park, greenway, pathway,
recreation, and open space sites to serve the recreational needs of both the residents of the subdivision and
the general public. When closes, mini-park sites, or similar small pockets of land are designed and improved
primarily for use of the nearby residents, they may be considered as meeting a portion of this open space
dedication.
B. AMOUNT OF LAND TO BE DEDICATED. At least one thirty fifth (1/35) of an acre shall be dedicated for each
dwelling unit lot planned or proposed in the subdivision plat, except that any land to be dedicated which lies
within the one hundred (100) year floodplain, any required SWIM buffers, or has slopes greater than fifteen
percent (15%) or is included within overhead utility easements shall be dedicated at a rate of at least one
twentieth (1/20) of an acre per dwelling unit.
C. NATURE OF LAND TO BE DEDICATED. Except as otherwise required by the Town Board of Commissioners at
the time of preliminary plan approval, all dedications of land shall meet the following criteria:
1. UNITY. The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land except where the Town Board of
Commissioners determines that two or more parcels would be in the best interest of the public, given
the type and distribution of open spaces needed to adequately serve the proposed development. In
such cases, the Town Board of Commissioners may require that such parcels either be connected by
a dedicated strip of land at least thirty feet (30’) in width, or be an improved small pocket of land
specifically intended to be used by the adjacent residential parcels.
2. USABILITY. At least one-half of the total land dedicated shall be located outside of areas of special
flood hazard, SWIM buffers, alluvial soils, lakes, or other water bodies, and areas with slopes greater
than fifteen percent (15%). Land dedicated only for greenways need not follow the requirements of
this subsection.
3. MINIMUM SIZE. In general, land dedicated for recreational purposes shall have an area of at least
four (4) acres. When the requirements of § 155.705.B would create less than four (4) acres, the
Town Board of Commissioners may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable place on
the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is
subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than two (2) acres be dedicated for recreational purposes
if it will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area. Where
minimal requirements of this subsection cannot be met, the provisions of § 155.706 shall be
applicable. Land dedication only for greenways or allowed small pocket spaces need not follow the
requirements of this subsection.
4. SHAPE. The shape of the portion of the dedicated land which is deemed suitable for active recreation
shall be sufficiently square or round to be usable for any or all recreational facilities and activities,
such as athletic fields and tennis courts, when a sufficient amount of land is dedicated to
accommodate such facilities. Land dedicated only for greenways or allowed improved small pocket
spaces need not follow the requirements of this subsection.
5. LOCATION. The dedicated land shall be located so as to reasonably serve the recreation and open
space needs of the subdivision for which the dedication was made and shall bear a reasonable
relationship to the use of the area by the future inhabitants of the subdivision or residential
development.
6. ACCESS. Public access to the dedicated land shall be provided either by adjoining public street
frontage or by a dedicated public easement, at least thirty feet (30’) wide, which connects the
dedicated land to a public street or right-of-way. Gradients adjacent to existing and proposed streets
shall allow for usable access to dedicated land. Where the dedicated land is located adjacent to a
street, the developer or subdivider shall remain responsible for the installation of utilities, sidewalks,
and other improvements required along that street segment. Public access to greenway dedications
are required and shall be at least twenty feet (20’) wide.
7. TOPOGRAPHY. The average slope of the portion of dedicated land deemed usable for active
recreation shall not exceed the average slope of the entire subdivision to be developed. In no case
shall a slope on the usable portion of dedicated land exceed fifteen percent (15%).
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 20
8. USABILITY. Any land dedicated as open space to meet the requirements of this section shall
generally be improved based on its intended use, such that a playground shall have age-appropriate
play structures and open fields shall be level and free of overhead utilities or trees and of sufficient
shape and size for various team sports. When the proposed land dedication is intended to preserve
land in its natural environment, minimal improvements may be required.
D. PROCEDURE FOR DEDICATION OF LAND. The dedication of land shall be reviewed for recommendations by
the Planning Board and the Parks and Recreation Director as part of the Sketch Plan review process prior to
the filing of an application for approval of the Preliminary Plan. The subdivider shall designate on the Sketch
Plan the area of land to be dedicated pursuant to this Section. Where wetlands falling under the jurisdiction
of State or Federal agencies have been certified to exist on the property, the boundaries of such wetlands
shall also be identified. Any subdivider wishing to request payment of funds in lieu of land dedication in
accordance with § 155.706 shall submit a letter of request along with the Sketch Plan.
155.706. Payment of Fees in Lieu of Dedication [formerly § 152.41]
A. GENERAL. The payment of fees, in lieu of the dedication of land under § 155.705 above, may occur at the
request of the subdivider or developer. The payment of fees in lieu of land dedication also may be required
by the Town Board of Commissioners at the time of preliminary plan approval upon finding that all or part
of the land required to be dedicated under § 155.705 is not suitable for public recreation and open space
purposes, or upon finding that the recreational needs of the proposed development can be met by other park,
greenway, or recreational facilities planned or constructed by the Town within reasonable proximity to the
development.
B. PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL. Any subdivider wishing to pay fees in lieu of land dedication shall submit a
letter of request with the Sketch Plan submittal. As part of the Sketch Plan review the Planning Board and
the Parks and Recreation Department shall make recommendations concerning land dedication or payment
of fees in lieu of land dedication. Following Sketch Plan recommendations, the subdivider shall prepare the
Preliminary Plan and include land dedication or payment of fees in lieu of land dedication as part of the
Preliminary Plan submission for approval.
C. TIME OF PAYMENT. The fees in lieu of land dedication shall be paid prior to recording any lot(s) in the
subdivision to which the fees relate.
D. AMOUNT OF PAYMENT. The amount of the payment shall be the product of:
1. The number of acres to be dedicated, as required by § 155.705 above;
2. The assessed value for property tax purposes of the land being subdivided, adjusted to reflect its
current fair market value at the time such payment is due to be paid.
E. DISAGREEMENT AS TO AMOUNT. When the applicant disagrees with the fair market value methodology as
explained here, the applicant may choose to obtain a special appraisal by a professional appraiser. (A
professional appraiser is an individual who can show by credentials and experience that he or she has
knowledge of land appraisals of a similar type). The Plan Review Committee (PRC) shall review the
conclusions of the established method and the appraiser, and may receive comments from both the County
tax assessor’s office and the applicant. The PRC shall make a recommendation on an appropriate value to
the Town Board of Commissioners, who shall determine a final amount within thirty (30) days of receiving
the PRC’s recommendation. If the applicant continues to disagree with the Board of Commissioner’s
decision, another professional appraiser shall be chosen jointly by the applicant and the Town to provide an
additional appraisal. The cost of this supplementary professional land appraiser shall be borne evenly by the
applicant and the Town. The decision of this supplementary appraisal shall be final, and shall be certified by
the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days of receipt of final appraisal report.
F. USE OF FUNDS. All funds received in lieu of land dedication shall be deposited in a Park and Recreation
Improvement Fund to be established by the Town. The deposits shall be used by the Town for improvement
of a neighborhood park, playground, or recreation area including the acquisition of property. The deposit
must be used for facilities that actually will be available to and benefit the persons in the subdivision for
which payment was made and be located in the general vicinity of the subdivision.
155.707. Improvements [formerly § 152.50]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 21
A. IMPROVEMENT RESPONSIBILITY. In order to facilitate the provision of street right-of-way and necessary
improvements, the following sections establish responsibilities for the installation of streets and related
improvements for each class of street. Any right-of-way which must be reserved for future acquisition may
be dedicated at the option of the developer or property owner for development rights transfer purposes as
provided in § 155.701.B of this ordinance.
1. CLASS I (FREEWAY-EXPRESSWAY): The entire right-of-way width shall be reserved for future
acquisition.
2. CLASS II (LIMITED ACCESS ARTERIAL): The entire right-of-way width shall be reserved for future
acquisition.
3. CLASS III-C (COMMERCIAL ARTERIAL):
a. RIGHT-OF-WAY. One hundred feet (100’) dedicated and the remainder reserved for future
acquisition (fifty feet (50’) on each side of centerline). Any development along a Class IIIC
Street which requires specific improvements of the street to meet traffic demands of the
particular development must dedicate the right-of-way necessary to accommodate those
improvements.
b. IMPROVEMENTS. Installed by the public in accordance with a schedule of public street
improvements, except where specific improvements are required to meet the traffic
demands of the particular development in which case the developer must install the
necessary improvements at the time of development. If, however, a public improvement
project for the street is programmed and funded, the developer may be relieved of the actual
construction, but remains liable for the costs of the improvements for which he or she
would otherwise be liable. The developer has the option, after consultation with the Town
and Mecklenburg LUESA to construct all or a portion of the street if the developer wants
to make use of the street for access to the development.
4. CLASS III (MAJOR ARTERIAL):
a. RIGHT-OF-WAY. The developer is responsible for the dedication of up to one hundred feet
(100’) (fifty feet (50’) each side of the centerline) as provided for in § 155.701.B. Any
development along a Class III street which requires specific improvements of the street to
meet traffic demands of the particular development must dedicate the right-of-way
necessary to accommodate those improvements.
b. IMPROVEMENTS. Installed by the public in accordance with a schedule of public street
improvements, except on existing streets where specific improvements are required to meet
the traffic demands of the particular development in which case the developer must install
the necessary improvements at the time of development. If, however, a public improvement
project for the street is programmed and funded, the developer may be relieved of the actual
construction, but the developer remains liable for the costs of the improvements for which
he or she would otherwise be liable. Development sites which are dependent on an unbuilt
portion of a Class III street may be required to be phased or deferred until the missing
section of roadway is continued through or along the entire site. The developer has the
option, after consultation with the Town and Mecklenburg LUESA to construct all or a
portion of the street if the developer wants to make use of the street for access to the
development. Development along new Class III streets or extensions of Class III streets
must utilize reverse frontage with the only access points being public streets or specifically
approved street type entrances.
5. CLASS IV (MINOR ARTERIAL).
a. RIGHT-OF-WAY. The developer is responsible for the dedication of up to seventy feet (70’)
(thirty five feet (35’) each side of the centerline) as provided for in § 155.701.A. Additional
right-of-way which may be required for improvements to meet specific traffic demands of
the development must be dedicated by the developer.
b. IMPROVEMENTS. Installed by the public in accordance with a schedule of public street
improvements, except on existing streets where specific improvements are required to meet
the traffic demands of the particular development in which case the developer must install
the necessary improvements at the time of development. If, however, a public improvement
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 22
project for the street is programmed and funded, the developer may be relieved of the actual
construction, but the developer remains liable for the costs of the improvements for which
he or she would otherwise be liable. Development sites which are dependent on an unbuilt
portion of a Class IV street may be required to be phased or deferred until the missing
section of roadway is continued through or along the entire site. The developer has the
option, after consultation with the Town and Mecklenburg LUESAs to construct all or a
portion of the street if the developer wants to make use of the street for access to the
development. Development along new Class IV streets or extensions of Class IV streets
must utilize reverse frontage with the only access points being public streets or specifically
approved street type entrances.
6. CLASS V (COLLECTOR).
a. RIGHT-OF-WAY. Dedicated by the developer.
b. IMPROVEMENTS. Constructed by the developer.
7. CLASS VI AND CLASS VI-L (LOCAL):
a. RIGHT-OF-WAY. Dedicated by the developer.
b. IMPROVEMENTS. Constructed by the developer. All streets must be constructed to comply
with the minimum standards of the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards
Manual and all appropriate applicable Town requirements. Public improvements shall be
made in accordance with adopted plans, programs and budgets. It should not be expected
that the occurrence of development will result in the immediate installation of public street
improvements by the public sector unless those improvements are scheduled and funded
in accordance with public policies and programs.
8. ALLEY (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE).
a. RIGHT-OF-WAY. Dedicated by the developer if public. Private alleys may be located within
an established single parcel paralleling the alley pavement, or may be located within an
easement over adjacent parcels.
b. IMPROVEMENTS. Constructed by the developer. All alleys must be constructed to comply
with the minimum standards of the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards
Manual and all appropriate applicable Town requirements. Public improvements shall be
made in accordance with adopted plans, programs and budgets. When an alley is dedicated
to the public, it should not be expected that the occurrence of development will result in
immediate installation of further public street improvements by the public sector. Private
alleys shall meet the construction standards for public alleys for subgrade, base, and surface
although standards for curbing, sidewalks, and minimum widths may be altered. (Am. Ord.
2059, passed 12-8-14)
B. REQUIRED WORK ON GROUND.
1. Street and sidewalk infrastructure improvements are not required for any minor residential
subdivision containing not more than three (3) lots where required improvements do not exist within
five hundred feet (500’) of the proposed subdivision. Further subdivision of lots within the minor
subdivision shall not occur within twenty-four months.
2. Except as provided in these regulations, improvements shall have been completed and approved in
accordance with the standards of these regulations as specified below before any final plat of a
subdivision shall be eligible for approval.
C. STREETS.
1. GRADING.
a. Proposed street rights-of-way shall be graded to a minimum of eight feet (8’) behind the
curb.
b. Longitudinal grades shall conform with the requirements of § 155.701.C.
c. The transverse grade or crown shall be at a slope of three eighths inches (3/8”) to one foot
(1’). The maximum slope for cut or fill embankment shall be one foot of vertical distance
to every one and one half feet (1½’) of lateral distance. Fill embankments shall be formed
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 23
of suitable material placed in successive layers of not more than six inches (6”) in depth
for the full width of the cross sections including the width of the slope area. No stumps,
trees, brush, rubbish, or other unsuitable materials or substances shall be placed in the
embankment. Each successive six-inch layer shall be thoroughly compacted by a
sheepsfoot tamping roller, ten (10) ton power roller, pneumatic tired roller, or other
methods approved by the Mecklenburg LUESA. Embankments over and around all pipe
and culverts shall be of select materials, placed and thoroughly tamped and compacted as
directed by the Mecklenburg LUESA. All grading and excavation shall conform to the
Standard Specifications for Roads and Structures of the North Carolina State Highway
Commission.
2. SUBGRADE. For standards and requirements see the Mecklenburg Land Development Standards
Manual.
3. ROADWAY BASE.
a. All roadways shall be improved with a base course to the required width of the roadway.
b. The material and construction methods for base course shall meet the requirements of the
latest edition of the NCDOT Standard Specifications.
c. The stone base shall be compacted to one hundred percent (100%) of the maximum density
obtainable with the Standard Proctor Test by rolling with ring or tamping roller or with a
pneumatic tired roller with a minimum weight of ten tons. When completed, the base
course shall be smooth, hard, dense, unyielding and well bonded. Certified test reports
shall be submitted to Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Engineer.
d. In lieu of a stone base course, a bituminous concrete base course, Type I19.0X may be
substituted. Construction shall conform to the requirements of Section 640 of the NCDOT
Standard Specifications. (Ord. No. 1292, passed 5-12-03)
e. Bituminous concrete base course, type I19.0X, shall be used in widening strips less than
five feet (5’) in width. (Ord. No. 1292, passed 5-12-03)
4. ROADWAY SURFACE.
a. All roadways shall be improved with a surface course to the required width of the roadway.
b. Plant mixed asphalt shall conform in all respects to the Section 645 of the NCDOT
Standard Specifications (S9.5X and SF9.5X). On Class I, II, III, III-C, IV and V streets the
asphalt mix will be determined by truck volumes (ESALS). A prime coat shall be applied
when the base has been in place for seven (7) days or more. The compacted surface course
shall not be less than one and one half inches (1½ “) thick.
c. The Inspector for Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Public Works Department shall be
notified prior to, and approve the use of, recycled asphalt.
d. Standard curb and gutter shall be constructed on all arterial (Class I, II, III, III-C and IV),
industrial access, office access, or multi-family access streets. Rolled curb and gutter or
standard curb and gutter shall be constructed on all minor and secondary residential access
streets (Class V, VI, and VI-L). Curb and gutter design shall conform to Town standards.
5. CUL-DE-SAC DESIGN. Any road segment terminating in a permanent deadend shall include
turnaround area. One of the options illustrated below may be used, or another alternative as designed
by the developer and approved by the County and Town Engineer may be allowed. see also §
155.701.C.4.e.
D. SIDEWALKS, NON-STREETSIDE PUBLIC USE PATHS, BICYCLE FACILITIES AND GREENWAYS-VARIOUS NONMOTORIZED
VEHICULAR USE AREAS.
1. REQUIREMENTS. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all classes of streets.
2. LOCATION OF SIDEWALKS. The outer edge of the sidewalk shall generally be located at the street
right-of-way edge or one foot (1’) inside of the right-of-way. However, a variance may be granted
for location other than the edge of the right-of-way to avoid excessive grading and the destruction
of trees, to allow placement of utility lines or surface water drainage facilities, or other unusual
circumstances.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 24
3. MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION. Sidewalks shall be constructed of not less than three thousand six
hundred (3600) PSI concrete and shall be a minimum of five feet (5’) wide and four inches (4”)
thick and constructed on an adequately graded base, except that where the sidewalk crosses a
driveway it shall be six inches (6”) thick. Subgrade shall be compacted to ninety five percent (95%)
of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard Proctor Test. The surface of the sidewalk shall
be steel trowel and light broom finished and cured with an acceptable curing compound. Troweled
joints shall be provided at intervals of not less than five feet (5’) and expansion joints at intervals of
not less than thirty feet (30’). The sidewalk shall have a lateral slope of one quarter inch (1/4”) per
foot. Test reports shall be submitted to Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Engineer.
4. ACCESSIBLE RAMPS. Accessible ramps are required where sidewalks intersect curbing, at any street
intersection, and at Type III driveway connections. Ramps must comply with current ADA
standards and Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual.
5. ELEVATION. The elevation of the sidewalk shall be flexible to allow for flexibility in tree
preservation and reduction of excessive grading. When approaching intersections or driveways the
sidewalk shall generally not be less than six inches (6”) above the roadway crown, and within fifty
feet (50’) of any intersection the elevation of the sidewalk shall not be more than eighteen inches
(18”) above the roadway crown unless approved by the Town Public Works Department.
6. NON-STREETSIDE PUBLIC USE PATHS. There may be situations where pedestrian movement can be
met or enhanced with the use of paths not adjacent and parallel to a street. This may include midblock
connections, multimodal pathways, shared use alleys, or other design formats. When such
pathway is proposed in a development, it shall be designed and built to meet the minimum
construction standards for sidewalks as given in § 155.707.D.3. above and shall be a minimum width
as needed for the specific type of modal use anticipated. Any non-streetside pathway facility that
may allow bicycles and pedestrians shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) wide. The use of any path
that intends to mix motorized vehicles with nonmotorized transport shall be favorably recommended
by the PRC, and the minimum width, materials, and construction shall be approved by Mecklenburg
LUESA and the Town Engineer.
7. BICYCLE FACILITIES THAT ARE SEPARATE FROM MOTORIZED VEHICULAR USE TRAVEL LANES. There
are a variety of design options for bicycle use that are separated from on-street shared travel lanes.
When any such bicycle facility is included in any adopted plan, such as a neighborhood or small
area plan, the Carolina Thread Trail, or the Town’s Comprehensive Bicycle Plan, then the portion
of the facility within the development site shall be required to be built at the time the surrounding
or adjacent development is installed. Where no adopted construction standards exist, the PRC shall
recommend the minimum width, materials, and construction, which shall be approved by
Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Engineer. A request to delay construction may be considered
through the subdivision variance process at § 155.172, if there are no bicycle facilities connection
to the development site and a bond or other acceptable financial guarantee is posted to assure full
funding for the improvements when it is appropriate to do so.
8. GREENWAYS. Town and County adopted greenway plans identify trail pathways through the
community separate from roadside sidewalks. These greenways run generally parallel to creeks and
may be located within SWIM buffers, PCO buffers, and/or floodplains. When any portion of a
greenway is shown on any adopted plan within a development site, it shall be installed at the time
the site is developed and shall meet all adopted construction design standards. When no adopted
construction standards exist, the PRC shall recommend the minimum width, materials, and
construction, which shall be approved by Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Engineer. A request
to delay construction may be considered through the subdivision variance process at § 155.712, if
there are no pathways connecting to the development site and a bond or other acceptable financial
guarantee is posted to assure full funding for the improvements when it is appropriate to do so.
E. STORM DRAINAGE.
1. All storm drainage design shall conform to the standards and specifications as provided at §
155.704.1, in Chapter 8 Matthews Post Construction Ordinance, the Charlotte Mecklenburg Storm
Water Design Manual, Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual, or the more
restrictive of any standards that conflict.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 25
2. All work and materials shall conform to the latest edition of the NCDOT Standard Specifications
unless otherwise specified in the Mecklenburg County Land Development Standards Manual or by
the Design Manual for the Post Construction Ordinance. (Ord. 1585, passed 8-13-07)
F. WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
1. When any part of the subdivision or development lies within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the
Charlotte-Mecklenburg public water system, it shall be properly connected to the public water
system or an alternate community system approved by the Division of Environmental Health of the
State Department of Environment and Natural Resources and shall meet all Charlotte Mecklenburg
Utility Department standards and be constructed in such a manner as to serve adequately for both
domestic use and fire protection on all lots and buildable areas shown on the subdivision plat or
development plan. The size of the water mains shall be at least six inches (6”).
2. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department
standards.
G. SANITARY SEWERS.
1. When any part of the subdivision or development site lies within one thousand feet (1,000’) of the
Charlotte-Mecklenburg sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewer shall be installed in a manner as
to serve adequately all lots and building sites with connection to the public system.
2. Sewer connections shall comply with the regulations of the State Department of Environment and
Natural Resources (DENR) and shall be constructed under the supervision and approval of the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources. All sewer collection lines shall be at least eight
inches (8”) in diameter.
3. Where lots are not to be connected with a sewerage system, they must be at least twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in area, contain an area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal
fields, and must be approved in writing by the Mecklenburg County Department of Environmental
Health.
H. STREETSCAPE TREES. Streetscape trees are a protection against excessive heat and glare and enhance the
attractiveness and value of property. Streetscape trees can also serve as a traffic calming measure,
encouraging drivers to reduce speeding. The provisions of § 155.606.3 shall be followed. Where the Town
has adopted specific tree species and spacing/location requirements for existing roads, those plans shall be
followed as new subdivisions and development projects are designed. Where new streets are designed that
are not part of an approved plan, then the species, locations, and spacing of trees shall follow the standards
listed in § 155.606.3. (Ord. No. 1618, passed 4-14-08)
I. TREES ON BUILDING LOTS. Existing tree cover shall be taken into account as the layout of new streets and
lots is designed and build placement is determined. Tree canopy preservation and protection standards listed
at § 155.606.7 shall be followed, utilizing preservation of existing trees to the greatest extent feasible. Post
Construction Ordinance provisions for Undisturbed Open Space may also be met by preserving existing trees
and planting new trees. Existing trees on the tract identified for designation as Undisturbed Open Space shall
be clearly identified on the site and on all plans. (Ord. No. 1618, passed 4-14-08)
J. STREET LIGHTS. Street lighting shall be installed in each new subdivision and development site unless
exempted by the Town Public Works Director. Street lights shall meet the standards given at § 155.609.
This shall be the responsibility of the developer with placement coordinated with and approved by the Town
Public Works Director as part of preliminary plan review.
155.708. Streetscape Tree Standards [formerly § 152.51]
Streetscape trees shall generally be planted or preserved along the edges of streets, except where an adopted streetscape
plan or alternative streetscape provisions are in place. Specific standards are provided at § 155.606.3.
155.709. Landscaping Standards [formerly § 152.52]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 26
A. PRESERVATION STANDARDS. Existing trees specified on an approved landscape plan to remain on site during
any land disturbing activity are protected trees. Special criteria apply to protected trees either as individuals
or in a stand. The standards provided in § 155.606.11 of this Title shall be followed.
B. PLANTING STANDARDS. Planting standards apply uniform and commonly acceptable guidelines to the
installation of new trees into the landscape. Standards help ensure tree survivability and long-term health.
The standards provided at § 155.606.12 of this Title shall be followed.
C. MAINTENANCE STANDARDS. The property owner and/or lessee shall maintain all tree and landscape areas in
accordance with the approved landscape plan. Maintenance shall include watering, weeding, mowing,
fertilizing, treating, mulching, pruning, removal and replacement of dead or diseased trees. Maintenance
shall be performed on a regular basis in order to maintain plant vigor and stability, and to present a neat and
well-kept appearance at all times. The standards provided at § 155.606.13 of this Title shall be followed.
D. MITIGATION FOR LOSS OF STREETSCAPE TREES. The loss of a protected or approved new streetscape tree
normally requires replacement by the subdivider or developer during the three (3) year Landscape
Establishment Guarantee period. Replacement streetscape trees shall not be planted until approved by the
Town. The standards provided at § 155.606.13.C. of this Title shall be followed.
1. Failure by the subdivider to replace trees as indicated here shall be cause for the Town to complete
the replacement action using the subdivider’s Landscape Establishment Guarantee.
2. Beyond the three-year period, all streetscape trees within the public right-of-way shall be the
responsibility of the Town for ongoing maintenance, removal, and replacement. All streetscape
trees on private property, after the three (3) year period, shall be the responsibility of the property
owner for maintenance, as provided at § 155.606.13.D. The Town vision is to encourage mature
trees along streets, so will generally not allow removal or unnecessary pruning of streetscape trees.
No streetscape tree on private property may be substantially pruned or limbed up, removed or
replaced by the property owner without Town approval. (Ord. No. 1618, passed 4-14-08)
155.710. Inspections [formerly § 152.60]
A. Mecklenburg County LUESA and the Town Engineer must be notified two (2) working days in advance of
the work so that all necessary inspections of the work may be made.
B. County and Town inspectors must be allowed access to all parts of the work, and must be furnished with
every reasonable facility to ascertain whether or not the work as performed is in accordance with the
specifications.
C. No material may be placed nor any work performed except in the presence of the inspector without special
permission of the appropriate agency. Such inspection, however, does not relieve the contractor from any
obligation to perform all of the work strictly in accordance with the specifications.
D. In case of any disputes arising as to the material furnished or the manner of performing the work, the inspector
shall have the authority to reject the materials or reject completed work. The contractor shall remove any
work or material condemned as unsatisfactory by the authorized inspector and shall rebuild and replace same
to the standard required by the specifications, all at his own expense.
E. In the event that work is suspended for more than forty eight (48) hours, Mecklenburg County LUESA and
the Town Engineer or other designated authority must be notified and any work re-inspected.
F. When subdivisions or developments are being developed in phases or for development of adjoining tracts,
and upon which lots structures are being and/or are to be constructed, a surety bond, letter of credit, or other
form of guarantee that provides equivalent security to a surety bond or letter of credit filed with the
Mecklenburg County LUESA in the amount determined by Mecklenburg County LUESA and the Town
Engineer shall be required, or the bond by §§ 155.405.8.C. and 155.405.10. shall be retained, in order to
insure that the streets shall be in acceptable completed condition at the time active development activity is
concluded. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
1. Mecklenburg County LUESA will release the posted securities only after LUESA and the Town
Public Works Director have determined that all work guaranteed by the securities filed has been
completed within the subject phase in compliance with the standards set forth in these regulations,
and that barricades approved by the Mecklenburg County LUESA in accordance with § 155.703.B
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 27
have been installed at the termination point of any street leading into future phases of the
development. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
2. All subsequent development of future phases or development of adjoining tracts, whether or not
those phases are shown on a preliminary plan, shall not be allowed, nor shall the removal of
barricades required by § 155.703.B be allowed, and no access to adjoining property for development
purposes shall be allowed via previously completed sections of a subdivision or development site
until the developer shall first have filed a surety bond, letter of credit or other form of security as
described in § 155.710.F with Mecklenburg LUESA in an amount determined by Mecklenburg
LUESA. (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
G. The performance bond required by this section shall not be released until the phase under development has
met the criteria for acceptance of streets as outlined in § 155.405.10, and it has been determined by
Mecklenburg LUESA and the Town Public Works Director that streets are in an acceptable completed
condition. (Ord. No. 1010; passed 11-9-98; Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
155.711. Acceptance of Dedicated Land and Public Improvements [formerly § 152.08, 09]
A. ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS WITHIN A SUBDIVISION. The approval of a preliminary or final plat by the Board
of Commissioners shall not constitute the acceptance by the Town of any street, public utility line, or other
public facility or ground shown upon that plat. The Town shall not maintain, lay out, open, improve, grade,
pave, or light any street or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections, or other utilities in any
street unless that street has been accepted as a public street by a resolution adopted by the Board of
Commissioners in a regular or duly called special session.
B. ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE. The Board of Commissioners shall not adopt any resolution accepting a new street
or any public improvements unless:
1. The Board has received a written request from the subdivider, developer, or from a majority of the
property owners along a street that the street be accepted as a public street for maintenance by the
Town.
2. The Board of Commissioners receives a report from the Public Works Director that:
a. Either final approval of the street or streets was granted by Mecklenburg LUESA and the
Town Public Works Director at least one (1) year prior to the time of the request for
maintenance or that the street or streets existed as a public street prior to the effective date
of these regulations and as such have functioned as a street or streets for a least one year;
provided that this one (1) year testing period may be waived by the Board of
Commissioners in cases where the development density set forth in division B.2.b of this
Section has been met and the Board of Commissioners finds that the street or streets
requested for maintenance would suffer damage from further delay of application of the
final surface course required under § 155.405.10 of this Title;
b. At least eighty percent (80%) of the lots fronting on the street or streets requested for
maintenance contain an occupied dwelling unit, occupied multi-family, commercial or
mixed use building, or occupied permanent principal use which does not involve a
building; and (Am. Ord. 2141, passed 4-11-16)
c. Any defects which have appeared in new streets during the one (1) year waiting period, or
in the case of existing streets, any defects identified by the Public Works Director at the
time the request for maintenance is made have been repaired.
3. The Board of Commissioners determines that the street corresponds in its location and aligns with
a street shown on an approved preliminary subdivision plat or development plan or that the street
was established as a public street prior to the adoption of these regulations and therefore not subject
to these regulations.
4. The security bond as required by Mecklenburg LUESA according to § 155.405.10 of this Title shall
not be released prior to acceptance of the street by the Board of Commissioners or by the North
Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT). [formerly § 152.09]
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 7 - 28
155.712. Public Improvement Variances [formerly § 152.06]
The Planning Board may review and make recommendations on requests for public improvement variances from the
regulations of §§ 155.701, 155.702, 155.704, 155.707, 155.708, and 155.709. These recommendations shall be
forwarded to the Town Board of Commissioners for final decision. Request for public improvement variances shall
be governed by the following requirements and procedures. (Am. Ord. 2038, passed 5-11-15)
A. GENERAL. Where the Planning Board finds that unnecessary hardships or practical difficulties may result
from strict compliance with these regulations and/or that the purposes of these regulations may be served to
a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may recommend, and the Board of Commissioners may
authorize, variances to these regulations, provided that the public improvement variances shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. Approval of a public improvement variance
shall be based on evidence in each specific case that:
1. The relationship of the property to natural topography or to the nature of adjoining properties
warrants relief from the standard in question; or
2. The difficulty or hardship from the application of these regulations would prevent the owner from
making reasonable use of the property; or
3. The granting of a variance would permit the preservation of an historic structure or site; or
4. The granting of a variance would permit the preservation of a mature grove of hardwood trees or a
significant specimen tree.
B. PROCEDURES. Wherever practicable, a request for a public improvement variance should be submitted in
writing by the subdivider or developer at the time the sketch plan or development site plan is submitted for
review to the Planning Board or Plan Review Committee. The request shall state fully the grounds for the
application and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 1
Chapter 8. Post Construction Storm Water Regulations
155.801. General Provisions [formerly § 154]
A. TITLE. These regulations shall be officially
known as the “Post Construction Storm
Water Ordinance” and is commonly known
as and referred to in this Title as the “PCO”.
[formerly known as § 154.001]
B. AUTHORITY. The Town is authorized to
adopt these regulations pursuant to North
Carolina law, including but not limited to
Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of
North Carolina; North Carolina General
Statutes 143-214.7 and rules promulgated
by the Environmental Management
Commission; Session Law 2004-163;
Chapter 160A, §§ 174, 185. [formerly
known as § 154.002]
C. FINDINGS. It is hereby determined that:
Development and redevelopment alter the
hydrologic response of local watersheds
and increase storm water runoff rates and
volumes, flooding, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, non-point source
pollution, and sediment transport and
deposition, as well as reduce groundwater
recharge; these changes in storm water
runoff contribute to increased quantities of
water-borne pollutants and alterations in
hydrology which are harmful to public
health and safety as well as to the natural
environment; and these effects can be
managed and minimized by applying
proper design and well planned controls to
manage storm water runoff from
development sites. Further, the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (“Clean Water Act”) and Federal Phase II Storm Water Rules
promulgated under it, as well as rules of the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission
promulgated in response to federal Phase II requirements, compel certain urbanized areas, including the
Town of Matthews (the “Town”), to adopt the minimum storm water controls such as those included in the
PCO. Therefore, the Town establishes this set of water quality and quantity regulations to meet the
requirements of state and federal law regarding control of storm water runoff and discharge. [formerly
known as § 154.003]
D. PURPOSE.
1. GENERAL. The purpose of these regulations is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health,
safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to
control the adverse effects of increased post construction storm water runoff and non-point source
pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper
management of construction-related and post construction storm water runoff will minimize damage
to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, and general
welfare, and protect water and aquatic resources.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 2
2. SPECIFIC. These regulations seek to meet its general purpose through the following specific
objectives and means:
a. Establishing decision-making processes for development that protect the integrity of
watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
b. Minimizing changes to the predevelopment hydrologic response for new development and
redevelopment in their post construction state in accordance with the requirements of these
regulations for the applicable design storm in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion,
and non-point and point source pollution, as well as to maintain the integrity of stream
channels, aquatic habitats and healthy stream temperatures;
c. Establishing minimum post construction storm water management standards and design
criteria for the regulation and control of storm water runoff quantity and quality;
d. Establishing design and review criteria for the construction, function, and use of structural
storm water control facilities that may be used to meet the minimum post construction
storm water management standards;
e. Establishing criteria for the use of better management and site design practices, such as the
preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas;
f. Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural
and nonstructural storm water best management practices (BMPs) to ensure that they
continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose minimum risk to
public safety;
g. Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and
disapproval of storm water management plans, for the inspection of approved projects, and
to assure appropriate long-term maintenance; and
h. Coordinating post construction storm water control provisions to be consistent with other
standards within this Title, including such areas as storm water detention, landscaping and
tree canopy, open space, and nonconforming improvements. (Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-
9-14) [formerly known as § 154.004]
E. APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
1. GOOSE CREEK DISTRICT. All developments and redevelopments within the corporate limits
of the Town of Matthews in the Goose Creek District as illustrated by the “Post Construction
Ordinance Map of the Town of Matthews” and described in 155.801.E.4. below are not subject to
this Chapter, but rather are subject to the requirements contained in North Carolina Administrative
Code 15A NCAC 2B.0600 – o.609 as administered by the North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources.
2. CATAWBA AND YADKIN DISTRICTS. The requirements of these regulations shall apply to all
developments and redevelopments within the Town not within the Goose Creek District, unless one
of the following exceptions applies to the development or redevelopment as of the effective date of
June 30, 2007.
a. For residential development, preliminary subdivision plan application or in the case of
minor subdivisions, construction plan for required improvements, submitted and accepted
for review;
b. For nonresidential development, preliminary subdivision plan application submitted and
accepted for review, provided that subdivision-wide water quality and quantity features
required at the time of submittal are contained within the submittal and provided the plan
is subsequently approved and all necessary easements are properly established;
c. Zoning use application submitted and accepted for review for uses that do not require a
building permit;
d. Certificate of Building Code Compliance issued by the proper governmental authority;
f. Valid building permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 153A-344 or G.S. § 160A-385(b)(I), so
long as the permit remains valid, unexpired, and unrevoked;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 3
g. Common law vested right established (e.g., the substantial expenditure of resources (time,
labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received a valid governmental
approval to proceed with a project); and/or
h. A conditional zoning district or parallel conditional district approved prior to the effective
date of this article/ordinance, provided formal plan submission has been made and accepted
for review either prior to five (5) years from the Effective Date of these regulations in the
case of conditional zoning districts approved on or after February 14, 2000 or prior to two
(2) years from the Effective Date of these regulations in the case of conditional zoning
districts approved prior to February 14, 2000, and provided such plans encompass either a
minimum of twenty five (25%) of the area of the project, or any phase of a project so long
as such phase is part of a project that includes project-wide water quality requirements to
achieve eighty five percent (85%) Total Suspended Solids removal from developed areas.
If no such formal plan submission occurs within the above-described five (5) year or two
(2) year time frames, the requirements of these regulations shall be applied to the project,
except for total phosphorus removal, undisturbed open space and buffer requirements not
in effect at the time of the approval of the conditional zoning district, all of which do not
apply. Any changes to a conditional zoning district necessary to comply with the
requirements of these regulations shall be made through administrative amendment and not
through a rezoning.
3. EXEMPTIONS. The requirements of the PCO shall not apply within the corporate limits with respect
to the following types of development or redevelopment activities:
a. Residential development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and cumulatively
creates less than twenty four percent (24%) built-upon area based on lot size or the lot is
less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (lot must have been described by metes and
bounds in a recorded deed prior to the Effective Date of the PCO and cannot be part of a
larger development);
b. Commercial and industrial development that cumulatively disturbs less than one acre and
cumulatively creates less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of built-upon area
(built-upon area includes gravel and other partially impervious materials);
c. Redevelopment that incorporates removal of some or all previous buildings and aboveground
structures but reuses existing impervious area (same footings/foundations) for new
buildings, that results in no net increase in built-upon area, that cumulatively disturbs less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and is not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale;
d. Any intensification of development on an existing improved/partially improved site not
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, which may convert ground-level
impervious surface to more intense uses, such as a paved area being converted to a building,
in no net increase in built-upon area, that cumulatively disturbs less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, and that provides equal or greater storm water control than the
previous development;
e. Any intensification of development on an existing improved/partially improved site which
is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, and only when the overall larger
common plan for development or sale has already incorporated and installed sufficient
storm water control improvements such that no further storm water control measures are
necessary to accommodate the new impervious area being created; and
f. Activities exempt from permit requirements of § 404 of the federal Clean Water Act, as
specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing farming and forestry activities). (Am. Ord.
2025A, passed 6-9-14)
4. NO DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT UNTIL COMPLIANCE AND PERMIT. No development or
redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the provisions of the PCO or unless exempted.
No development for which a permit is required pursuant to the PCO shall occur except in compliance
with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 4
5. MAP. The provisions of the PCO shall apply within the areas designated on the map titled “Post
Construction Ordinance Map of the Town of Matthews, North Carolina” (hereafter referred to as
the “Post Construction Ordinance Map” or “PCO Map”), which is adopted simultaneously with this
Chapter. The Post Construction Ordinance Map and all explanatory matter contained on it
accompanies and is made a part of the PCO. The Post Construction Ordinance Map shall be kept on
file by the Storm Water Administrator or designee (the “Storm Water Administrator”) and shall be
updated to take into account changes in the land area covered by the PCO and the geographic
location of all structural BMPs permitted under the PCO. In the event of a dispute, the applicability
of the PCO to a particular area of land or BMP shall be determined by appeal through the Storm
Water Administrator. [formerly known as § 154.005]
F. INTERPRETATION.
1. MEANING AND INTENT. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in the PCO shall
be construed according to the general and specific purposes set forth in § 155.801.D, Purpose. If a
different or more specific meaning is given for a term defined elsewhere in this Title, the meaning
and application of the term in the PCO shall control for purposes of application of the PCO.
2. TEXT CONTROLS IN EVENT OF CONFLICT. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text
of the PCO and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
3. AUTHORITY FOR INTERPRETATION. The Storm Water Administrator has authority to interpret the
PCO. Any person may request an interpretation by submitting a written request to the Storm Water
Administrator who shall respond in writing within thirty (30) days. The Storm Water Administrator
shall keep on file a record of all written interpretations of the PCO.
4. REFERENCES TO STATUTES, REGULATIONS, AND DOCUMENTS. Whenever reference is made to a
resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual (including the Design and Administrative
Manuals), or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such that
has been finalized and published with due provision for notice and comment, unless otherwise
specifically stated.
5. COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or holiday observed by the Town, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next
day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the Town. References to days are calendar
days unless otherwise stated.
6. DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Any act authorized by the PCO to be carried out by the Storm Water
Administrator of the Town may be carried out by his or her designee.
7. USAGE.
a. MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONARY TERMS. The words “shall”, “must”, and “will” are
mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular
provision. The words “may” and “should” are permissive in nature.
b. CONJUNCTIONS. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, conjunctions shall be
interpreted as follows: The word “and” indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions or events apply. The word “or” indicates that one or more of the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events apply.
c. TENSE, PLURALS, AND GENDER. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number
includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates
otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice
versa.
8. MEASUREMENT AND COMPUTATION. Lot area refers to the amount of horizontal land area contained
inside the lot lines of a lot or site. [formerly known as § 154.006]
G. DESIGN MANUAL.
1. REFERENCE TO DESIGN MANUAL. The Storm Water Administrator shall use the policy, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Design Manual as the basis for
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 5
decisions about storm water management permits and about the design, implementation and
performance of structural and non-structural storm water BMPs. The Design Manual includes a list
of acceptable storm water treatment practices, including the specific design criteria for each storm
water practice. Storm water treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with
these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance
standards of the PCO and the Phase II laws. Failure to construct storm water treatment practices in
accordance with these criteria may subject the violator to a civil penalty as described in § 155.807
of the PCO.
2. RELATIONSHIP OF DESIGN MANUAL TO OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS. If the specifications or
guidelines of the Design Manual are more restrictive or apply a higher standard than other laws or
regulations, that fact shall not prevent application of the specifications or guidelines in the Design
Manual.
3. CHANGES TO STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Standards, specifications, guidelines, policies,
criteria, or other information in the Design Manual in effect at the time of acceptance of a complete
application shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in implementing the
PCO with regard to the application.
4. AMENDMENTS TO DESIGN MANUAL. The Design Manual may be updated and expanded from time
to time, based on advancements in technology and engineering, improved knowledge of local
conditions, or local monitoring or maintenance experience. Prior to amending or updating the
Design Manual, proposed changes shall be generally publicized and made available for review, and
an opportunity for comment by interested persons shall be provided.[formerly known as § 154.007]
H. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.
1. CONFLICT OF LAWS. The PCO is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of the PCO are in addition to the requirements
of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of the
PCO imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or
other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective
standards for human or environmental health, safety, and welfare, shall control.
2. PRIVATE AGREEMENTS. The PCO is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or
other private agreement. However, where the regulations of the PCO are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, then the
requirements of the PCO shall govern. Nothing in the PCO shall modify or repeal any private
covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not legitimize any failure to
comply with the PCO. In no case shall the Town be obligated to enforce the provisions of any
easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties. [formerly known as § 154.008]
I. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
1. EFFECTIVE DATE. The PCO shall take effect on June 30, 2007.
2. VIOLATIONS CONTINUE. Any violation of the provisions of the PCO existing as of the Effective
Date of the PCO shall continue to be a violation under the PCO and be subject to penalties and
enforcement unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the
provisions of the PCO.[formerly known as § 154.110]
155.802. Administration and Procedures [formerly § 154, Section II]
A. THE STORM WATER ADMINISTRATOR. The Storm Water Administrator has designated responsibilities as
listed at § 155.206. [formerly known as § 154.021, moved to § 155.206]
B. REVIEW PROCEDURES.
1. PERMIT REQUIRED;MUST APPLY FOR PERMIT. A storm water management permit is required for all
development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to the PCO. A permit may only be issued
subsequent to a properly submitted, reviewed and approved permit application, pursuant to this
Chapter. The content and form of the permit shall be established by the Storm Water Administrator.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 6
2. EFFECT OF PERMIT. A storm water management permit shall govern the design, installation, and
construction of storm water management and control practices on the site, including structural BMPs
and elements of site design for storm water management other than structural BMPs. The permit is
intended to provide a mechanism for the review, approval, and inspection of the approach to be used
for the management and control of storm water for the development or redevelopment site consistent
with the requirements of the PCO, whether the approach consists of structural BMPs or other
techniques such as low-impact or low-density design. Compliance after project construction is
assured by the maintenance provision of the PCO.
3. AUTHORITY TO FILE APPLICATIONS. All applications required pursuant to the PCO shall be
submitted to the Storm Water Administrator by the land owner or the land owner’s duly authorized
agent or anyone having interest in the property by reason of a written contract with the owner.
4. ESTABLISHMENT OF APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS, SCHEDULE, AND FEES.
a. APPLICATION CONTENTS AND FORM The Storm Water Administrator shall establish
requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall amend and update those
requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the storm water management permit
application shall describe in detail how post construction storm water runoff will be
controlled and managed, the design of all storm water facilities and practices, and how the
proposed project will meet the requirements of the PCO.
b. SUBMISSION SCHEDULE. The Storm Water Administrator shall establish a submission
schedule for applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by which complete
applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring that there is adequate time to
review applications, and that the various stages in the review process are accommodated.
c. PERMIT REVIEW FEES. The Storm Water Administrator shall establish permit review fees
as well as policies regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of an application, and
may amend and update the fees and policies from time to time.
d. ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL. For applications required under the PCO, the Storm Water
Administrator shall compile into an Administrative Manual the application requirements,
submittal checklist, submission schedule, fee schedule, maintenance agreements, a copy of
the PCO, and where to obtain the Design Manual, as well as other information and
materials necessary for the effective administration of the PCO. This Administrative
Manual shall be made available to the public.
5. SUBMITTAL OF COMPLETE APPLICATION. Applications shall be submitted to the Storm Water
Administrator pursuant to the application submittal schedule in the form established by the Storm
Water Administrator, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant to this Chapter. An
application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it contains all elements of a complete
application pursuant to the PCO, along with the appropriate fee. If the Storm Water Administrator
finds that an application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient elements and
shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete application. However, the submittal of
an incomplete application shall not suffice to meet a deadline contained in the submission schedule
established above.
6. REVIEW. Within thirty (30) working days after a complete application is submitted, the Storm Water
Administrator shall review the application and determine whether the application complies with the
standards of the PCO. A copy of the application including all attachments shall be provided to the
Town for review.
a. APPROVAL. If the Storm Water Administrator finds that the application complies with the
standards of the PCO, the Storm Water Administrator shall approve the application and
issue a storm water management permit to the applicant. The Storm Water Administrator
may impose conditions of approval as needed to ensure compliance with the PCO. The
conditions shall be included in the permit as part of the approval.
b. FAILS TO COMPLY. If the Storm Water Administrator finds that the application fails to
comply with the standards of the PCO, the Storm Water Administrator shall notify the
applicant and shall indicate how the application fails to comply. The applicant shall have
an opportunity to submit a revised application.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 7
c. REVISION AND SUBSEQUENT REVIEW. A complete revised application shall be reviewed by
the Storm Water Administrator within fifteen (15) working days after its re-submittal and
shall be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved. If a revised application is not
re-submitted within sixty (60) calendar days from the date the applicant was notified, the
application shall be considered withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or
substantially the same project shall be required along with the appropriate fee.[formerly
known as § 154.022]
C. APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
1. CONCEPT PLAN AND CONSULTATION MEETING. A Concept Plan shall be submitted to and approved
by the Storm Water Administrator prior to approval of the preliminary plan for a project or approval
of a rezoning application, and prior to submittal of a Storm Water Management Permit Application.
The Concept Plan should be submitted for review along with sketch plans for the project. The
purpose of the Concept Plan is to demonstrate how a proposed project shall comply with the post
construction ordinance requirements in the early stages of project design. At the time of submittal
of a Concept Plan the Storm Water Administrator or land owner or the land owner’s duly authorized
agent or anyone having interest in the property, by reason of a written contract with the owner, may
request consultation(s) on a Concept Plan for the post construction storm water management system
to be utilized in the proposed development project. This consultation meeting(s) should take place
at the time of the preliminary plan of the subdivision, submission of a rezoning application, or other
early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting(s) is to discuss the post
construction storm water management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to
discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential approaches to storm water management
designs before formal site design engineering is commenced. Local watershed plans and other
relevant resource protection plans may be consulted in the discussion of the Concept Plan. To
accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the Concept Plan, which
should be submitted in advance of the meeting as specified in the Administrative Manual.
a. EXISTING CONDITIONS / PROPOSED SITE PLANS. A Concept Plan shall include existing
conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing
and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant
soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits
of clearing and grading; proposed Undisturbed Open Space area; and location of existing
and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
b. NATURAL RESOURCES INVENTORY. A Concept Plan submitted prior to a consultation
meeting shall include a written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and
surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description
should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, geologic features, topography,
wetlands, and native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of
other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as lakes, ponds, flood plains,
stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic system
setbacks, etc.) Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that
provide particular opportunities or constraints for development.
c. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CONCEPT PLAN. A Concept Plan shall include the
proposed post construction storm water management system including: preliminary
selecting and location of proposed structural storm water controls; low impact design
elements; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels,
swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of proposed Undisturbed Open Space areas;
location of all floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream
properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel
modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
2. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT APPLICATION. The storm water management permit
application shall detail how post construction storm water runoff will be controlled and managed
and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of the PCO, including § 155.803,
Standards. All such plans submitted with the application shall be prepared by a registered North
Carolina professional engineer or landscape architect. The engineer or landscape architect shall
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 8
perform services only in their area of competence, and shall verify that the design of all storm water
management facilities and practices meets the submittal requirements for complete applications, that
the designs and plans are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies found in the
Design Manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with the PCO. The submittal shall
include all of the information required in the submittal checklist established by the Storm Water
Administrator. Incomplete submittals shall be treated pursuant to § 155.802.B.5.
3. AS-BUILT PLANS AND FINAL APPROVAL. The applicant shall certify that the completed project is in
accordance with the approved storm water management plans and designs, and shall submit actual
“as- built” plans for all storm water management facilities or practices after final construction is
completed. Failure to provide approved as-built plans within the time frame specified by the Storm
Water Administrator may result in assessment of penalties as specified in § 155.807, Violations and
Enforcement. At the discretion of the Storm Water Administrator, performance securities or bonds
may be required for storm water management facilities or practices until as-built plans are approved.
As-built plans shall show the final design specifications for all storm water management facilities
and practices and the field location, size, depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls,
and devices, as installed, and location and size of all Undisturbed Open Space areas and tree
plantings. The designer of the storm water management measures and plans shall certify, under seal,
that the as-built storm water measures, controls, and devices are in compliance with the approved
storm water management plans and designs and with the requirements of the PCO. Final as-built
plans and a final inspection and approval by the Storm Water Administrator are required before a
project is determined to be in compliance with the PCO. At the discretion of the Storm Water
Administrator, certificates of occupancy may be withheld pending receipt of as-built plans and the
completion of a final inspection and approval of a project.[formerly known as § 154.023]
D. APPROVALS.
1. EFFECT OF APPROVAL. Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward with only the specific plans
and activity authorized in the permit. The approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant
from obtaining other applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities.
2. TIME LIMIT/EXPIRATION. A Storm Water Management Permit and accompanying plan approved
under the provisions of the PCO shall remain valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of
approval. If no work on the site in furtherance of the plan has commenced within the three (3) year
period, the permit and plan approval will become null and void and a new application will be
required to develop the site. If work on the site in furtherance of the plan has commenced that
involves any utility installations or street improvements except grading, the permit and plan shall
remain valid and in force and the project may be completed in accordance with the approved plan.
[formerly known as § 154.024]
E. APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
1. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE STORM WATER ADVISORY COMMITTEE. The Storm Water Advisory
Committee (the “SWAC”), shall have the following powers and duties:
a. ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW. To hear and decide appeals according to the procedures set
forth in this Chapter, where it is alleged there is an error in any order, decision,
determination, or interpretation made by the Storm Water Administrator in the enforcement
of the PCO, including assessments of remedies and/or penalties.
b. VARIANCES. To grant variances in specific cases from the terms of the PCO according to
the standards and procedures in § 155.802.E.
2. PETITION TO SWACFOR APPEAL OR VARIANCE.An appeal may be initiated by any aggrieved person
affected by any decision, order, requirement, or determination relating to the interpretation or
application of the PCO. A petition for variance from the requirements of the PCO may be initiated
by the owner of the affected property, an agent authorized in writing to act on the owner’s behalf,
or a person having written contractual interest in the affected property.
a. FILING OF NOTICE OF APPEAL. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Storm Water
Administrator contesting any order, decision, determination or interpretation within thirty
(30) working days of the day of the order, decision, determination or interpretation made
or rendered by the Storm Water Administrator in the enforcement of the PCO, including
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 9
assessments of remedies and penalties. SWAC may waive or extend the thirty (30) day
deadline only upon determining that the person filing the notice of appeal received no
actual or constructive form of notice of the order, decision, determination or interpretation
being appealed. The notice filed with the Storm Water Administrator shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable filing fee as established by SWAC as well as a list of adjoining
properties including tax parcel numbers and the name and address of each owner. Failure
to timely file such notice and fee shall constitute a waiver of any rights to appeal under the
PCO. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Storm Water Administrator shall transmit to
SWAC copies of all administrative papers, records, and other information regarding the
subject matter of the appeal. The filing of such notice shall stay any proceedings in
furtherance of the contested action, except the Storm Water Administrator may certify in
writing to SWAC that because of facts stated in the certificate, a stay imposes an imminent
peril to life or property or would seriously interfere with the enforcement of the PCO.
SWAC shall then review such certificate and may override the stay of further proceedings.
b. FILING A VARIANCE PETITION. A petition for variance, in the form prescribed by SWAC,
shall be filed with the Storm Water Administrator accompanied by a nonrefundable filing
fee as established by SWAC as well as a list of adjoining properties including tax parcel
numbers and the name and address of each owner. Upon receipt of a variance petition, the
Storm Water Administrator shall transmit to SWAC copies of all information regarding the
variance.
c. NOTICE AND HEARING. SWAC shall, in accordance with the rules adopted by it for such
purposes, hold public hearings on any appeal or variance petition which comes before it.
SWAC shall, prior to the hearing, mail written notice of the time, place and subject of the
hearing to the person or persons filing the notice of appeal or variance petition, to the
owners of the subject property and to the owners of property adjacent to the subject
property. The hearing shall be conducted in the nature of a quasi-judicial proceeding with
all findings of fact supported by competent, material evidence.
d. STANDARDS FOR GRANTING AN APPEAL. SWAC shall reverse or modify the order, decision,
determination or interpretation under appeal only upon finding an error in the application
of the PCO on the part of the Storm Water Administrator. In modifying the order, decision,
determination or interpretation, SWAC shall have all the powers of the Storm Water
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. If SWAC finds that a violation of the PCO
has occurred, but that in setting the amount of the penalty the Storm Water Administrator
has not considered or given appropriate weight to either mitigating or aggravating factors,
SWAC shall either decrease or increase the per day civil penalty within the range allowed
by the PCO. Any decision of SWAC that modifies the amount of a civil penalty shall
include, as part of the findings of fact and conclusions of law, findings as to which
mitigating or aggravating factors exist and the appropriate weight that should have been
given to such factors by the Storm Water Administrator in setting the amount of the civil
penalty levied against the Petitioner.
e. STANDARDS FOR GRANTING A VARIANCE. Before granting a variance, SWAC shall have
made all the following findings:
i. Unnecessary hardships would result from the strict application of the PCO.
ii. The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as the
location, size or topography of the property.
iii. The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
iv. The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the
PCO; will secure public safety and welfare; and will preserve substantial justice.
f. VARIANCE CONDITIONS. SWAC may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon any variance it grants.
g. ACTION BY SWAC. SWAC bylaws will determine the number of concurring votes needed
to grant an appeal or request for variance. SWAC shall grant or deny the variance or shall
reverse, affirm or modify the order, decision, determination or interpretation under appeal
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 10
by recording in the minutes of the meeting the reasons that SWAC used and the findings
of fact and conclusions of law made by SWAC to reach its decision.
h. REHEARING. SWAC shall refuse to hear an appeal or variance petition which has been
previously denied unless it finds there have been substantial changes in the conditions or
circumstances relating to the matter.
3. REVIEW BY SUPERIOR COURT. Every decision of SWAC shall be subject to Superior Court review
by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Petition for review by the Superior Court shall be filed
with the Clerk of Superior Court within thirty (30) days after the later occurring of the following: 1)
the decision of SWAC is filed; or 2) a written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved
party who has filed a written request for such copy with SWAC at the time of its hearing of the case.
[formerly known as § 154.025]
155.803. Standards [formerly § 154, Section III]
A. GENERAL STANDARDS. All development and redevelopment to which the PCO applies shall comply with the
standards of this section. [formerly known as § 154.031]
1. All built-upon area for development and redevelopment subject to the requirements of this PCO
shall be at a minimum thirty feet (30’) landward of all perennial and intermittent surface waters.
This built-upon area setback can be located within the stream buffer area defined by this PCO, but
any disturbances within the built-upon area setback must also comply with SWIM buffers and
detention standards as outlined at § 155.704, and regulated floodways as outlined in Chapter 9. A
surface water shall be deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on either the most recent
version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute)
quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An
exception to this requirement shall be granted if one or more of the following is satisfied and
documented:
a. Based on an on-site determination by the Storm Water Administrator or designee, surface
waters are not present on the site. When a landowner or other affected party believes that
the maps have inaccurately depicted surface waters, he or she shall consult the Storm Water
Administrator or designee. Upon request, the Storm Water Administrator or designee shall
make on-site determinations. Surface waters that appear on the maps shall not be subject
to this Chapter if this on-site determination shows that they fall into one of the following
categories:
i. Ditches and manmade conveyances other than modified natural streams unless
constructed for navigation or boat access;
ii. Manmade ponds and lakes located outside natural drainage ways;
iii. Ephemeral (storm water) streams.
b. Based on a variance issued pursuant to § 155.802.E., unnecessary hardships would result
from the strict application of this requirement.
c. Based on a determination by the Storm Water Administrator, a lack of practical alternatives
exists for accomplishing the basic purpose of the project in a manner that would avoid or
result in less adverse impact to surface waters considering the potential for a reduction in
size, configuration, or density and all alternative designs.
B. WATERSHED DISTRICTS. Standards for development and redevelopment vary depending on the watershed
district in which a project is located as described in the Town’s “Post Construction Ordinance Map,” which
is adopted simultaneously as described in § 155.801.E.4. The Town is divided into the following watershed
districts for purposes of the PCO.
1. CATAWBA DISTRICT. That area of land that drains to West Fork Twelve Mile, McAlpine, and Four
Mile Creeks in the Catawba River basin in the Town, including all creeks and tributaries.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 11
2. YADKIN DISTRICT. That area of land that drains to the North Fork of Crooked Creek in the Yadkin
River basin in the Town, including all creeks and tributaries.
3. Goose Creek District. That area of land that drains to Goose Creek in the Yadkin River Basin in the
Town, including all tributaries. This area of land is not subject to the provisions of this Chapter, but
rather is subject to the requirements contained in the State of North Carolina Administrative Code
15A NCAC 2B.0600 – 0.609 as administered by the North Carolina Department of Environment
and Natural Resources. [formerly known as § 154.032]
C. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE CATAWBA DISTRICT.
1. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOW DENSITY PROJECTS. Any project in the Catawba District is
considered low density when said drainage area has less than or equal to twenty four percent (24%)
built-upon area as determined by the methodology established in the Design Manual. Such lowdensity
projects shall comply with each of the following standards.
a. VEGETATED CONVEYANCES. Storm water runoff from the development shall be transported
from the development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable.
b. STREAM BUFFERS. The S.W.I.M. Stream Buffer requirements apply in the Catawba as
described in Chapter 7. In addition, intermittent and perennial streams within the project
boundary shall be delineated by a certified professional using U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and N.C. Division of Water Quality methodology and shall be shown in the
storm water management permit application along with all buffer areas. All perennial and
intermittent streams draining less than fifty (50) acres shall have a minimum thirty foot
(30’) vegetated buffer including a ten foot (10’) zone adjacent to the bank. All buffers shall
be measured from the top of the bank on both sides of the stream. Disturbance of the buffer
is allowed; however, any disturbed area must be revegetated and disturbance of the ten foot
(10’) zone adjacent to the bank shall require stream bank stabilization using bioengineering
techniques as specified in the Design Manual. The buffer widths for streams draining
greater than or equal to fifty (50) acres and the other provisions of the S.W.I.M. regulations
shall apply in the Catawba District. Passive recreational uses are allowed in the buffer,
including greenway trails and bicycle paths, as well as other land uses consistent with
maintaining the natural topography and vegetation.
c. For projects with twenty-two to twenty-four percent (22 – 24%) built-upon area, the
maximum built-upon area limit shall not be modified on any parcel that is included on a
recorded final plat. If additional open land is subsequently required in order to maintain
the BUA limit established when the first plat was recorded for the subdivision or
development site: a parcel on a previously recorded plat within the same subdivision may
be revised to become common open space or dedicated as permanent open and unbuildable
land; or two lots may be replatted and recorded to become a single parcel, with a written
note on the plat explaining the reason and stating that the two lots may not be subsequently
separated or further revised. (Am. Ord 2264, passed 10-9-17)
2. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HIGH DENSITY PROJECTS. Any project in the Catawba District is
considered high density when said drainage area has greater than twenty four percent (24%) builtupon
area as determined by the methodology established in the Design Manual. Such high-density
projects shall implement storm water treatment systems that comply with each of the following
standards.
a. STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT VOLUME. Storm water quality treatment systems
shall treat the runoff generated from the first inch of rainfall.
b. STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT. All structural storm water treatment systems used
to meet these requirements shall be designed to have a minimum of eighty five percent
(85%) average annual removal for Total Suspended Solids. Low Impact Development
techniques as described in the Design Manual can be used to meet this requirement.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 12
c. STORM WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM DESIGN. General engineering design criteria for all
projects shall be in accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the Design
Manual.
d. STREAM BUFFERS. The S.W.I.M. Stream Buffer requirements apply in the Catawba as
described in Chapter 7. In addition, intermittent and perennial streams within the project
boundary shall be delineated by a certified professional using U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and N.C. Division of Water Quality methodology and shall be shown in the
storm water management permit application along with all buffer areas. All perennial and
intermittent streams draining less than fifty (50) acres shall have a minimum thirty foot
(30’) vegetated buffer including a ten foot (10’) zone adjacent to the bank. All buffers shall
be measured from the top of the bank on both sides of the stream. Disturbance of the buffer
is allowed; however, any disturbed area must be revegetated and disturbance of the ten foot
(10’) zone adjacent to the bank shall require stream bank stabilization using bioengineering
techniques as specified in the Design Manual. The buffer widths for streams draining
greater than or equal to fifty (50) acres and the other provisions of the S.W.I.M. regulations
shall apply in the Catawba District. Passive recreational uses are allowed in the buffer,
including greenway trails and bicycle paths, as well as other land uses consistent with
maintaining the natural topography and vegetation.
e. STORM WATER VOLUME CONTROL. Storm water treatment systems shall be installed to
control the volume leaving the project site at post-development for the one (1) year, twenty
four (24) hour storm. Runoff volume drawdown time shall be a minimum of 24 hours, but
not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours.
f. STORM WATER PEAK CONTROL. For residential developments exceeding twenty four
percent (24%) built-upon area, peak control shall be installed for the appropriate storm
frequency (i.e., 10, 25, 50 or 100 yr, 6 hr) as determined by the Storm Water Administrator
based on a downstream flood analysis provided by the owner or designee using the criteria
specified in the Design Manual or if a downstream analysis is not performed the peak shall
be controlled for the ten (10) year and twenty five (25) year, six (6) hour storms. For
commercial development exceeding twenty four percent (24%) built-upon area, peak
control shall be installed for the 10-yr, 6-hr storm and additional peak control provided for
the appropriate storm frequency (i.e., 25, 50 or 100-yr, 6-hr) as determined by the Storm
Water Administrator based on a downstream flood analysis provided by the owner or
designee using the criteria specified in the Design Manual or if a downstream analysis is
not performed the peak shall be controlled for the 10-yr and 25-yr, 6-hr storms. Controlling
the 1-year, 24-hour volume achieves peak control for the 2-year, 6-hour storm. The
emergency overflow and outlet works for any pond or wetland constructed as a storm water
BMP shall be capable of safely passing a discharge with a minimum recurrence frequency
as specified in the Design Manual. For detention basins, the temporary storage capacity
shall be restored within seventy two (72) hours. Requirements of the Dam Safety Act shall
be met when applicable. [formerly known as § 154.033]
D. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE YADKIN DISTRICT.
1. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOW DENSITY PROJECTS. Any project in the Yadkin District is
considered low density when said drainage area has less than or equal to ten percent (10%) builtupon
area as determined by the methodology established in the Design Manual. Such low density
projects shall comply with each of the following standards.
a. VEGETATED CONVEYANCES. Storm water runoff from the development shall be
transported from the development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent
practicable.
b. STREAM BUFFERS. Intermittent and perennial streams within the project boundary shall be
delineated by a certified professional using U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and N.C.
Division of Water Quality methodology and shall be shown in the storm water management
permit application along with all buffer areas. All perennial and intermittent streams
draining less than fifty (50) acres shall have a minimum fifty foot (50’) undisturbed buffer.
All perennial and intermittent streams draining greater than or equal to fifty (50) acres shall
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 13
have a one hundred foot (100’) undisturbed buffer, plus the entire floodplain. All buffers
shall be measured from the top of the bank on both sides of the stream. The uses allowed
in the stream side zone described in the S.W.I.M. Stream Buffer requirements in Chapter
7 as well as the other provisions of the S.W.I.M. regulations shall apply in the Yadkin
District (except buffer widths). Passive recreational uses are allowed in the buffer,
including greenway trails and bicycle paths, as well as other land uses consistent with
maintaining the natural topography and vegetation.
c. For projects with nine to ten percent (9 – 10%) built-upon area, this maximum built-upon
area limit shall not be modified on any parcel that is included on a recorded final plat. If
additional open land is subsequently required in order to maintain the BUA limit
established when the first plat was recorded for the subdivision or development site: a
parcel on a previously recorded plat within the same subdivision may be revised to become
common open space or dedicated as permanent open and unbuildable land; or two lots may
be replatted and recorded to become a single parcel, with a written note on the plat
explaining the reason and stating that the two lots may not be subsequently separated or
further revised. (Am. Ord 2264, passed 10-9-17)
2. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HIGH DENSITY PROJECTS. Any project in the Yadkin District is
considered high density when said drainage area has greater than ten percent (10%) built-upon area
as determined by the methodology established in the Design Manual. Such high density projects
shall implement storm water treatment systems that comply with each of the following standards:
a. STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT VOLUME. Storm water quality treatment systems
shall treat the runoff generated from the first inch of rainfall.
b. STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT. All structural storm water treatment systems used
to meet these requirements shall be designed to have a minimum of eighty five percent
(85%) average annual removal for Total Suspended Solids and seventy percent (70%)
average annual removal for Total Phosphorus. Low Impact Development techniques as
described in the Design Manual can be used to meet this requirement.
c. STORM WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM DESIGN. General engineering design criteria for all
projects shall be in accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the Design
Manual.
d. STREAM BUFFERS. Intermittent and perennial streams within the project boundary shall be
delineated by a certified professional using U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and N.C.
Division of Water Quality methodology and shall be shown in the storm water management
permit application along with all buffer areas. All perennial and intermittent streams
draining less than fifty (50) acres shall have a minimum fifty foot (50’) undisturbed buffer.
All perennial and intermittent streams draining greater than or equal to fifty (50) acres shall
have a one hundred foot (100’) undisturbed buffer, plus the entire floodplain. All buffers
shall be measured from the top of the bank on both sides of the stream. The uses allowed
in the stream side zone described in the S.W.I.M. Stream Buffer requirements in Chapter
7 as well as the other provisions of the S.W.I.M. regulations shall apply in the Yadkin
District (except buffer widths). Passive recreational uses are allowed in the buffer,
including greenway trails and bicycle paths, as well as other land uses consistent with
maintaining the natural topography and vegetation.
e. STORM WATER VOLUME CONTROL. Storm water treatment systems shall be installed to
control the volume leaving the project site at post-development for the 1-year, 24-hour
storm. Runoff volume drawdown time shall be a minimum of twenty four (24) hours, but
not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours.
f. STORM WATER PEAK CONTROL. For residential developments exceeding ten percent (10%)
built-upon area, peak control shall be installed for the appropriate storm frequency (i.e.,
10, 25, 50 or 100-yr, 6-hr) as determined by the Storm Water Administrator based on a
downstream flood analysis provided by the owner or designee using the criteria specified
in the Design Manual or if a downstream analysis is not performed the peak shall be
controlled for the 10-yr and 25-yr, 6-hr storms. For commercial development exceeding
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 14
ten percent (10%) built-upon area, peak control shall be installed for the 10-yr, 6-hr storm
and additional peak control provided for the appropriate storm frequency (i.e., 25, 50 or
100-yr, 6-hr) as determined by the Storm Water Administrator based on a downstream
flood analysis provided by the owner or designee using the criteria specified in the Design
Manual or if a downstream analysis is not performed the peak shall be controlled for the
10-yr and 25-yr, 6-hr storms. Controlling the 1-year, 24-hour volume achieves peak control
for the 2-year, 6-hour storm. The emergency overflow and outlet works for any pond or
wetland constructed as a storm water BMP shall be capable of safely passing a discharge
with a minimum recurrence frequency as specified in the Design Manual. For detention
basins, the temporary storage capacity shall be restored within seventy two (72) hours.
Requirements of the Dam Safety Act shall be met when applicable. [formerly known as
§ 154.034]
E. STANDARDS FOR STORM WATER CONTROL MEASURES
1. EVALUATION ACCORDING TO CONTENTS OF DESIGN MANUAL. All storm water control measures
and storm water treatment practices (also referred to as Best Management Practices, or BMPs)
required under the PCO shall be evaluated by the Storm Water Administrator according to the
policies, criteria, and information, including technical specifications, standards and the specific
design criteria for each storm water best management practice contained in the Design Manual. The
Storm Water Administrator shall determine whether these measures will be adequate to meet the
requirements of the PCO.
2. DETERMINATION OF ADEQUACY; PRESUMPTIONS AND ALTERNATIVES. Storm water treatment
practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the criteria and
specifications in the Design Manual will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality and
quantity performance standards of the PCO. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or
practices not designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and specifications in the
Design Manual, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy
the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards of the PCO before it can be
approved for use. The Storm Water Administrator may require the applicant to provide such
documentation, calculations, and examples as necessary for the Storm Water Administrator to
determine whether such an affirmative showing is made.
3. SUBMITTAL OF DIGITAL RECORDS. Upon submittal of as-built plans, the location of storm drainage
pipes, inlets and outlets as well as the location of all BMPs as well as Undisturbed Open Space must
be delivered to the Storm Water Administrator in the digital format specified in the Design Manual.
[formerly known as § 154.035]
F. TOTAL PHOSPHOROUS MITIGATION FOR THE YADKIN DISTRICT.
1. PURPOSE. The purpose of this mitigation is to reduce the cost of complying with the seventy percent
(70%) total phosphorus removal criteria for developments exceeding fifty percent (50%) built-upon
area while ensuring the reduction of pollution loads and achievement of the ordinance objectives.
2. GENERAL DESCRIPTION. For the Yadkin District, there are two (2) total phosphorus mitigation
options available to developments greater than or equal to sixty percent (60%) built-upon area,
including offsite mitigation and a buy-down option as described in this Chapter. For developments
with greater than or equal to fifty percent (50%) and less than sixty percent (60%) built-upon area,
off-site mitigation only is allowed provided it occurs in the same named creek system. Both off-site
and buy-down mitigation will result in the construction of retrofit BMPs. In addition, the buy-down
option is available provided the Town of Matthews has projects and/or property available for
mitigation. There is no total phosphorus requirement in the Catawba District so the mitigation option
is not necessary.
3. CRITERIA FOR OFF-SITE MITIGATION FOR THE YADKIN DISTRICT.
a. The owner or designee of a proposed construction site that will include greater than or
equal to fifty percent (50%) built-upon area shall construct a BMP retrofit project designed
to achieve an equivalent or greater net mass removal of total phosphorus as would be
achieved by removing seventy percent (70%) of the total phosphorus from the proposed
site. Off-site mitigation is allowed only for total phosphorus removal above fifty percent
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 15
(50%). On-site BMPs shall be constructed to achieve fifty percent (50%) removal of total
phosphorus.
b. The Storm Water Administrator shall receive, review, approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions an “Application for Off-Site Total Phosphorus Mitigation.” The Storm Water
Administrator shall design this application to include all pertinent information. This
application shall be submitted with the storm water management permit application and
shall at a minimum contain a description of the BMP(s) to be constructed, including their
type and size as well as the pollutant removal efficiencies to be achieved. The location of
the site where the BMP(s) are to be constructed shall be described, including the size of
the drainage area to be treated and percentage and type of existing built-upon area. The
application must also include the pounds of total phosphorus being mitigated for and the
pounds of total phosphorus reduced with the retrofit BMP(s). A legally valid instrument
shall be submitted with the application to demonstrate that the applicant has land rights to
perform the BMP retrofit on the property.
c. The criteria for approval of offsite total phosphorus mitigation by the Storm Water
Administrator are as follows:
i. BMP(s) must be constructed in accordance with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as
explained in the Design Manual.
ii. BMP(s) must be sized for the corresponding watershed area according to the
Design Manual.
iii. BMP(s) must be inspected by the Storm Water Administrator and found to be in
compliance with all approved plans and specifications prior to the release of
occupancy permits for the mitigated site.
iv. Following approval from the Storm Water Administrator, BMP(s) may be
installed and credits obtained for pounds of total phosphorus removed that can be
applied to future projects. These credits can be accumulated or “banked” for a
period of time as specified by the Storm Water Administrator in the
Administrative Manual.
v. All off-site mitigation BMPs shall be subject to the maintenance requirements as
well as installation and maintenance performance securities specified in §
155.806.
4. CRITERIA FOR TOTAL PHOSPHORUS BUY-DOWN OPTION FOR THE YADKIN DISTRICT.
a. The owner or designee of a proposed construction site that will include greater than or
equal to sixty percent (60%) built-upon area may “buy-down” the seventy percent (70%)
phosphorus removal requirement to no less than fifty percent (50%). On-site BMPs must
be installed to remove the remaining total phosphorus load. The money shall be used by
the Town ofMatthews to construct BMP retrofit projects designed to achieve an equivalent
or greater net mass removal of total phosphorus as would be achieved by removing seventy
percent (70%) of the total phosphorus from the proposed site.
b. The Storm Water Administrator shall receive, review, approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions an “Application for Total Phosphorus Buy-Down.” The Storm Water
Administrator shall design this application to include all pertinent information. This
application shall be submitted with the storm water management permit application and
shall at a minimum contain calculations showing the total load buy-down and all cost
calculations as described in the Design Manual.
c. The criteria for the buy-down option are as follows:
i. The buy-down option shall not be approved by the Storm Water Administrator
unless projects and/or properties are available for mitigation, including BMP
construction, BMP maintenance, BMP rehabilitation and stream restoration.
ii. There is no time constraint for the Town of Matthews to spend mitigation money;
however, the Town shall strive to spend buy-down monies in a timely and
efficient manner such that a net improvement in water quality results.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 16
iii. All BMPs constructed by the Town of Matthews as part of this mitigation option
shall be maintained by the Town of Matthews into perpetuity.
d. The criteria for calculating the buy down cost shall be provided in the Design
Manual.[formerly known as § 154.036]
G. DEED RECORDATION AND INDICATIONS ON PLAT. The approval of the storm water management permit shall
require an enforceable restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as plat, recorded deed
restrictions or protective covenants, to ensure that future development and redevelopment maintains the site
consistent with the approved project plans. This or these documents must be recorded at the Register of Deeds
and at a minimum include the following:
1. The location of all designated Undisturbed Open Space shall be identified on a plat as “Undisturbed
Open Space.”
2. Streams and buffer boundaries including the delineation of each buffer zone must be specified on
record plats.
3. The applicable operations and maintenance agreement pertaining to every structural BMP shall be
referenced on the final plat and shall be recorded with the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds
Office upon final plat approval. If no subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operations
and maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds
Office so as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under generally accepted
searching principles. A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be provided to the Storm
Water Administrator within fourteen (14) days following receipt of the recorded document.
4. A maintenance easement for every structural BMP to allow sufficient access for adequate
maintenance.
5. When the proposed development project is utilizing the low density provisions indicated at §
155.803.C.1. within the Catawba District and proposes a Built-Upon Area (BUA) between twentytwo
and twenty-four percent (22 - 24%), then the maximum built-upon area limit shall not be
modified on any parcel once that parcel is included on a recorded plat. Any record plat for a
development utilizing the low density option and having a built-upon area of twenty-two to twentyfour
percent (22 – 24%) shall include a written note explaining that no parcel on the plat may be
revised in size or built-upon area restrictions, except as allowed at §155.803.C.1.c, or to correct
technical mistakes made in the original record plat.
6. When the proposed development project is utilizing the low density provisions indicated at §
155.803.D.1. within the Yadkin District and proposes a Built-Upon Area (BUA) between nine and
ten percent (9 – 10%), then the maximum built-upon area limit shall not be modified on any parcel
once that parcel is included on a recorded plat. Any record plat for a development utilizing the low
density option and having a built-upon area of nine to ten percent (9 – 10%) shall include a written
note explaining no parcel on the plat may be revised in size or built-upon area restrictions, except
as allowed at §155.803.D.1.c, or to correct technical mistakes made in the original record plat.
7. The specific recordation and deed restriction requirements as well as notes to be displayed on final
plats and deeds shall be contained in the Administrative Manual.
(Am. Ord. 2264, passed 10-9-17) [formerly known as § 154.037]
155.804. Development and Redevelopment Mitigation [formerly § 154, Section IV]
A. MITIGATION PAYMENT. Development and redevelopment on a lot less than one (1) acre in size measured in
accordance with § 155.801.F.8 that is not exempt according to § 155.801.E.2 is allowed by right to forego
meeting the requirements of the PCO provided the Town is paid a mitigation fee according to rates set forth
in the Administrative Manual and provided such development and redevelopment are not part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take place at
different times on different schedules. [formerly known as § 154.041]
B. CRITERIA FOR MITIGATION PAYMENT.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 17
1. NOTIFICATION TO STORM WATER ADMINISTRATOR. The by-right mitigation option does not require
approval by the Storm Water Administrator; however, notification that this right is to be exercised
for a particular lot must be made prior to the issuance of any permits for the project. This notification
is to be made to the Storm Water Administrator on a standard form provided in the Administrative
Manual.
2. USE OF MITIGATION PAYMENT. The Town shall use the mitigation payment to install water quality
enhancement measures, including but not limited to BMPs, stream restoration, open space
preservation, etc. BMP(s) installed using the mitigation payment must be constructed in accordance
with 15A NCAC 2H .1008(c), as explained in the Administrative Manual. All BMPs constructed by
the Town as part of this mitigation option shall be maintained by the Town of Matthews into
perpetuity.
3. TIME FRAME FOR USE OF MITIGATION PAYMENT. The Town shall use the mitigation payment within
a maximum of two (2) years of the end of the calendar year from the receipt of the payment. As an
option, the Town of Matthews may elect to use the fee to purchase and plant trees within the Town.
[formerly known as § 154.042]
155.805. Undisturbed Open Space [formerly § 154, Section V]
A. PURPOSE. Undisturbed Open Space provides for a reduction in the negative impacts from storm water runoff
through nonstructural means. The combination of the structural BMPs described in § 155.803 with the nonstructural
Undisturbed Open Space provisions described in this § 155.805 allow the objectives of the PCO to
be fulfilled. [formerly known as § 154.051]
B. GENERAL DESCRIPTION. Except as provided below in paragraph C.4, Undisturbed Open Space is required
for all development unless mitigated. The percentage of Open Space required depends on a project’s builtupon
area as described below. Undisturbed Open Space requirements can be met in stream or lake buffers,
designated common areas or on individual lots for residential development (e.g., backyards, borders, etc.).
Undisturbed Open Space cannot be designated within rights of way, utility easements, etc. where redisturbance
could occur. Grass fields can also be used to meet Undisturbed Open Space requirements;
however, the fields must be replanted in accordance with the tree planting provisions described in §
155.805.E. below. Undisturbed Open Space is preferred where it will provide maximum water quality benefit
(i.e., around gullies and existing drainage areas, adjacent to streams and wetlands, around structural BMPs,
etc.). [formerly known as § 154.052] (Am. Ord. 2269, passed 11-13-17)
C. UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE CRITERIA. Undisturbed Open Space requirements apply to projects as described
below.
1. LESS THAN TWENTY FOUR PERCENT (24%)BUILT-UPON AREA. A project with less than twenty four
percent (24%) built-upon area shall include as Undisturbed Open Space within the boundaries of
the project a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the project area.
2. GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO TWENTY FOUR PERCENT (24%) AND LESS THAN FIFTY PERCENT (50%)
BUILT-UPON AREA. A project with greater than or equal to twenty four percent (24%) and less than
fifty percent (50%) built-upon area shall include as Undisturbed Open Space within the boundaries
of the project a minimum of seventeen and one-half percent (17.5%) of the project area.
3. GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO FIFTY PERCENT (50%) BUILT-UPON AREA. A project with greater than
or equal to fifty percent (50%) built-upon area shall include as Open Space within the boundaries
of the project a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the project area.
4. PROJECT IN THE ENT ZONING DISTRICT. Due to the presence of the Sportsplex in the ENT
zoning district and the undevelopable portions of parcels land located and planned to be located in
the ENT zoning district, parcels of land located in the ENT zoning district shall be exempt from the
Undisturbed Open Space requirements of the PCO. [formerly known as § 154.053] (Am. Ord.
2269, passed 11-13-17)
D. UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE DESIGNATION. The Undisturbed Open Space location shall be recorded at the
Register of Deeds Office as “Undisturbed Open Space” and future disturbance is prohibited except for
greenway trails with unlimited public access, Charlotte- Mecklenburg Utility lines and channel
work/maintenance activities by Charlotte-Mecklenburg Storm Water Services. Other utility work may be
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 18
allowed in the Undisturbed Open Space area provided it will not result in loss of Undisturbed Open Space as
approved by the Town of Matthews. [formerly known as § 154.054]
E. UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE MITIGATION.
1. PURPOSE. The purpose of this mitigation is to reduce the cost of complying with the Undisturbed
Open Space requirement while ensuring the reduction of pollution loads and achievement of the
ordinance objectives.
2. GENERAL DESCRIPTION. Approved disturbance to the Open Space area described in § 155.805.C.
above must be off-set by an allowable form of mitigation, including on-site and off-site mitigation
as well as through payment-in-lieu.
3. UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE MITIGATION CRITERIA.
a. ON-SITE MITIGATION. On-site mitigation shall allow the disturbance of designated
Undisturbed Open Space area on a project with the fulfillment of the following criteria on
the project site:
i. Fifty percent (50%) increase in total Undisturbed Open Space area designation
above the requirements specified in § 155.805.D, except when the Undisturbed
Open Space area qualifies as a “grass field” in which case the size of the required
Undisturbed Open Space area remains unchanged. The portion of the Open Space
area that is a grass field, whether or not disturbed, must be replanted with trees as
specified in subsection 3, below.
ii. Establishment of a minimum of six inches (6”) of top soil to the disturbed Open
Space area following the completion of construction activities. This material may
be obtained from on-site when available.
iii. Planting of a minimum of thirty six (36) trees per acre of Undisturbed Open Space
area as follows:
• Trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches (1.5”).
• Trees shall be of a quality set forth by the American Standard for Nursery
Stock and will be selected from a list of acceptable native species for
planting in Undisturbed Open Spaces established by the Town of
Matthews.
• Planted trees shall contain a mix of at least three (3) different species in
roughly equal proportions and be “large mature shade tree species” as
listed in § 155.606.14.
• Trees shall be planted in accordance with specifications provided by the
Town of Matthews.
• Trees shall be warranted for a minimum of three (3) years following
planting and any dead or diseased trees must be replaced.
iv. The area around and between trees must be stabilized using an approved
vegetative ground cover and mulch.
v. The slope of any graded or disturbed area that is dedicated for Undisturbed Open
Space cannot exceed three (3) to one (1) (3:1).
vi. The flow of water across the Undisturbed Open Space area must be controlled to
prevent soil erosion or mulch disturbance.
b. OFF-SITE MITIGATION. On a case by case basis and at the sole discretion of the Storm
Water Administrator, the Town may allow Undisturbed Open Space disturbance and offsite
mitigation through the acceptance for ownership or conservation easement properties
for the protection of Undisturbed Open Space, provided the result will be an increased
protection of water quality over what would be attained through preservation of
Undisturbed Open Space or on site mitigation (see Administrative Manual).
c. PAYMENT - IN - LIEU OF UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE DEDICATION. Payment-in-lieu of
Undisturbed Open Space dedication is only allowed for industrial and commercial
developments and multi-family projects that are in excess of fifty percent (50%) built-upon
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 19
area. Payment-in-lieu shall only be allowed to the extent an approved disturbance cannot
be offset by onsite mitigation as determined by the Storm Water Administrator. The
following criteria shall be fulfilled for the payment-in-lieu option:
i. A fee shall be paid to the Town or its designee based on the following formula:
1.25 x (appraised value of subject property including intended use without
improvements). The appraised value of the subject property shall be determined
by a licensed, independent real estate appraiser retained by the developer or
owner. The Town may accept the appraised value or at its discretion obtain its
own appraisal. In the event the parties cannot agree on the appraised value, the
two appraised values shall be averaged together to determine the final appraised
value to be used in the formula above.
ii. Payment shall be accepted by the Town or its designee prior to land disturbing
activities.
iii. The Town shall use the payment-in-lieu to purchase Undisturbed Open Space in
the same river basin (Yadkin or Catawba) as the property to be disturbed within a
maximum of two (2) years of the end of the calendar year from the receipt of the
payment. As an option, the Town may elect to use up to ten percent (10%) of the
fee to purchase and plant trees within the Town.
4. APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE MITIGATION.
a. APPLICATION FOR UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE MITIGATION. The Storm Water
Administrator shall receive, review, approve, disapprove or approve with conditions an
“Application for Undisturbed Open Space Mitigation.” The Storm Water Administrator
shall design this application to include all pertinent information, including at a minimum a
“mitigation plan” describing the desired mitigation option as discussed in previous sections
and an effective demonstration that all reasonable efforts have been undertaken to fulfill
the Undisturbed Open Space requirement on the particular site. An application for on-site
mitigation shall show the location of the restored Undisturbed Open Space on the property
and the location, type and size of all trees and ground cover to be planted as well as contain
a warranty statement for the trees. An off-site mitigation application shall show the location
and description including acreage, etc. of the property to be used for mitigation and contain
a legally valid instrument demonstrating that the applicant has legal title to the property for
transfer to the Town. A payment-in-lieu application shall at a minimum contain the location
and description of the site to be mitigated and an approved appraisal by a licensed,
independent real estate appraiser
b. PRE-APPROVED UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE MITIGATION. The following is pre-approved
for on-site mitigation and does not require the submittal of an application to the Storm
Water Administrator; however, these mitigation areas shall be described on the storm water
management permit application.
i. Residential, Commercial and Multi-family Uses: twenty five percent (25%) of the
required Undisturbed Open Space area as described in § 155.805.D is preapproved
for on-site mitigation provided the size of mitigation area is one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the disturbed area. Other forms of mitigation as described
above must receive approval from the StormWater Administrator.
ii. Industrial Uses: one hundred percent (100%) of the required Undisturbed Open
Space area as described in § 155.805.D above is pre-approved for on-site
mitigation with no increase in total required Undisturbed Open Space area. Other
forms of mitigation as described above must receive approval from the Storm
Water Administrator.
5. UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE DESIGNATION. All designated Undisturbed Open Space areas included
as part of an approved mitigation must be recorded at the Register of Deeds Office as “Undisturbed
Open Space” and any future disturbance of this area is strictly prohibited except for greenway trails
with unlimited public access, Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility lines and channel work/maintenance
activities by Charlotte-Mecklenburg Storm Water Services. Other utility work may be allowed in
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 20
the Undisturbed Open Space area provided it will not result in loss of Undisturbed Open Space as
approved by the Town. [formerly known as § 154.055]
155.806. Maintenance [formerly § 154, Section VI]
A. DEDICATION OF BMPS, FACILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS.
1. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BMPS ACCEPTED FOR MAINTENANCE. The Town shall accept
maintenance responsibility (as specified in the Design Manual) of structural BMPs that are installed
pursuant to the PCO following a warranty period of two (2) years from the date of as-built
certification described in § 155.802.C.3, provided the BMP:
a. Only serves a single-family detached residential development or townhomes all of which
have public street frontage;
b. Is satisfactorily maintained during the two-year warranty period by the owner or designee;
c. Meets all the requirements of the PCO and the Design Manual; and
d. Includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection, maintenance, repair or reconstruction. The Storm Water Administrator must
receive an application for transfer of maintenance responsibilities for the structural BMP
along with the storm water management permit application. The Storm Water
Administrator will develop and distribute this application as a component of the
Administrative Manual (see § 155.802.B.4.d).
2. MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF BMPS. The owner of a structural BMP installed pursuant to the
PCO and not covered under Sub§ 155.806.A.1 shall maintain and operate the BMP so as to preserve
and continue its function in controlling storm water quality and quantity at the degree or amount of
function for which the structural BMP was designed.
3. DAMAGE OR REMOVAL OF TREES. The following provisions apply to trees contained in permitted
Undisturbed Open Space areas or in BMPs that are damaged or removed:
a. For trees damaged or removed due to natural disasters, the owner shall be required to
replace the trees in accordance with the undisturbed open space mitigation criteria
described in § 155.805.E.3.a of the PCO within a timeframe specified by the Storm Water
Administrator.
b. For trees damaged or removed due to reasons other than (a) above, the owner shall be
required to replace the trees in accordance with the undisturbed open space mitigation
criteria described in § 155.805.E.3.a of the PCO within a timeframe specified by the Storm
Water Administrator with the following exception, the trees shall be replaced at twice the
specified density. In addition, the owner may be subject to fines as described in § 155.807,
Violations and Enforcement.
4. ANNUAL MAINTENANCE INSPECTION AND REPORT. The person responsible for maintenance of any
BMP installed pursuant to the PCO and not covered under § 155.806.A.1 shall submit to the Storm
Water Administrator an inspection report from a qualified registered North Carolina professional
engineer or landscape architect performing services only in their area of competence. All inspection
reports shall be on forms supplied by the Storm Water Administrator that are contained in the Design
Manual. An original inspection report shall be provided to the Storm Water Administrator beginning
one year from the date of as-built certification and each year thereafter on or before the anniversary
date of the as-built certification. [formerly known as § 154.061]
B. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
1. GENERAL. At the time that as-built plans are provided to the Storm Water Administrator as described
in § 155.802.C.3 and prior to final approval of a project for compliance with the PCO, but in all
cases prior to placing the BMPs in service, the applicant or owner of the site must execute an
operation and maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all current and subsequent owners of
the site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the structural BMP. This maintenance
agreement shall be recorded as specified in § 155.803.G. Failure to execute an operation and
maintenance agreement within the time frame specified by the Storm Water Administrator may
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 21
result in assessment of penalties as specified in § 155.807, Violations and Enforcement. Until the
transference of all property, sites, or lots served by the structural BMP, the original owner or
applicant shall have primary responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the maintenance
agreement. At the discretion of the Storm Water Administrator, certificates of occupancy may be
withheld pending receipt of an operation and maintenance agreement. The operation and
maintenance agreement shall require the owner or owners to maintain, repair and, if necessary,
reconstruct the structural BMP, and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance
for the structural BMP. In addition, it shall grant to the Town a right of entry in the event that the
Storm Water Administrator has reason to believe it has become necessary to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, or reconstruct the structural BMP; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of
itself, confer an obligation on the Town to assume responsibility for the structural BMP. Standard
operation and maintenance agreements for BMPs shall be developed by the Storm Water
Administrator and made available in the Design Manual. The operation and maintenance agreement
must be approved by the Storm Water Administrator prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced
on the final plat as described in § 155.803.G.
2. SPECIAL REQUIREMENT FOR HOMEOWNERS AND OTHER ASSOCIATIONS. For all structural BMPs
required pursuant to the PCO not covered under § 155.806.A.1 and that are to be or are owned and
maintained by a homeowners’ association, property owners’ association, or similar entity, the
required operation and maintenance agreement shall include the provisions described in the Design
Manual. [formerly known as § 154.062]
C. INSPECTION PROGRAM. Inspections and inspection programs by the Town may be conducted or established
on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
BMPs; and evaluating the condition of BMPs. If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit
such inspection, the Storm Water Administrator shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant
pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2 or its successor. No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Storm Water
Administrator while carrying out his or her official duties. [formerly known as § 154.063]
D. PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE. The Town may require the submittal of a
performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit or other acceptable legal arrangement
prior to issuance of a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in the Administrative Manual.
[formerly known as § 154.064]
E. RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES. The owner of each structural BMP shall keep
records of inspections, maintenance, and repairs for at least five (5) years from the date of creation of the
record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the Storm Water Administrator. [formerly
known as § 154.065]
F. MAINTENANCE EASEMENT. Every structural BMP installed pursuant to the PCO shall be made accessible for
adequate inspection, maintenance, reconstruction and repair by a maintenance easement. The easement shall
conform to standards listed in the Administrative Manual, and be recorded as described in § 155.803.G and
its terms shall specify who may make use of the easement and for what purposes. [formerly known as §
154.066]
155.807. Violations and Enforcement [formerly § 154, Section VII]
A. GENERAL.
1. AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE. The provisions of the PCO shall be enforced by the Storm Water
Administrator, his or her designee, or any authorized agent of the Town. Whenever this section
refers to the Storm Water Administrator, it includes his or her designee as well as any authorized
agent of Town.
2. VIOLATION UNLAWFUL. Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition,
standard, or limitation imposed by the PCO, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 22
development or redevelopment approval or authorization granted pursuant to the PCO, is unlawful
and shall constitute a violation of the PCO.
3. EACH DAY A SEPARATE OFFENSE. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation or offense.
4. RESPONSIBLE PERSONS/ENTITIES. Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether
actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or maintain any structure,
BMP, practice, or condition in violation of the PCO, as well as any person who participates in,
assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of
the PCO, or fails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of the PCO results or persists; or an
owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the
use or development of the property on which the violation occurs shall be subject to the remedies,
penalties, and/or enforcement actions in accordance with this § 155.807. For the purposes of this
article, responsible person(s) shall include but not be limited to:
a. PERSON MAINTAINING CONDITION RESULTING IN OR CONSTITUTING VIOLATION. Any
person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that
constitutes a violation of the PCO, or fails to take appropriate action, so that a violation of
the PCO results or persists.
b. RESPONSIBILITY FOR LAND OR USE OF LAND. The owner of the land on which the violation
occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person who is responsible for storm
water controls or practices pursuant to a private agreement or public document, or any
person, who has control over, or responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment
of the property. [formerly known as § 154.071]
B. INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS
1. AUTHORITY TO INSPECT. The Storm Water Administrator shall have the authority, upon presentation
of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land, building, structure, or premises to ensure
compliance with the PCO, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to the PCO, and to determine
whether the activity is being conducted in accordance with the PCO and the approved storm water
management plan, Design Manual and Administrative Manual and whether the measures required
in the plan are effective. No person shall willfully resist, delay, or obstruct the Storm Water
Administrator while the Storm Water Administrator is inspecting or attempting to inspect an activity
under the PCO.
2. NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND ORDER TO CORRECT. When the Storm Water Administrator finds that
any building, structure, or land is in violation of the PCO, the Storm Water Administrator shall
notify in writing the responsible person/entity. The notification shall indicate the nature of the
violation, contain the address or other description of the site upon which the violation occurred or
is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the violation, and give a deadline for correcting the
violation. The notice shall, if required, specify a date by which the responsible person/entity must
comply with the PCO, and advise that the responsible person/entity is subject to remedies and/or
penalties or that failure to correct the violation within the time specified will subject the responsible
person/entity to remedies and/or penalties as described in § 155.807.C In determining the measures
required and the time for achieving compliance, the Storm Water Administrator shall take into
consideration the technology and quantity of work required, and shall set reasonable and attainable
time limits. The Storm Water Administrator may deliver the notice of violation and correction order
personally, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any means authorized for
the service of documents by Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. If a violation is
not corrected within a reasonable period of time, as provided in the notification, the Storm Water
Administrator may take appropriate action, as provided in § 155.807.C, Remedies and Penalties, to
correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with the PCO. Violations of other Chapters
of this Title are a separate issue.
3. EXTENSION OF TIME. A responsible person/entity who receives a notice of violation and correction
order, or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may submit to the Storm Water
Administrator a written request for an extension of time for correction of the violation. On
determining that the request includes enough information to show that the violation cannot be
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 23
corrected within the specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the responsible
person/entity requesting the extension, the Storm Water Administrator may extend the time limit as
is reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but not exceeding sixty
(60) days. The Storm Water Administrator may grant thirty (30) day extensions in addition to the
foregoing extension if the violation cannot be corrected within the permitted time due to
circumstances beyond the control of the responsible person/entity violating the PCO. The Storm
Water Administrator may grant an extension only by written notice of extension. The notice of
extension shall state the date prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator will
be subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and correction order. This provision
does not automatically provide the same extension for violations of any other chapter of the Town
Unified Development Ordinance.
4. PENALTIES ASSESSED CONCURRENT WITH NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Penalties may be assessed
concurrently with a notice of violation for any of the following in which case the notice of violation
shall also contain a statement of the civil penalties to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the
time within which they must be paid or be subject to collection as a debt:
a. Failure to submit a storm water management plan.
b. Performing activities without an approved storm water management plan.
c. Obstructing, hampering or interfering with an authorized representative who is in the
process of carrying out official duties.
d. A repeated violation for which a notice was previously given on the same project and to
the same responsible person/entity responsible for the violation.
e. Willful violation of the PCO.
f. Failure to install or maintain best management practices per the approved plan.
5. AUTHORITY TO INVESTIGATE. The Storm Water Administrator shall have the authority to conduct
such investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in the
PCO, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the
purpose of investigating and inspecting. No Person shall refuse entry or access to the Storm Water
Administrator who requests entry for purpose of inspection or investigation, and who presents
appropriate credentials, nor shall any Person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with the Storm Water
Administrator while in the process of carrying out official duties. The Storm Water Administrator
shall also have the power to require written statements, or the filing of reports under oath as part of
an investigation.
6. ENFORCEMENT AFTER TIME TO CORRECT. After the time has expired to correct a violation, including
any extension(s) if authorized by the Storm Water Administrator, the Storm Water Administrator
shall determine if the violation is corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the Storm Water
Administrator may act to impose one or more of the remedies and penalties authorized by §
155.807.C.
7. EMERGENCY ENFORCEMENT. If delay in correcting a violation would seriously threaten the effective
enforcement of the PCO or pose an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then
the Storm Water Administrator may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any Person so
ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The Storm Water Administrator may seek immediate
enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or penalty specified in § 155.807.C.
[formerly known as § 154.072]
C. REMEDIES AND PENALTIES. The remedies and penalties provided for violations of the PCO, whether civil or
criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law, and may be exercised in
any order.
1. REMEDIES.
a. WITHHOLDING OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The Storm Water Administrator or other
authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other
improvements constructed or being constructed on the site and served by the storm water
practices in question until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial
measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the described violations.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 24
b. DISAPPROVAL OF SUBSEQUENT PERMITS AND DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS. As long as a
violation of the PCO continues and remains uncorrected, the Storm Water Administrator
or other authorized agent may withhold, and the Town of Matthews may disapprove, any
request for permit or development approval or authorization provided for by the PCO or
the zoning, subdivision, and/or building regulations, as appropriate for the land on which
the violation occurs.
c. INJUNCTION, ABATEMENTS, ETC. The Storm Water Administrator, with the written
authorization of the Matthews Town Manager may institute an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement to
correct a violation of the PCO. Any person violating the PCO shall be subject to the full
range of equitable remedies provided in the General Statutes or at common law.
d. CORRECTION AS PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE, COSTS AS LIEN, ETC. If the violation is
deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public safety and is within the
geographic limits prescribed by North Carolina G.S. 160A-193, the Storm Water
Administrator, with the written authorization of the Town Manager, may cause the
violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien against the property.
e. RESTORATION OF AREAS AFFECTED BY FAILURE TO COMPLY. By issuance of an order of
restoration, the Storm Water Administrator may require a Person who engaged in a land
development activity and failed to comply with the PCO to restore the waters and land
affected by such failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution.
This authority is in addition to any other civil penalty or injunctive relief authorized under
the PCO.
2. CIVIL PENALTIES
a. VIOLATIONS OF ORDINANCE. A violation of any of the provisions of the PCO or rules or
other orders adopted or issued pursuant to the PCO may subject the violator to a civil
penalty. A civil penalty may be assessed from the date the violation occurs. No penalty
shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation
except as provided in § 155.807.B.4 in which case the penalty is assessed concurrently with
a notice of violation. Refusal to accept the notice or failure to notify the Storm Water
Administrator of a change of address shall not relieve the violator’s obligation to comply
with the PCO or to pay such a penalty.
b. AMOUNT OF PENALTY. The maximum civil penalty for each violation of the PCO is twenty
seven thousand five hundred dollars ($27,500.00). Each day of continuing violation shall
constitute a separate violation. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the Storm
Water Administrator shall consider any relevant mitigating and aggravating factors
including, but not limited to, the effect, if any, of the violation; the degree and extent of
harm caused by the violation; the cost of rectifying the damage; whether the violator saved
money through noncompliance; whether the violator took reasonable measures to comply
with the PCO; whether the violation was committed willfully; whether the violator reported
the violation to the Storm Water Administrator; and the prior record of the violator in
complying or failing to comply with the PCO or any other post construction ordinance or
law. The Storm Water Administrator is authorized to vary the amount of the per diem
penalty based on criteria specified in the Administrative Manual and based on relevant
mitigating factors. Civil penalties collected pursuant to the PCO shall be credited to the
Town general fund as non-tax revenue.
c. NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL PENALTY. The Storm Water Administrator shall
determine the amount of the civil penalty and shall notify the violator of the amount of the
penalty and the reason for assessing the penalty. This notice of assessment of civil penalty
shall be served by any means authorized under G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4 and shall direct the
violator to either pay the assessment or file an appeal within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the notice as specified in § 155.807.C.2.e.
d. FAILURE TO PAY CIVIL PENALTY ASSESSMENT. If a violator does not pay a civil penalty
assessed by the Storm Water Administrator within thirty (30) days after it is due, or does
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 25
not request a hearing as provided in § 155.807.C.2.e, the Storm Water Administrator shall
request the initiation of a civil action to recover the amount of the assessment. The civil
action shall be brought in Mecklenburg County Superior Court or in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. A civil action must be filed within three (3) years of the date the
assessment was due. An assessment that is appealed is due at the conclusion of the
administrative and judicial review of the assessment.
e. APPEAL OF REMEDY OR PENALTY. The issuance of an order of restoration and/or notice of
assessment of a civil penalty by the StormWater Administrator shall entitle the responsible
party or entity to an appeal before the Storm Water Advisory Committee (SWAC) if such
Person submits written demand for an appeal hearing to the Clerk of SWAC within thirty
(30) days of the receipt of an order of restoration and/or notice of assessment of a civil
penalty. The demand for an appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by
SWAC. The appeal of an order of restoration and/or notice of assessment of a civil penalty
shall be conducted as described in § 155.802.E.
3. CRIMINAL PENALTIES. Violation of the PCO may be enforced as a misdemeanor subject to the
maximum fine permissible under North Carolina law. [formerly known as § 154.073]
155.808. Definitions [formerly § 154, Section VIII]
A. USE OF DEFINITIONS. In the construction of the PCO, the definitions contained in this § 155.808 shall be
observed and applied, unless other provisions of the PCO specifically indicate otherwise.
B. DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms when used in the interpretation and administration of the PCO
shall have the meaning set forth below except where otherwise specifically indicated. [formerly known as
§ 154.081]
Administrative Manual – Shall mean a manual developed by the Storm Water Administrator and distributed
to the public to provide information for the effective administration of the PCO, including but not limited to
application requirements, submission schedule, fee schedule, maintenance agreements, criteria for mitigation
approval, criteria for recordation of documents, inspection report forms, requirements for submittal of bonds,
a copy of the PCO, and where to obtain the Design Manual.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) – Shall mean a structural management facility used singularly or in
combination for storm water quality and quantity treatment to achieve water quality protection goals.
Buffer – Shall mean a natural or vegetated area through which storm water runoff flows in a diffuse manner
so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering
of pollutants.
Buffer Zones – Shall mean in the Catawba District, streams draining greater than or equal to fifty (50) acres
but less than three hundred (300) acres have a two (2) zone buffer including a stream side and upland zone.
Buffers for streams draining greater than or equal to three hundred (300) acres have three (3) zones as shown
below. The amount of disturbance allowed in the buffer differs in each zone. In the Yadkin District there are
no zones, the entire buffer is undisturbed.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 26
Buffer Widths – Shall mean viewed aerially, the stream buffer width is measured horizontally on a line
perpendicular to the surface water, landward from the top of the bank on each side of the stream.
Built-Upon Area (BUA) – Shall mean that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious
or partially impervious surface including, but not limited to, buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as
roads, parking lots, and paths; and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. “Built-upon area” does not
include a wooden slatted deck or the water area of a swimming pool.
Commercial Development – Shall mean any development that is not residential development as defined
below.
Design Manual – Shall mean the storm water design manual approved for use in the Town of Matthews by
the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources and shall be at least as stringent as
the storm water design manual approved for use in Phase II jurisdictions by the Department for the proper
implementation of the requirements of the federal Phase II storm water program. All references to the Design
Manual are to the latest published edition or revision.
Development – Shall mean new development created by the addition of built-upon area to land void of builtupon
area as of the Effective Date of the Post Construction Regulations.
Disturbance – Shall mean any use of the land by any person or entity which results in a change in the natural
cover or topography of the land.
Drainage Area – Shall mean that area of land that drains to a common point on a project site.
Effective Date of the PCO– Shall mean June 30, 2007.
Floodplain – Shall mean the low, periodically-flooded lands adjacent to streams. For land use planning
purposes, the regulatory floodplain is usually viewed as all lands that would be inundated by the Regulatory
Flood.
Grass Field – Shall mean land on which grasses and other herbaceous plants dominate and trees over six
feet in height are sparse or so widely scattered that less than five percent (5%) of the land area is covered by
a tree canopy.
Industrial Uses – Shall mean land used for industrial purposes only; commercial (or other non-industrial)
businesses operating on industrially zoned property shall not be considered an industrial use.
Larger common plan of development or sale – Shall mean any contiguous area where multiple separate
and distinct construction or land disturbing activities will occur under one plan. A plan is any announcement
or piece of documentation (including but not limited to public notice or hearing, drawing, permit application,
zoning request, or site design) or physical demarcation (including but not limited to boundary signs, lot
stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.
Low Impact Development (LID) – Shall mean the integration of site ecology and environmental goals and
requirements into all phases of urban planning and design from the individual residential lot level to the entire
watershed.
Mitigation – Shall mean actions taken either on-site or off-site as allowed by the PCO to offset the impacts
of a certain action.
Multi-family – Shall mean a group of two or more attached, duplex, triplex, quadruplex, or multi-family
buildings, or a single building of more than two (2) units constructed on the same lot or parcel of land under
single ownership, and planned and developed with a unified design of buildings and coordinated common
open space and service areas.
Non-Point Source (NPS) Pollution – Shall mean forms of pollution caused by sediment, nutrients, organic
and toxic substances originating from land use activities and carried to lakes and streams by surface runoff.
Owner – Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a fee owner, mortgagee
or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long term or commercial lessee, or any other person
or entity holding proprietary rights in the property or having legal power of management and control of the
property. “Owner” shall include long term commercial tenants; management entities, such as those charged
with or engaged in the management of properties for profit; and every person or entity having joint ownership
of the property. A secured lender not in possession of the property does not constitute an owner, unless the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 27
secured lender is included within the meaning of “owner” under another description in this definition, such
as a management entity.
Person(s) – Shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body,
or other legal entity.
Redevelopment – Shall mean rebuilding activities on land containing built-upon area as of the effective date
of the PCO and where any pre-existing impervious surface remains intact and is not removed during the
rebuilding or redevelopment process.
Residential Development – Shall mean a development containing dwelling units with open yards on at least
two sides where land is sold with each dwelling unit.
Storm Water Administrator – Shall mean the position or individual that has been designated by the
Matthews Board of Commissioners to administer and enforce the PCO.
Storm Water Advisory Committee (SWAC) – Shall mean the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Storm Water
Advisory Committee as established by joint resolutions of the Charlotte City Council, Mecklenburg County
Board of Commissioners and the Towns of Cornelius, Davidson, Huntersville, Matthews, Mint Hill and
Pineville, together with any amendments.
Storm Water Management Permit – Shall mean a permit required for all development and redevelopment
unless exempt pursuant to the PCO, which demonstrates compliance with the PCO.
S.W.I.M. – Shall mean an acronym for the Surface Water Improvement and Management initiative by the
Mecklenburg County Board of Commissioners for the purpose of restoring the quality and usability of
Mecklenburg County’s surface water resources. The S.W.I.M. initiative resulted in the adoption of county
wide buffers on streams that are termed S.W.I.M. Buffers.
Top of Bank – Shall mean the landward edge of the stream channel during high water or bankfull conditions
at the point where the water begins to overflow onto the floodplain.
Topsoil – Shall mean natural, fertile soil capable of sustaining vigorous plant growth that is of uniform
composition throughout with an admixture of subsoil, has an acidity range of pH 5.5 - 7.0.
Total Phosphorus (TP) – Shall mean a nutrient that is essential to the growth of organisms but when it
occurs in high enough concentrations it can negatively impact water quality conditions. Total phosphorus
includes both dissolved and suspended forms of reactive phosphorus, acid-hydrolyzable phosphorus and
organic phosphorus as measured by Standard Method 4500-P.
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) – Shall mean total suspended matter in water which includes particles
collected on a filter with a pore size of two (2) microns as measured by Standard Method 2540-D, which is
commonly expressed as a concentration in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l) or parts per million (ppm).
Townhomes – Shall mean attached dwellings where a lot is created for each unit.
Undisturbed Open Space – Shall mean land that consists of natural areas containing trees and other natural
shrubs consisting of either undisturbed areas or disturbed areas that have been replanted in accordance with
the criteria established in the PCO. (Ord. No. 1559, passed 5-14-07; eff. 6-30-07; Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-
14; Am. Ord 2264, passed 10-9-17)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 8 - 2
2. SPECIFIC. These regulations seek to meet its general purpose through the following specific
objectives and means:
a. Establishing decision-making processes for development that protect the integrity of
watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
b. Minimizing changes to the predevelopment hydrologic response for new development and
redevelopment in their post construction state in accordance with the requirements of these
regulations for the applicable design storm in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion,
and non-point and point source pollution, as well as to maintain the integrity of stream
channels, aquatic habitats and healthy stream temperatures;
c. Establishing minimum post construction storm water management standards and design
criteria for the regulation and control of storm water runoff quantity and quality;
d. Establishing design and review criteria for the construction, function, and use of structural
storm water control facilities that may be used to meet the minimum post construction
storm water management standards;
e. Establishing criteria for the use of better management and site design practices, such as the
preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas;
f. Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural
and nonstructural storm water best management practices (BMPs) to ensure that they
continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose minimum risk to
public safety;
g. Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and
disapproval of storm water management plans, for the inspection of approved projects, and
to assure appropriate long-term maintenance; and
h. Coordinating post construction storm water control provisions to be consistent with other
standards within this Title, including such areas as storm water detention, landscaping and
tree canopy, open space, and nonconforming improvements. (Am. Ord. 2025A, passed 6-
9-14) [formerly known as § 154.004]
E. APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
1. GOOSE CREEK DISTRICT. All developments and redevelopments within the corporate limits
of the Town of Matthews in the Goose Creek District as illustrated by the “Post Construction
Ordinance Map of the Town of Matthews” and described in 155.801.E.4. below are not subject to
this Chapter, but rather are subject to the requirements contained in North Carolina Administrative
Code 15A NCAC 2B.0600 – o.609 as administered by the North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources.
2. CATAWBA AND YADKIN DISTRICTS. The requirements of these regulations shall apply to all
developments and redevelopments within the Town not within the Goose Creek District, unless one
of the following exceptions applies to the development or redevelopment as of the effective date of
June 30, 2007.
a. For residential development, preliminary subdivision plan application or in the case of
minor subdivisions, construction plan for required improvements, submitted and accepted
for review;
b. For nonresidential development, preliminary subdivision plan application submitted and
accepted for review, provided that subdivision-wide water quality and quantity features
required at the time of submittal are contained within the submittal and provided the plan
is subsequently approved and all necessary easements are properly established;
c. Zoning use application submitted and accepted for review for uses that do not require a
building permit;
d. Certificate of Building Code Compliance issued by the proper governmental authority;
f. Valid building permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 153A-344 or G.S. § 160A-385(b)(I), so
long as the permit remains valid, unexpired, and unrevoked;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
__________________________________________________________________
Page 8 - 28
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 1
Chapter 9. Floodplain Regulations
155.901. General Provisions.
A. TITLE. The regulations set out in this
Chapter 9 shall be known and may be
cited as the "floodplain regulations o f
Matthews, North Carolina" or “the
floodplain regulations.” [formerly
known as § 151.01]
B. AUTHORITY. The Legislature of the
State of North Carolina has in Part 6,
Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and
8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and
Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes, delegated to
local governmental units the
responsibility to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare. [formerly
known as § 151.02]
C. FINDINGS OF FACT.
1. The flood hazard areas of
Matthews and Matthews land
use jurisdiction are subject to
periodic inundation which
results in loss of life, increased
health and safety hazards,
destruction of property, and
disruption of commerce and
governmental services.
Inundation from flood waters
results in public expenditures
for flood protection, flood
disaster relief, and impairment
of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in
flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazards to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise unprotected from flood
damages. [formerly known as § 151.03]
D. PURPOSE. It is the purpose of the floodplain regulations to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards
or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are
involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 2
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which
may increase flood hazards to other lands. [formerly known as § 151.04]
E. OBJECTIVES.
1. The regulations of the Special Flood Hazard Areas herein set forth are intended to protect areas of designated
floodplains subject to and necessary for regulating flood waters and to permit and encourage the retention of
open-land uses which will be so located and designed as to constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of
the physical development of the Town as provided in the comprehensive plans as such are adopted and
amended from time to time.
2. The specific intent in establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas composed of floodways and flood fringe areas
includes the following:
a. To control uses such as fill dumping, storage of materials, structures, buildings and any other works
which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, would cause damaging
flood heights and velocities by obstructing flows and reducing floodplain storage;
b. To protect human life and health;
c. To minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
d. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public;
e. To permit certain uses which can be appropriately located in flood hazard areas and to assure such
permitted uses will not impede the flow of flood waters or otherwise cause danger to life and
property at or above or below their locations along the floodways;
f. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
g. To protect existing drainage courses that carry abnormal flows of stormwater in periods of heavy
precipitations;
h. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in Floodplains;
i. To meet the needs of the streams to carry flood waters and protect the creek channels and
Floodplains from encroachment so that flood heights and flood damage will not be increased;
j. To inform existing and potential property owners that property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area as
well as the associated flood risks and development restrictions;
k. To minimize future flood losses by depicting Community Flood Fringe Areas on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps;
l. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone
areas.
3. This ordinance is intended to permit only that development within the floodplain which is appropriate in light
of the probability of flood damage and presents a reasonable social and economic use of land in relation to
the hazards involved. The regulations hereinafter set forth shall apply to all property located within the
Special Flood Hazard Area as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) including FEMA and/or
locally approved revisions to data shown on the FIRMs. It is the intent that these regulations combine with
and coordinate with the zoning ordinance regulations for the zoning district in which such property is located.
Any use not permitted by the zoning regulations shall not be permitted in the Special Flood Hazard Area,
and any use permitted by the zoning regulations shall be permitted in these districts only upon meeting
conditions and requirements as prescribed in this ordinance. [formerly known as § 151.05]
F. DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined in this Chapter, words or phrases used in this Chapter 9 shall apply the
definitions provided in Chapter 1 of this Title, or when not defined in Chapter 1 they shall be interpreted so as to give
them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The
following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter 9, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. [formerly § 151.06]
Accessory Structure – shall mean a structure that is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure
and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common
urban accessory structures.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 3
Addition (to an existing building) – shall mean an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or
structure.
Appeal – shall mean a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this
ordinance.
Basement – shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building – shall mean any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Chemical Storage Facility – shall mean a building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used
for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products.
Community Base Flood – shall mean the flood determined using future land use conditions having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Community Base Flood Elevation – shall mean the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map Flood Hazard
Data Table, having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded, determined using future land use conditions.
Community Conditional Letter of Map Revisions (CoCLOMR) – shall mean a letter from the Floodplain
Administrator that provides conditional approval of a study that proposes to change the location of the Community
Encroachment Lines, and/or the location of the Community Flood Fringe Line, and/or Community Base Flood
Elevations.
Community Encroachment Area – shall mean the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the FEMA Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one-tenth foot (0.1’). (See attachments.)
Community Encroachment Lines – shall mean the lateral limits of the Community Encroachment Area, within
which, in the direction of the stream or other body of water, no structure or fill may be added, unless specifically
permitted by this ordinance. (See attachments).
Community Flood Fringe Area – shall mean the land area located between the Community Encroachment Line and
the Community Flood Fringe Line as defined herein. (See attachments).
Community Flood Fringe Line – shall mean the line that depicts the outer limits of the Community Flood Fringe
Area (outer limits of the Community Special Flood Hazard Area).
Community Letter of Map Revision (CoLOMR) – shall mean a letter from the Floodplain Administrator that
provides final approval of a study, based on as-built conditions, which changes the location of the Community
Encroachment Lines and/or the Community Flood Fringe Lines.
Community Special Flood Hazard Area – shall mean the land subject to a one - percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year from a Community Base Flood. It includes the FEMA Floodway, Community Encroachment Area,
FEMA Flood Fringe Area, and the Community Flood Fringe Area. (See attachments).
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) – shall mean FEMA’s comments on whether a project, if built as
proposed, would meet the minimum NFIP standards.
Critical Facility – shall mean a building used to house a function that is vulnerable or essential to the community.
Uses include but are not limited to: child and adult daycare facilities, nursing homes, schools, hospitals, fire, police
and medic facilities and other uses as deemed by the Floodplain Administrator.
Development – shall mean any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials.
Disposal – shall mean as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the
solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.
Dry Public Street – shall mean a public street at the intersection of a proposed driveway where the surface of the
pavement is at an elevation above the Community Base Flood Elevation.
Dry land Access – shall mean a gravel, paved or concrete access route, at least twelve feet (12’) wide, which is above
the Community Base Flood Elevation and connects a habitable building to a dry public street.
Elevated Building – shall mean a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground
level by solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 4
Encroachment – shall mean the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or
development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. Building renovations
contained within the existing building footprint area are not considered an encroachment.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home Subdivision – shall mean a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction of streets) was
completed before February 4, 1991.
FEMA – shall mean the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FEMA Base Flood – shall mean the flood determined using land use conditions at the time of the study having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
FEMA Base Flood Elevation (BFE) – shall mean the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood
Insurance Study Profile that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a FEMA Base Flood that has a one
percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
FEMA Flood Fringe Area – shall mean the land area located between the FEMA Floodway Lines and the line
depicting the maximum elevation subject to inundation by the FEMA Base Flood as defined herein (see attachments).
FEMA Flood Fringe Line – shall mean the line on a map that depicts the outer limits of the FEMA Flood Fringe
Area.
FEMA Floodway – shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the FEMA Base Flood, without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one-half foot (0.5’).
FEMA Floodway Lines – shall mean the lateral limits of the FEMA Floodway. (see attachments).
FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area – shall mean the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year from a FEMA Base Flood. It includes the FEMA Floodway, Community Encroachment Area, and the
FEMA Flood Fringe Area. (see attachments).
Flood or Flooding – shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of run-off of surface
waters from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) – shall mean an official map of a community, in both digital and printed format,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the Special Flood Hazard Area and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. The date of Matthews’ original FIRM is February 4, 2004 and this date
should be used to determine whether a structure is pre-FIRM or post-FIRM.
Flood Insurance Study – shall mean an examination, evaluation, and determination of Special Flood Hazard Areas,
corresponding water surface elevations, flood insurance risk zones, and other flood data in a community. The study
includes a Flood Insurance Study report, and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs).
Floodplain – shall mean the land subject to inundation by the Community Base Flood and is encompassed by the
Community Special Flood Hazard Area.
Floodplain Development Permit – shall mean either an Individual Floodplain Development Permit or a General
Floodplain Development Permit issued for development in the floodplain per the requirements of §151.16 of this
chapter.
Floodproofing – shall mean any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures, which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, or structures with their contents.
Flood Protection Elevation – shall mean the elevation to which all structures located within the Community Special
Flood Hazard Area must be elevated (or flood-proofed if nonresidential). Within areas where Base Flood Elevations
(BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the Community Base Flood Elevation plus one foot (1’) of
freeboard. In areas where no BFE has been established, all structures and other Development must be elevated (or
flood-proofed if non-residential), to two feet (2’) above the highest adjacent grade.
Floodwall – shall mean a wall built along a shore or bank to protect an area from flooding.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 5
Floodway – shall mean either the FEMA Floodway or the Community Encroachment Area.
Flood Zone – shall mean a geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map
that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Floor – (see Lowest Floor)
Freeboard – shall mean the height added to the Community Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to account for the many
unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization
of the watershed. The Community Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the “Flood Protection
Elevation”.
Functionally Dependent Facility – shall mean a facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose, unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include
long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
General Floodplain Development Permit – shall mean a permit issued for certain types of Development in the
Floodplain per §151.16.
Habitable Building – shall mean a structure designed primarily for, or used for human habitation. This includes, but
is not limited to, houses, condominiums, townhomes, restaurants, retail establishments, manufacturing buildings,
commercial buildings, office buildings, manufactured homes, and similar uses. It does not include Accessory
Structures (see definition above).
Hazardous Waste Management Facility – shall mean a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste as defined in NCGS Article 9 of Chapter 130A.
Highest Adjacent Grade – shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next
to the proposed walls of the structure.
Historic Structure – shall mean any structure that is listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; individually listed on a local
inventory of historic landmarks in communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or certified as
contributing to the historical significance of a historic district designated by a community with a Certified Local
Government (CLG) Program.
Individual Floodplain Development Permit – shall mean a permit for Development in the Floodplain that involves
activities not listed in §151.16 (B) (1) and may not qualify for a General Floodplain Development Permit.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) – shall mean an official amendment to the currently effective FEMA FIRM based
on as-built conditions. It is issued by FEMA and may change FEMA Base Flood Elevations, the location of the FEMA
Floodway Lines and/or the location of the FEMA Flood Fringe line.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) – shall mean a letter from FEMA that officially removes a property or building
from the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) that was inadvertently shown in the SFHA on the FIRM.
Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) – shall mean a letter from FEMA that officially removes a property
from the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) as a result of placing fill on the property.
Levee – shall mean a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, floodwall or a combination of both that is
designed and constructed to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
Levee System – shall mean a flood protection system which consists of levee(s) and/or floodwall(s) and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices.
Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG) – shall mean the elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to
the building, or deck support, after completion of the building.
Lowest Floor – shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement). An unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 6
basement area, is not considered a building's Lowest Floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
Manufactured Home – hall mean a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision – shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2)
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value – shall mean the value of a building, excluding land value, that is determined by an appraiser certified
in North Carolina using the cost approach method. Use of the “income capitalization approach” is not acceptable.
Market value must be determined based on the building condition prior to Start of Construction (for proposed
improvements) or before damage occurred (for damage repair). The value of the land and site improvements
(landscaping, driveways, detached accessory structures, etc.) is not included. The values of the use and occupancy
(business income) are not included. The Floodplain Administrator may use the tax value of the building in lieu of
other methods described.
Market value may also mean the actual cash value (ACV) of a building minus depreciation. Actual cash value is the
cost to replace a building on the same parcel with a new building of like-kind quality, minus depreciation due to age,
use, and neglect. ACV does not consider loss in value mainly due to outmoded design or location factors.
Depreciation accounts for the physical condition of a structure. Depreciation does not take into account functional
obsolescence or factors that are external to the structure.
Mean Sea Level – shall mean the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for
establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with the
"North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88)."
New Construction – shall mean construction of a replacement structure commenced after total demolition, or
renovation/rehabilitation of an existing structure that results in the partial or complete removal of two (2) external
walls and has a total cost equal to or exceeding fifty-percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. For flood insurance purposes, New Construction also means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after February 4, 1991 and includes subsequent improvements to
such structures (see definition of Flood Insurance Rate Map).
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision – hall mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
slabs) is completed on or after February 4, 1991.
Nonconforming Building or Use – shall mean any legally existing building or use which fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
Non-solid Fence – shall mean a fence with at least seventy five percent (75%) open area and with vertical supports
each no more than twenty five 25 square inches in cross sectional area.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) – shall mean as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference
for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. If a datum other than NAVD 88 is used then use the datum
listed as the reference datum on the applicable FIRM panel for use on Elevation Certificate completion. (See Flood
Insurance Administration (FIA)-20 part 1, 8).
Open House Forum – shall mean a public meeting held by the owner of a proposed levee and the Director of
Mecklenburg County Storm Water Services, or his designee. The purpose of the Open House Forum is to provide an
opportunity for discussion between the owner that has submitted an application for the construction of a levee, nearby
property owners, and other interested parties.
Post-FIRM – shall mean construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred on or after
the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Pre-FIRM – shall mean a Construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred before
the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map (PFIRM) – shall mean a map or maps released by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for public comment prior to the Effective Date of the FIRM as established by FEMA.
The map may be in both digital and printed format and shows Community and FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 7
Community Encroachment Areas and FEMA Floodways, FEMA and Community Base Flood Elevations, flood
insurance risk premium zones and other data. The data and maps are subject to change prior to the Effective Date.
Preliminary Flood Insurance Study (PFIS) – shall mean a narrative report released by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for public comment prior to the Effective Date. Information contained in the PFIS includes a
description of past flooding and studies, the study area, engineering methods, Community and FEMA Base Flood
Elevations, other community and FEMA flood data. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps are also included as part of the
Flood Insurance Study. The data and maps are subject to change prior to the Effective Date.
Principally Above Ground – shall mean at least fifty one percent (51%) of the actual cash value of the structure is
above ground.
Project – shall mean a development activity that is physically separate, functionally independent and not constructed
at the same time as another development activity.
Public Safety and/or Nuisance – shall mean anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community
or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Recreational Vehicle – shall mean a vehicle which is: 1) built on a single chassis; 2) four hundred (400) square feet
or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a car or light duty truck; and, 4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Reference Level – shall mean the portion of a structure or other development that must be compared to the flood
protection elevation to determine regulatory compliance of such structure. Within Special Flood Hazard Areas
designated as zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, or AH, the reference level is the top of the lowest floor.
Remedy a Violation – shall mean to bring the structure or other development into compliance with this ordinance or,
if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impact may be reduced include protecting
the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the
structure or other development.
Repetitive Loss – shall mean flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during any
ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds
twenty five percent (25%) of the Market Value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Riverine – shall mean relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Salvage Yard – shall mean any non-residential property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type
of equipment, and including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
Solid Waste Disposal Site – shall mean as defined in NCGS130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are
disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.
Solid Waste Disposal Facility – shall mean any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in NCGS
130A-290(a)(35).
Special Flood Hazard Area – shall mean the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area.
Start of Construction – shall mean the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as pouring a slab or footing, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond
the state of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not parts of the main structure. For Substantial
Improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure – shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 8
Substantial Damage – shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to the condition before damage occurred would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of
the structure before the damages occurred. Substantial Damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a
structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period beginning after October 11, 1999, for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of "Substantial Improvement."
Substantial Improvement – shall mean any repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of
a structure, or combination thereof, where the total cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) percent of the market
value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either any correction of existing violations of State or Community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure. Substantial Improvement also refers to any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement to a structure on two separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the total cost of repairs,
reconstruction or improvement at the time of each alteration, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred or the Substantial Improvement began. The Floodplain
Administrator may determine if separate actions constitute a single project (§151.29 (A) (13)). For the purposes of
this definition, "Substantial Improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
Technically Measurable – shall mean an activity and/or condition that can be modeled within the stated or commonly
known accuracy of the FEMA approved hydraulic models or other engineering computations, and may have an impact
on base flood elevations. The Floodplain Administrator will determine if a proposed activity and/or condition meets
the Technically Measurable definition.
Variance – shall mean a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter.
Violation – shall mean the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance
required in § 155.904 and § 155.905 is presumed to be in violation, until such time as the documentation is provided.
Watercourse – shall mean a lake, river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters
flow at least periodically; includes, specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
Water Surface Elevation (WSE) – shall mean the height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
155.902. General Provisions.
A. JURISDICTION. This Chapter shall apply to all lands in the land use jurisdiction of the Town within the area shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or any FEMA and/or locally approved revisions to data shown on the FIRMs,
as being located within the Community Special Flood Hazard Areas or land adjacent to the Community Special Flood
Hazard Areas if it is affected by the work that is taking place. [formerly known as § 151.07]
B. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. The FEMA and Community Flood Hazard Areas are
those identified in the effective Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Mecklenburg County dated February 19, 2014, and
its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and local or FEMA approved revisions to the FIRM and/or
FIS which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. (Am. Ord. 1994, passed 2-10-14)
In areas where a Preliminary FIRM and Preliminary FIS exist, Community Base Flood Elevations shown on the
Preliminary FIRM and Preliminary FIS shall be used for local regulatory purposes, if they are higher than those shown
on the effective FIRM and FIS. The initial Flood Insurance Rate Maps are as follows for the jurisdictional areas of
the Town of Matthews at the initial date of February 4, 2004 and Mecklenburg County Unincorporated Area, dated
June 1, 1981. [formerly known as § 151.08]
C. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance
with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. The Floodplain
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 9
Regulations Technical Guidance Document may be used for illustrative purposes to assist in determining the
applicable type of floodplain development permit required. [formerly known as § 151.09]
D. COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. [formerly known as § 151.10]
E. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with any existing provisions of laws or ordinances or any rules, regulations or permits previously
adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued, in conformity with law, relating to the use of buildings or
premises; nor is it intended by this Chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties; provided, however, that, where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use
of buildings or premises or requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such
existing provisions of laws or ordinances, or by such rules, regulations or permits or by such easements, covenants or
agreements, the provisions of this Chapter shall control. [formerly known as § 151.11]
F. INTERPRETATIONS. In the interpretation and applications of the Floodplain Regulations, all provisions shall be
considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed to meet the purposes and objectives of this regulation as
stated in § 155.901.D and § 155.901.E; and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. [formerly known as § 151.12]
G. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Chapter does not
imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. The Floodplain Regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Matthews,
Mecklenburg County, or on any agent, officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or by any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [formerly known as § 151.13]
H. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of floodplain
development permits, variances or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
Chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. Each day such violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town or the Floodplain Administrator
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including but not limited to
seeking injunctive relief, orders of abatement, or other similar equitable relief. [formerly known as § 151.14]
155.903. Administration and Enforcement.
A. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. [formerly known as § 151.16]
1. A Floodplain Development Permit is required for any development within the Community Special Flood
Hazard Area (CSFHA) and is subject to the conditions below. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to
create, and amend from time to time as necessary, a Technical Guidance Document to help explain the
application of the provisions of this chapter, specifically the Floodplain Development Permit provisions,
through the use of charts and related written materials. The Technical Guidance Document shall not be a part
of this chapter, and shall be solely for illustrative and educational purposes. If there is any discrepancy
between the Technical Guidance Document and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
2. Floodplain Development Permits fall into one of two types: General Floodplain Development Permits
(GFDP) and Individual Floodplain Development Permits (IFDP). If the proposed development activities meet
the requirements of the General Floodplain Development Permit, an Individual Floodplain Development
Permit is not required.
a. GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT (GFDP) PERMIT. The intent of the General Floodplain
Development Permit (GFDP) is to allow uses or activities in the Community Special Flood Hazard
Area (including the FEMA Floodway and Community Encroachment Area) which inherently will
not increase FEMA and/or Community Base Flood Elevations. The following uses and activities
are permitted under a GFDP, without the need for an Individual Floodplain Development Permit,
flood study or variance, as long as they result in no Technically Measurable increases in FEMA
and/or Community Base Flood Elevations.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 10
i. General farming, pasture, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuaries, gardens, lawns,
landscaping, mulch twelve inches (12”) or less in depth, and other similar activities;
ii. Utility infrastructure (poles, sewer manholes, vent pipes, underground utilities, etc.), sign
poles, non-solid fences, and other similar activities.
iii. On-grade driveways, trails, sidewalks, boardwalks, roads and road maintenance; storm
drainage system construction, repairs and maintenance (major and minor system), and
other similar activities. The Floodplain Administrator must be notified in writing, including
a project description and sketch plan, prior to commencement of these activities.
iv. Interior renovations with a value of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), to a
structure with its lowest floor not meeting the requirements of § 155.905.B.1.a or §
155.905.B.1.b.
v. Interior renovations of any value, to a structure with its Lowest Floor meeting the
requirements of § 155.905.B.1.a or § 155.905.B.1.b.
b. INDIVIDUAL FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT (IDFP) PERMITS. Individual Floodplain Development
Permits are required for all other projects that do not meet the requirements of a General Floodplain
Development Permit. Application for an Individual Floodplain Development Permit (IFDP) shall
be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development
activities proposed to be located within the Community Special Flood Hazard Area. Requirements
for submittal are available from the Floodplain Administrator.
c. CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. Final As-Built Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) (for
either residential or non-residential buildings) or Flood-proofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is
required after construction is completed and prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or a
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation or floodproofed
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. Said certification shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified
by same. When flood-proofing is utilized, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall
be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy or Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. In some instances, another certification may be
required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make said corrections required shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
or Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
i. For proposed development in the Community or FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area but
located outside of the Community Encroachment Area and the FEMA Floodway, a
certification from a registered land surveyor or professional engineer that states that no fill
material or other development was placed within the FEMA Floodway or Community
Encroachment Area of any watercourse, will be required prior to issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy or Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
ii. For proposed development within the Community Encroachment Area or the FEMA
Floodway, an as-built topographic map prepared by a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer will be required prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. This is in addition to a no-rise/no-impact study or
CLOMR that may be required as specified in § 9-102 (a)(6).
iii. If a manufactured home is placed within the Floodplain and the elevation of the chassis is
thirty six inches (36”) or higher above adjacent grade, an engineered foundation
certification is required.
d. CERTIFICATION EXEMPTIONS. The following structures, if located within the Floodplain, are exempt
from the elevation/flood-proofing certification requirements specified in § 155.903.B.1 and §
155.903.B.2:
i. Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of § 155.905.B.1.i.;
ii. Temporary structures meeting requirements of § 155.905.B.1.j; and
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 11
iii. Accessory structures less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet meeting requirements of
§ 155.905.B.1.k.
e. PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
i. A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
specific details of the proposed floodplain development:
• The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other
development;
• The location of the Community Flood Fringe Line, Community Encroachment
Line, FEMA Flood Fringe Line and FEMA Floodway Line as shown on the FIRM
or other flood map, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood
Hazard Area;
• Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the
FIRM or other flood map;
• The FEMA Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and Community Base Flood Elevation
(CBFE) and Flood Protection Elevation (FPE);
• The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development;
• The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer as deemed necessary by the Floodplain Administrator.
ii. Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a Community or FEMA
Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
• Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including
basement) of all structures;
• Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in
Zone AE, will be flood-proofed; and
• Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will
be elevated or flood-proofed;
iii. If flood-proofing, a Flood-proofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data
and an inspection and operational plan that includes, but is not limited to, installation,
exercise, and maintenance of flood-proofing measures.
iv. A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation
system to ensure all provisions of this ordinance are met. These details include but are not
limited to:
• The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation
perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on
columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
• Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls
when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Community Special Flood
Hazard Area
• Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
• Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
• Certification that all other Local, State and Federal permits required prior to
floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 12
• Documentation for proper placement of Recreational Vehicles and/or Temporary
Structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of § 155.905.B.1.i and
§ 155.905.B.1.j are met
• A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable,
including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the floodcarrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both
upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
f. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
i. A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit.
ii. The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed development
iii. The Flood Protection Elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
iv. The Flood Protection Elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
v. All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
vi. A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the Community
Encroachment Area or FEMA Floodway area of any watercourse, as applicable.
vii. The flood openings requirements in accordance with § 155.905.B.1.d.
B. CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES. [FORMERLY KNOWN AS § 151.18]
1. VIOLATIONS TO BE CORRECTED. When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable state and
local laws and notifies the property owner or building occupant of the violation, the owner or occupant shall
immediately remedy each violation of law cited in the notice.
2. ACTIONS IN EVENT OF FAILURE TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION. If the owner or occupant of a building or
property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give written notice,
by certified or registered mail to the last known address or by personal service that:
a. The building or property is in violation of the Floodplain Regulations;
b. A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later
than twenty (20) calendar days after the date of the notice; at which time the owner or occupant shall
be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and
c. Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate or
demolish the building, or to remove fill or other unauthorized encroachment, as appears appropriate.
3. ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the
Floodplain Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Floodplain
Regulations, he shall issue an order in writing to the owner or occupant, requiring the owner or occupant to
remedy the violation within such period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days. If the Floodplain Administrator determines that there is imminent danger to
public health, safety or welfare or other property, he may order that immediate corrective action be taken,
and if no corrective action is taken as ordered, the Floodplain Administrator, with the written authorization
of the Town Manager, shall have the authority to enter upon the property to perform the work necessary to
correct the condition and the owner or occupant shall be responsible for the actual costs incurred.
4. APPEAL. Any owner or occupant who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to
the Town Zoning Board of Adjustment (hereinafter referred to as the “Board of Adjustment” or “Board”) as
provided in § 155.904.B. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be
final. The Board of Adjustment shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and
affirm or revoke the order.
5. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER. If the owner or occupant of a building or property fails to comply with an
order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the
Board of Adjustment following an appeal, he/she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in
the discretion of the court. In addition, the owner or occupant shall be subject to civil enforcement as
described in § 155.902.H.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 13
155.904. Appeals and Variances.
A. INITIATION AND FILING OF APPEAL.
1. An appeal of an order, decision, determination or interpretation made by the Floodplain Administrator may
be initiated by any person aggrieved by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town.
2. A notice of appeal in the form prescribed by the Board of Adjustment must be filed with the Board’s Clerk,
with a copy to the Floodplain Administrator, within twenty (20) days of the order, decision, determination or
interpretation and must be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee as established by the Town Council.
Failure to timely file such notice and fee will constitute a waiver of any rights to appeal under this section
and the Board of Adjustment shall have no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.[formerly known as § 151.20]
B. STANDARDS AND HEARING PROCEDURE.
1. The Board of Adjustment will conduct the hearing on an appeal of an order, decision, determination or
interpretation of these regulations in accordance with its normal hearing procedures as set out in Chapter 2
of this Title.
2. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or modify the order, decision,
determination or interpretation under appeal upon finding an error in the application of these regulations on
the part of the Floodplain Administrator who rendered the decision, determination or interpretation. In
modifying the decision, determination or interpretation, the Board will have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken. [formerly known as § 151.21]
C. INITIATION AND FILING OF VARIANCE PETITION.
1. A petition for variance may be initiated only by the owner of the affected property, or an agent authorized in
writing to act on the owner’s behalf.
2. A petition for a variance from these regulations in the form prescribed by the Board of Adjustment must be
filed with the Board’s Clerk, with a copy to the Floodplain Administrator, and be accompanied by a
nonrefundable filing fee as established by the Town Board of Commissioners. [formerly known as § 151.22]
D. FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION AND DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS.
1. In passing upon variances, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and:
a. The danger that materials allowed to be placed in the floodway as a result of the variance may be
swept onto other lands to the injury of others during a Community Base Flood;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage from a Community Base Flood;
c. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage
during the Community Base Flood;
d. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
f. Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage during a Community
Base Flood, for the proposed use;
g. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. Relationship of the proposed use to the Mecklenburg County Floodplain Management Guidance
Document, Mecklenburg County Flood Hazard Mitigation Plans, the Mecklenburg County and/or
Matthews Greenway Plans, and any other adopted land use plans for that area;
i. Safety of access to the property in times of a Community Base Flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
j. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters during a
Community Base Flood expected at the site; and
k. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood events, including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets
and bridges.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 14
2. A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance.
3. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Adjustment
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
4. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
5. Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the definition as stated in § 155.901.F, provided
provisions of § 155.906 have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood
damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or
6. Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this Section. [formerly known as §
151.23]
E. CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
1. Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other Federal, State,
or local laws, regulations, or ordinances.
2. Variances shall not be issued within any designated Floodway if the variance would result in any increase in
flood levels during the Community and/or FEMA Base Flood discharge unless the requirements of §
155.905.B.1.f are met.
3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
4. Variances shall only be issued prior to approval of a Floodplain Development Permit. [formerly known as
§ 151.24]
F. STANDARDS FOR GRANTING VARIANCES.
1. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights (unless the
requirements of § 155.905.B.1.f are met), additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with other
existing local laws or ordinances.
2. The fact that the property could be utilized more profitably or conveniently with the variance than without
the variance shall not be considered as grounds for granting the variance. [formerly known as § 151.25]
G. MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS.
1. In addition to consideration of the items in § 155.904.E.1, if dry land access cannot be obtained, a variance
to the requirement for dry land access may be granted by the Board of Adjustment upon consideration of the
following conditions:
a. A determination that all possible alternatives have been investigated in an attempt to provide the
safest access from a proposed habitable building to a dry public street.
b. The existence of a site plan prepared by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer indicating
that the proposed access to habitable buildings on the property poses the least risk from flooding.
2. In addition to consideration of the items in § 155.904.E.1, a variance may be issued by the Board of
Adjustment for solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and
chemical storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the following
criteria are met:
a. The use serves a critical need in the community.
b. No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas.
c. The lowest floor of any structure is elevated above the Community Base Flood Elevation or is
designed and sealed by a professional engineer or a registered architect to be watertight with walls
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 15
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
d. There will be no storage of materials or tanks which could flood within the Special Flood Hazard
Area unless they are contained in a structure as defined in § 155.904.H.2.c.
e. The use complies with all other applicable laws and regulations.
f. The Town of Matthews has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior
to granting the variance. [formerly known as § 151.26]
H. NOTIFICATION AND RECORDKEEPING.
1. Any applicant to whom a variance from the FEMA Base Flood Elevation is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the FEMA Base Flood Elevation and the elevation to which the
structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions.
2. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances
regarding FEMA minimum standards to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North
Carolina upon request [formerly known as § 151.27]
I. APPEAL FROM BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1. Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the Board of Adjustment to grant or deny a Floodplain
Development Permit shall have thirty (30) days to file an appeal to Mecklenburg County Superior Court, as
provided in NCGS. 143-215.57 (c).
2. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment related to any other order, decision,
determination or interpretation of these regulations, including the granting or denial of a variance, shall have
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the Board’s decision to file a petition for review in the nature of certiorari
in Mecklenburg County Superior Court. [formerly known as § 151.28]
155.905. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
A. GENERAL STANDARDS.
1. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions are required:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure;
b. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods
of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for
resisting wind forces;
c. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage;
d. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage;
e. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities
shall be designed, constructed, installed, designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the Flood
Protection Elevation. These include but are not limited to HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, electric meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances (i.e., washers,
dryers, refrigerator, etc.), hot water heaters, electric wiring, and outlets/switches;
f. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
g. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 16
h. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding;
i. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of "New Construction" as contained in
this Chapter;
j. Construction of new solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage
yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted except by variance, in Special Flood
Hazard Area. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the
operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a Special
Flood Hazard Area only if the structure or tank is either elevated above the Community Base Flood
Elevation or designed to be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and with structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy;
k. Any new critical facility must be located outside of the five hundred (500) year two tenths percent
(0.2%) flood fringe area and elevated at least one foot (1’) above the five hundred (500) year two
tenths percent (0.2%) flood elevation or the Community Base Flood Elevation whichever is greater.
The determination of this flood fringe area and elevation will be provided by the Floodplain
Administrator;
l. SUBDIVISIONS. All development proposals submitted for review and approval in accordance with
the Town Unified Development Ordinance shall also comply with the following provisions:
i. Locate and construct public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, to minimize flood damage;
ii. Construct all new streets located in a Community Special Flood Hazard Area in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance;
iii. Design and construct adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
iv. Take such other appropriate measures needed to minimize flood damage.
m. For the purpose of determining substantial improvement, the Floodplain Administrator shall make
a determination of the total cost of repairs as it relates to a substantial improvement, including a
determination of whether a series of repairs, reconstructions or improvements constitute one single
alteration such that the total cost of the repairs, reconstructions or improvements will be the
cumulative cost from the first alteration.
n. When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet
the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements.
o. When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with
multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the
highest base flood elevation shall apply. [formerly known as § 151.29]
B. SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
1. Unless a variance is granted by the Town Board of Adjustment, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development requiring an Individual Floodplain Development Permit per §
155.903.B.1.d, is allowed within the Community and FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, except where
necessary for public infrastructure including but not limited to streets, utilities, greenways and sidewalks.
These uses must be approved by the Floodplain Administrator. Review and implementation of SWIM buffer
regulations shall be concurrent and coordinated with the provisions of this chapter, so that both are satisfied.
In all Community and FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas where development is allowed by variance the
following provisions will apply:
a. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
i. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the
lowest floor elevated at least one foot above the Community Base Flood Elevation.
ii. Non-substantial Improvements Notice. Renovations/rehabilitations costing between
twenty five percent (25%) and fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the existing
building and said building having the lowest floor below the Flood Protection Elevation,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 17
will require the property owner to record a Notice of Floodplain Improvements (provided
in the Technical Guidance Document) with the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds
Office prior to the issuance of a building permit.
b. NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements for residential
construction in § 155.905.B.1.a, or the structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation, provided
that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 155.903.B.2.c.
c. NEW BUILDINGS REMOVED FROM THE FEMA SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA BY FILL. When new
buildings have been constructed on land that has been removed from the FEMA Special Flood
Hazard Area by the placement of fill, they must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
at least one foot above the Community Base Flood Elevation.
d. ELEVATED BUILDINGS. New construction or substantial improvement of elevated buildings that
include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the Community
Base Flood Elevation shall meet the requirements of § 155.905.B.1, and shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. The walls shall be
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.
i. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional
engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
• Provide a minimum of two (2) openings, having a total net area of not less than
one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
• The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1’) above adjacent
grade at the opening;
• Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both
directions;
• Openings must be on different sides of the enclosed area if possible; and
• If the building has more than one enclosed area, each must have openings.
ii. FOUNDATION ENCLOSURES:
• Vinyl or sheet metal skirting is not considered an enclosure for regulatory and
flood insurance rating purposes. Therefore such skirting does not require
hydrostatic openings as outlined above.
• Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an
enclosure and requires hydrostatic openings as outlined above to comply with this
ordinance.
iii. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises (standard exterior door),or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
iv. Shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas.
v. Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation; and
e. DRY LAND ACCESS. Access to habitable buildings during a flood event is extremely hazardous. Dry
land access must be provided to new or substantially improved habitable buildings according to the
following criteria:
i. Dry land access is required if any portion of either the habitable building or vehicular
access route, connecting the habitable building to a public street, is within the Floodplain.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 18
If dry land access cannot be obtained, a variance to the requirement for dry land access
may be granted by the Board of Adjustment. Plans and details for the dry land access must
be submitted by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and approved by the
Floodplain Administrator.
ii. The following are exempt from the dry land access requirement:
• Substantial improvement to an existing habitable building where the property
does not have any access to a dry public street.
• Construction of a new habitable building where both the habitable building and
the access route connecting it to a public street, are located entirely outside the
Community Encroachment Area and where the property does not have any access
to a dry public street. Under this exemption, access from the habitable building to
the public street must connect to the highest point of the public street adjacent to
the property; be constructed of gravel, pavement or concrete and be at least twelve
feet (12’) wide; and be constructed entirely at or above the elevation of highest
point of the public street adjacent to the property.
f. FEMA FLOODWAY AND COMMUNITY ENCROACHMENT AREA. The FEMA Floodway and the
Community Encroachment Area are very hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris and potential projectiles and have erosion potential. The following provisions shall
apply within each of these designated areas:
i. COMMUNITY ENCROACHMENT AREA. No encroachments, requiring an Individual
Floodplain Development Permit, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development shall be permitted within the Community
Encroachment Area unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that such
encroachment would not result in increased flood heights of greater than one tenth feet
(0.10’) during the occurrence of a Community Base Flood. Such certification and
associated technical data by a registered engineer shall be approved by the Floodplain
Administrator. Any change which would cause a rise of more than one tenth feet (0.10’) in
the Community Base Flood Elevation will require notification of impacted property
owners, and a Community Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CoCLOMR) from the
Floodplain Administrator. If approved and constructed, as-built plans must be submitted
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a Community Letter of Map Revision
(CoLOMR) issued. A Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued without the above stated
Community Letter of Map Revision. Projects impacting existing habitable buildings that
increase the Community Base Flood Elevation more than 0.00 feet will not be allowed
without a variance.
ii. FEMA FLOODWAY. No encroachments requiring an Individual Floodplain Development
Permit, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development
shall be permitted within the FEMA Floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that such encroachment would not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in the FEMA
Base Flood Elevations during the occurrence of a FEMA Base Flood and no increase in
the Community Base Flood Elevations during the occurrence of the Community Base
Flood. Such analysis performed by a registered professional engineer shall be approved by
the Floodplain Administrator. Any change which would cause a rise in the FEMA Base
Flood Elevation or an increase in the FEMA Floodway width during the occurrence of the
FEMA Base Flood will require notification of impacted property owners, and a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision from FEMA. If approved and constructed, as-built plans must be
submitted by the property owner and approved by FEMA and a Letter of Map Revision
issued. A Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued without the above stated Conditional
Letter of Map Revision. Any change which would cause a rise in the Community Base
Flood Elevation or an increase in the width of the Community Encroachment Area during
the occurrence of the Community Base Flood will require notification of impacted property
owners, and a Community Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CoCLOMR). Projects
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 19
which cause a rise of greater than 0.00 feet in the FEMA Base Flood Elevation and impact
an existing habitable building will not be allowed.
iii. No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring and the elevation standards
of § 155.905.B.1.h are met.
iv. TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS. Certain temporary encroachments into the
Community Encroachment Area and/or the FEMA Floodway may be exempt from meeting
the requirements of § 155.905.B.1.f. Examples of temporary encroachments include but
are not limited to: sediment control devices including basins and/or check dam diversions,
temporary stream crossings, haul roads/construction entrances, storage of equipment, and
soil stockpiling. The following conditions must be met to qualify for the exemption:
• The proposed encroachment shall not be in place more than three months and is
renewable for up to one year with written approval from the Floodplain
Administrator. Temporary sediment control devices may be kept in place longer
than one year if required by the appropriate regulatory agency; and
• Supporting documentation, including hydrologic and/or hydraulic analyses (if
required by the Floodplain Administrator) must be submitted by a registered
engineer indicating that the proposed project will not impact any existing
habitable building or overtop any roadway surfaces.
• The temporary encroachment will require an Individual Floodplain Development
Permit unless it is included in another IFDP.
g. ADDITIONS/IMPROVEMENTS.
i. Additions and/or improvements to noncompliant portions of pre-FIRM structures where
the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the
existing structure i) are not a substantial improvement, then the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages, not have an enclosed area
lower than that of the existing structure, be constructed of flood resistant materials, and
must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure; ii) are a substantial
improvement, then both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must
comply with the standards of § 155.905.B.1.a.
ii. Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure other
than a standard door in the common wall require only the addition to comply with the
standards of § 155.905.B.1.a.
iii. Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures where the addition and/or
improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure i)
are not a substantial improvement, then the addition and/or improvements only must
comply with the standards for new construction; ii) are a substantial improvement, then
both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the
standards of § 155.905.B.1.a.
iv. Customary maintenance and/or repair are not considered additions and/or improvements.
h. MANUFACTURED HOMES:
i. New and replaced manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated at least one foot (1’) above the Community Base Flood
Elevation.
ii. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system,
or in accordance with the Regulations for Mobile Homes and Modular Housing adopted
by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to NCGS 143-143.15. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by raising the chassis at least thirty six inches (36”) or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 20
elements of at least equivalent strength. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty
six inches (36”) in height an engineering certification is required.
iii. An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new,
substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivision
located within the Special Flood Hazard Area. This plan shall be filed with and approved
by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.
iv. All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of §
155.905.B.1.d.
i. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. Recreational vehicles shall either i) be on site for fewer than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or (ii)
Meet all the requirements for New Construction.
j. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES. Prior to issuance of a Floodplain Development Permit for a temporary
structure the following requirements must be met:
i. All applicants must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for removal of such
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane or flash flood notification. The plan must include
the following information:
• A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. The time
specified may not exceed three months, and is renewable up to one (1) year;
• The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the
removal of the structure;
• The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed;
• A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a trucking company to
ensure the availability of removal equipment when needed; and
• Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the floodplain
to which the temporary structure will be removed.
ii. The above information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for
review and written approval.
k. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.), are to be placed
in the Floodplain the following criteria shall be met:
i. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping,
living, cooking or restroom areas);
ii. Accessory structures shall be designed to have a low flood damage potential;
iii. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with § 155.905.A.1.a;
iv. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated in accordance
with § 155.905.A.1.e;
v. Accessory structures shall have hydrostatic openings in accordance with § 155.905.B.1.d.
vi. Accessory structures less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet do not require an
elevation or flood proofing certificate.
vii. Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled
l. PARKING AREAS. All parking areas for new or substantially improved non-single family habitable
buildings must be at an elevation such that water depths would be less than six inches (6”) deep in
any parking space during the occurrence of a Community Base Flood. [formerly known as §
151.30]
C. LEVEES. In all Community and FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas where Community and FEMA Base Flood
Elevation data have been provided, the following provisions for levees are required as set forth in § 155.905.C.2.
1. GENERAL LEVEE REQUIREMENTS.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 21
a. Levees will be treated as development in the Floodplain and are subject to all applicable sections of
this Chapter.
b. Levees shall not be constructed solely to protect vacant property from flooding.
c. With the exception of a levee that protects a building or feature that must be located in the vicinity
of a stream to be functional such as a stream monitor, water/sewer facility or other uses approved
by the Floodplain Administrator, levees require the approval of the Director of Mecklenburg County
Storm Water Services, or his designee, regardless of their location within the Community Special
Flood Hazard Area (entire Floodplain).
d. With the exception of a levee that protects a building or feature that must be located in the vicinity
of a stream to be functional such as a stream monitor, water/sewer facility or other uses approved
by the Floodplain Administrator, the owner of the levee and the Director of Mecklenburg County
Storm Water Services (the “Director”), or his designee, shall conduct an open house forum prior to
consideration of approval. The open house forum initiates a thirty (30) day comment period for the
Director or his designee to receive comments from the public.
e. Owners of land adjacent to a proposed levee shall be notified of the open house forum and be
provided an opportunity to submit written comments during the thirty (30) day comment period.
Notification is to occur through regular mail, as well as a sign being placed at a conspicuous place
at the creek and along the public and private road(s) of the properties that would be protected by the
proposed levee.
f. After the end of the thirty (30) day comment period, but no more than sixty (60) days from the end
of the comment period, the Director shall approve or disapprove the application or request more
information from the owner of the levee. If the Director determines that the additional information
is sufficiently significant, the director may offer an additional thirty (30) day comment period to all
parties involved. Consistent with § 155.904, the Director’s decision may be appealed to the
Matthews Board of Adjustment.
g. Regardless of whether the proposed levee would meet FEMA certification requirements, floodplain
lines and flood elevations will not be modified based on the location, performance or any other
aspects of the levee.
2. LEVEE PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS. Prior to the issuance of a Floodplain Development Permit for
construction of a proposed levee, the applicant must submit the following information in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
a. Plans and/or specifications showing the location of the proposed levee is as far away from the
adjacent creek as reasonably possible;
b. A copy of the written approval for the levee received from the Director of Mecklenburg County
Storm Water Services;
c. Verification of notification to owners of land adjacent to the proposed levee (those within five
hundred feet (500’) of the property lines of the parcel on which the proposed levee is to be located
or within a distance equal to the length of the proposed levee, whichever is greater). Notification is
also to include properties that are in the Community Special Flood Hazard Area and within the
hydraulic modeling limits as described below;
d. Copies of all written comments received from property owners referenced above;
e. If the levee is proposed to be located within the Community Encroachment Area, a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis must be provided by a registered professional engineer and performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice. In addition to the requirements of § 155.905.B.1.f.
the analysis shall also:
i. show no increase in water surface elevations on any existing habitable building using the
current and future discharges for the ten (10), twenty five (25), fifty (50), and one hundred
(100) year frequency flows;
ii. account for all feasible future levees in the area as deemed appropriate by the Floodplain
Administrator;
f. A copy of the contract with the entity responsible for construction of the proposed levee;
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 22
g. A copy of the maintenance plan for the levee which has been certified by a professional engineer,
which shall include a description of the process by which the levee will be inspected annually and
provide for updated plans to be provided annually to property owners and residents intended to
benefit from the levee.
3. Levees constructed on an individual single-family residential parcel are exempt from the requirements of §§
155.905.C.1.(a-f), and 2.(a-g). [formerly known as § 151.31]
155.906. Legal Status Provisions.
A. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS.
1. EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOODWAY REGULATIONS. These regulations in part
come forward by reenactment of some of the provisions of the Floodway Regulations enacted February 4,
1991 (Ordinance 650) as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to reenact and continue to
enforce without interruption such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued
thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this Chapter shall not affect any action, suit
or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted on
February 4, 1991, as amended, which are not reenacted herein, are repealed. The date of the initial Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance for Mecklenburg County is December 4, 1972.
2. EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
a. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use
of any development or any part thereof for which a Floodplain Development Permit has been granted
by the Floodplain Administrator before the time of passage of this Floodplain Regulation ordinance;
provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a
period of two (2) years subsequent to passage of this Chapter or any revision thereto, such permit
shall become void and construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter.
b. Any application(s) for a Floodplain Development Permit received prior to the Effective Date of
these Floodplain Regulations shall be reviewed under the regulations in effect at the time of the
initial application. Any incomplete application(s) for a Floodplain Development Permit will be valid
only for ninety (90) days after the Floodplain Administrator has requested additional information
from the applicant or his agent. If ninety (90) days after the owner or his agent has received the
request for additional information the applicant has failed to submit reasonably complete
information that demonstrates a good faith effort to provide all the additional information requested,
as determined by the Floodplain Administrator, the application will become void. Any subsequent
submittals will be considered as new applications and reviewed under the regulations in effect on
the date the subsequent submittal is received by the Floodplain Administrator.
3. EXPIRATION OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS ISSUED AFTER FLOODPLAIN REGULATION ADOPTION.
a. Individual Floodplain Development Permits issued pursuant to this ordinance expire two (2) years
after the date of issuance unless i) the work has commenced within two (2) years after the date of
issuance, or ii) the issuance of the permit is legally challenged in which case the permit is valid for
two (2) years after the challenge has been resolved.
b. Any incomplete application(s) for an Individual Floodplain Development Permit will be valid only
for ninety (90) days after the Floodplain Administrator has requested additional information from
the applicant or his agent. If ninety (90) days after the owner or his agent has received the request
for additional information the applicant has failed to submit reasonably complete information that
demonstrates a good faith effort to provide all the additional information requested, as determined
by the Floodplain Administrator, the application will become void. Any subsequent submittals will
be considered as new applications and reviewed under the regulations in effect on the date the
subsequent submittal is received by the Floodplain Administrator. [formerly known as § 151.32]
B. SEVERABILITY. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the Floodplain Regulations Ordinance is held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Floodplain Regulations Ordinance. [formerly known as § 151.33] (Ord. No. 1664; passed
1-12-09)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 9 - 23
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 1
Chapter 10. Housing Code
155.1001. General Provisions. [formerly §149]
A. PURPOSE.
1. Pursuant to NCGS 160A-441, it is declared
that there exist in the Town dwellings
which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards
of fire, accidents and other calamities, lack
of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities,
and other conditions rendering such
dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous
and detrimental to the health and otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of
the Town.
2. In order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town as
authorized by Part 6 of Article 19, Chapter
160A of the General Statutes of North
Carolina, it is the purpose of this Chapter
to establish minimum standards of fitness
for the initial and continued occupancy of
all buildings used for human habitation, as
expressly authorized by NCGS 160A-444.
[formerly known as § 149.01]
155.1002. Definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined in this Chapter, words or
phrases used in this Chapter 10 shall apply the
definitions provided in Chapter 1 of this Title, or
when not defined in Chapter 1 they shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Chapter 10, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
Basement – Shall mean a portion of a building which is located partly underground, having direct access to light and
air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground.
Cellar – Shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having an inadequate access to light
and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
Deteriorated – Shall mean that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered, or improved to
comply with all of the minimum standards established by this Chapter, at a cost not in excess of fifty percent (50%)
of its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 2
Dilapidated – Shall mean that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to
comply with all of the minimum standards established by this ordinance at a cost not in excess of fifty percent (50%)
of its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.
Dwelling – Shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants; provided that temporary housing as defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
Dwelling unit – Shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit
with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
Extermination – Shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their
harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Inspector.
Garbage – Shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
Habitable room – Shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers, or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
Infestation – Shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests in such
number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.
Inspector – Shall mean the Director of the Mecklenburg County Code Enforcement Division or his designee.
Multiple dwelling – Shall mean any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
Occupant – Shall mean any person over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Operator – Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or any part of a building, in which
dwelling units or rooming units are let.
Owner – Shall mean any person who alone or jointly, or severally with others:
(1) shall have fee simple title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, and every mortgagee, and owner and holder of a
deed of trust and the trustee of record; with or without accompanying actual possession of said dwelling or
dwelling unit; or
(2) Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as
executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, and
of rules and regulations adopted within it, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
Parties in Interest – Means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling
and any who are in possession of such dwelling.
Plumbing – Shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: Gas pipes, gas burning
equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basin, drains,
vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
Public Authority – Shall mean the governing body of the Town or any officer who is in charge of any department or
branch of the government of the Town or of Mecklenburg County or the State of North Carolina relating to health,
fire, building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings in the Town.
Rooming unit – Shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used
for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
Rooming house – Shall mean any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one (1) or more rooming units, in
which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter,
mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
Rubbish – Shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage and ashes, and the term shall
include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 3
Supplied – Shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or operator.
Temporary housing – Shall mean any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than thirty consecutive days.
Town – Shall mean the Town of Matthews, located in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina.
Unfit for human habitation – Shall mean that conditions exist in a dwelling which violate or do not comply with one
(1) or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one (1) or more of the requirements established by this Chapter.
B. MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS. Whenever words "dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, premises" are
used in this ordinance, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part." [formerly
known as § 149.02]
155.1003. Minimum Standards.
A. MINIMUM STANDARDS OF FITNESS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS. Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as
a human habitation, or held out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standards of
fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of this § 155.1003. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant,
or let to another for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply
with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of this § 155.1003.
[formerly known as §149.03]
B. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.
1. Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or other structural members shall not
excessively list, lean or buckle and shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or
cracks which might admit rodents.
2. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used.
3. Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged so as
to dangerously reduce their intended load bearing characteristics.
4. Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that
they will not fail or collapse.
5. Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided.
6. Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall be finished of suitable materials, which
will, by use of reasonable household methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in
such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various spaces.
7. The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors, and all doors and windows exposed to the weather
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be weather-proof and watertight.
8. There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as
to constitute a fire hazard.
9. There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the ground. [formerly known as § 149.04]
C. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
1. PLUMBING SYSTEM.
a. Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to the public sewer or other
approved sewage disposal system.
b. Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet,
and adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved
pipe distribution system connected to an approved potable water supply.
c. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order.
d. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the
occupants of same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the user.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 4
2. HEATING SYSTEM. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities for providing heat in accordance
with either a) or b) below.
a. CENTRAL AND ELECTRIC HEATING SYSTEMS. Every central or electric heating system shall be of
sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in
every dwelling unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of sixty eight degrees
(68o) Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet (3’) above the floor and two feet (2') from exterior
walls during ordinary winter conditions (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-03)
b. OTHER HEATING FACILITIES. Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each
dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents
and such heating appliances may be connected or located so as to heat all habitable rooms with a
minimum temperature of 68-degrees Fahrenheit measured three feet (3’) above the floor and two
feet (2’) from exterior walls during ordinary winter conditions. (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-03)
3. ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
a. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles.
Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) floor or wall-type electric convenience
receptacles, connected in such manner as determined by the National Electric Code. There shall be
installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one (1)
supplied ceiling, or wall-type electric light fixture. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not
provided in any habitable room, then each such habitable room shall contain at least three (3) floor
or wall-type electric convenience receptacles.
b. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric
lights at all times when natural daylight is not sufficient.
c. All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe,
capable of being used, without hazard to property or person. [formerly known as § 149.05]
D. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR VENTILATION.
1. GENERAL. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors
for adequate ventilation. At least one (1) window in every habitable room shall be of such size and location
to allow egress by an average adult in the event of fire or other emergency.
2. HABITABLE ROOMS. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight which can easily be
opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum window area size or
minimum skylight type window size as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation.
3. BATHROOM AND WATER CLOSET ROOMS. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with
the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required
in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an approved ventilation system.
[formerly known as § 149.06]
E. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.
1. ROOM SIZES. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each habitable room as
required by the current version of the NC State Building Code or the building code in effect at the time of
the construction, whichever is less restrictive. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least one hundred (100) square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three (3) occupants, and at least seventy five (75) square feet of
additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit,
every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet
of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at
least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age and over, and at least thirty
five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age. (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-
03)
2. CEILING HEIGHT. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height
of not less than seven feet (7’). (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-03)
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 5
3. FLOOR AREA CALCULATION. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area. However,
closet area and wall area within the dwelling unit may count for not more than ten percent (10%) of the
required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four
and one-half feet (4.5’) shall not be considered as part of the floor area computing the total area of the room
to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
4. CELLAR. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
5. BASEMENTS. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
a. The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
b. The total window standards, total openable window area, and ceiling height are equal to those
required for habitable rooms;
c. The required minimum window standards of every habitable room are entirely above the grade
adjoining such window area, except where the window or windows face a stairwell, window well,
or access way. [formerly known as § 149.07]
F. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
1. EXTERIOR FOUNDATION, WALLS, AND ROOFS. Every foundation wall, exterior wall, and exterior roof shall
be substantially weather tight and rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may
cause to be placed on it. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to
prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.
2. INTERIOR FLOORS, WALLS, AND CEILINGS. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent
proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed on it.
3. WINDOWS AND DOORS. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door, and hatchway shall be
substantially weather tight, watertight, and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and
good repair.
4. STAIRS, PORCHES, AND APPURTENANCES. Every outside and inside stair, porch, and any appurtenance shall
be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed on it; and shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair.
5. BATHROOM SURFACES. Toilet, bath and shower spaces. bathtub and shower floors and walls above bathtubs
with installed shower heads and in shower compartments shall be finished with a nonabsorbent surface. Such
nonabsorbent surfaces must extend at least six feet (6’) above the floor. Every bathroom floor surface and
water closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit such floor to be
easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-03)
6. SUPPLIED FACILITIES. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this
ordinance shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be
maintained in satisfactory working condition.
7. DRAINAGE. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.
8. NOXIOUS WEEDS. Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant
growth which are noxious or detrimental to health.
9. EGRESS. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of egress as required by the current
version of the NC State Residential Building Code or the building code in effect at the time of construction,
whichever is less restrictive. All interior egress doors and a minimum of one (1) exterior egress door shall be
readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the use of a key or special knowledge
or effort. (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-03)
10. SMOKE ALARMS. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have smoke alarms installed and maintained
according to the NC State Residential Building Code. (Ord. 1308, passed 8-25-03)
11. CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have carbon monoxide alarms installed
and maintained according to the Mecklenburg County Carbon Monoxide Alarm Ordinance.(Ord.1308,
passed 8-25-03) [formerly known as § 149.08]
G. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATIONS.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 6
1. RODENT CONTROL. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every
other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed
or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
2. INFESTATION. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests in or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling
unit in a dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner
to maintain a dwelling in a rodent-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling
or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
3. RUBBISH STORAGE AND DISPOSAL. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved
containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by Town ordinances or any Health Department
regulations, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible
for the removal of rubbish.
4. GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an
approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical
sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the inspector, in the structure for
the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can. [formerly known as §
149.09]
H. MINIMUM STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ROOMING HOUSES; EXCEPTIONS. All of the provisions of this ordinance, and
all of the minimum standards and requirements of this Chapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses, and to every
person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any
rooming house, except as provided in the following subsections:
1. WATER CLOSET, HAND LAVATORY, AND BATH FACILITIES. At least one (1) water closet, lavatory basin, and
bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a rooming house wherever said facilities are
shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible
from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than one (1) story removed from any of the persons
sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water
at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar or uninhabitable basement.
2. MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1)
occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each
occupant twelve (12) years of age and over and at least thirty five (35) square feet of floor area for each
occupant under twelve (12) years of age.
3. SANITARY CONDITIONS. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the
rooming house; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where
the entire structure or building within which the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the
operator.
4. SANITARY FACILITIES. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required by §
155.1003.H.1. shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford privacy
and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible from a common hall and without going
outside the rooming house or through any other room. [formerly known as § 149.10]
155.1004. Responsibilities of the Owners and Occupants.
A. PUBLIC AREAS. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining
in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises .
B. CLEANLINESS. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of
the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises which he occupies and controls.
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 7
C. RUBBISH AND GARBAGE. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish and garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage facilities. In all cases the owner shall be responsible
for the availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.
D. SUPPLIED PLUMBING FIXTURES. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures in a clean
and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation of
same.
E. CARE OF FACILITIES, Equipment and Structure. No occupant shall willfully destroy, deface, or impair any of the
facilities or equipment, or any part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit. [formerly known as § 149.11]
155.1005. Mecklenburg County Code Enforcement Administration and Enforcement.
A. DUTIES OF MECKLENBURG COUNTY CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION (THE BUILDING INSPECTOR). The Mecklenburg
County Code Enforcement division that enforces the NC State Residential Building Code, which may be referred to
as “the Building Inspector” is designated in § 155.212 to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. It shall be the duty of
the Building Inspector:
1. To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings and dwelling units located in the Town, in
order to determine which dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this Chapter with respect to such dwellings or dwelling units;
2. To take such action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public and private, as may be
necessary to effect rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;
3. To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this Chapter and an inventory of those dwellings
that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness; and
4. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed. (Ord.1308, passed 8-25-03) [formerly known as §
149.12]
B. POWERS OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this Chapter, including the following:
1. To continually investigate the dwelling conditions in the Town in order to determine which dwellings are
unfit for human habitation;
2. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence;
3. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections; provided, such entries shall
be made in accordance with law and in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession; and
4. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Chapter. [formerly known as §149.13]
C. INSPECTIONS; DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS. For the purpose of making inspections, the Building Inspector is
hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units
and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the person in charge, shall
give the inspector free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, and its premises at all reasonable times
and with one week notice for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling
or dwelling unit shall give the owner, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit,
and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter. [formerly known as § 149.14]
D. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE.
1. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION; NOTICE; HEARING. Whenever a petition is filed with the Building Inspector
by a Public Authority or by at least five (5) residents of the Town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit
is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Building Inspector, upon inspection, that any
dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling
or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the
Building Inspector at a specific place, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the
serving of said complaint. The owner and any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 8
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the
complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one (1) of the persons signing a petition
relating to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give evidence relevant
to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling
in hearings before the Building Inspector.
2. PROCEDURE AFTER HEARING. After such notice and hearing, the Building Inspector shall state in writing his
determination whether such dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, and, if so, whether it is
deteriorated or dilapidated. If the Building Inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
deteriorated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, alter, and improve
such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this Chapter
within a reasonable specified period of time. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and
close such dwelling or dwelling unit until such repairs, alterations, and improvements have been made. Upon
completion of required improvements, a new certificate of occupancy must be issued prior to subsequent
leasing or sale of dwelling to a third party. Hardship cases may be handled by the Building Inspector,
recommending time or minimum requirement waivers to the Town's Board of Adjustment, which body shall
act on such recommendation. If the Building Inspector determines that the dwelling is dilapidated, he shall
state in writing his findings of fact to support such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon
the owner an order directing and requiring the owner to either repair, alter and improve such dwelling or
dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this ordinance, or else vacate
and remove or demolish the same within a reasonable specified period of time.
3. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
a. IN PERSONAM REMEDY. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to
comply with an order of the Building Inspector to repair, alter, or improve the same within the
specified time, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to comply with an order of the
Building Inspector to vacate and close, and remove or demolish the same within the specified time,
the Building Inspector shall submit to the Town Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting
a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the superior court for an order directing such
owner to comply with the order of the Building Inspector, as authorized by NCGS 160A-446(g).
b. IN REM REMEDY. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit, or of a
dilapidated dwelling, to comply with an order of the Building Inspector within the specified time, if
injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in the preceding paragraph
D.1., the Building Inspector shall submit to the Board of Commissioners an ordinance ordering the
Building Inspector to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, improved, or
vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the Building
Inspector, and pending such removal or demolition, to placard such dwelling as provided by NCGS
160A-443 and § 155.1005.F. of this Chapter.
c. ORDER BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.Whenever the Inspector has issued an order ordering a
dwelling to be repaired to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this Chapter,
or an order ordering a dwelling to be either repaired or vacated, demolished and removed under the
provisions outlined at § 155.1005, and the owner does not complete the listed repairs but has the
dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year, then the Board of Commissioners shall find
that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair or improve the dwelling in order to
render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed
status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the Town and surrounding
neighborhood in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create fire and safety
hazards, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal
activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in that area,
and would render unavailable a dwelling which might otherwise have provided safe and secure
housing for a household in need of such dwelling. In such circumstances, after the expiration of the
one-year period, the Board of Commissioners may enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance
upon the owner, requiring that the owner either:
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 9
i. Repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90) days, if repair necessary to
render the dwelling fit for human habitation would cost less than fifty percent (50%) of the
present value of the dwelling; or
ii. Demolish and remove the dwelling within ninety (90) days, if the repair necessary to render
the dwelling fit for human habitation would cost in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the
present value of the dwelling.
Such order shall be recorded in the office of the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds and shall
be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with
this ordinance within the ninety (90) day time limit, then the Inspector shall cause such dwelling to
be repaired or demolished and removed pursuant to the ordinance.
4. APPEALS FROM ORDERS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR. An appeal from any decision or order of the Building
Inspector may be taken by any aggrieved person. Any appeal from the Building Inspector shall be taken
within ten (10) days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing
with the Building Inspector and with Planning Office for the Town's Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal
which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the
Building Inspector shall transmit to the Planning Office all the paper constituting the record upon which the
decision appealed from was made. When appeal is from a decision of the Building Inspector refusing to allow
the aggrieved person to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any
appeal is from a decision of the Building Inspector requiring the aggrieved person to do any act, the appeal
shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board of Adjustment, unless the
Building Inspector certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant), a suspension
of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be
suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one
(1) days written notice to the Building Inspector, by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to NCGS
160A-446(f) and subsection 5 below of this Section. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make such
decision and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have the powers
of the Building Inspector, but the concurring vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Building Inspector. The
Board of Adjustment shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where there are practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the
application of this Chapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the Chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
5. Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of
certiorari instituted within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the Board of Adjustment, but not otherwise,
as provided in NCGS 160A-446(e). In addition, any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Building
Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment shall also have the right, within thirty (30) days
after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the superior court for a temporary
injunction restraining the Building Inspector pending a final disposition of the case, as provided by NCGS
160A-446(f). [formerly known as §149.15]
E. METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS. Complaints or orders issued by the Building Inspector shall be
served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the whereabouts of such persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Building Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Building
Inspector makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon such persons may be made
by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county,
the second publication being not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing.
[formerly known as § 149.16]
F. IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING. After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with
an order of the Building Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and upon adoption by the Town
Board of Commissioners of an ordinance authorizing and directing him to do so, as provided by NCGS 160A-443 (4)
and (5) and § 155.1005.D of this Chapter, the Building Inspector shall proceed to cause such dwelling or dwelling
unit to be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this Chapter,
TOWN OF MATTHEWS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Page 10 - 10
or to be vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Board of Commissioners
and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of such dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited
and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each such ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the Mecklenburg County Register of Deeds, and shall be indexed in the name of the property
owner in the grantor index, as provided by NCGS 160A-443(5). [formerly known as §149.17]
G. COSTS; A LIEN ON THE PREMISES. As provided by NCGS 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of any repairs,
alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to be made or done by the
Building Inspector pursuant to §155.1005.F. shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be enforced and the costs collected as the lien for special
assessments provided by Article 10, Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. [formerly known as § 149.18]
H. ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES. Neither this Chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any
way the power of the Town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or
otherwise, or to enforce this Chapter by criminal process as authorized by NCGS 14-4 and § 155.1005.I., and the
enforcement of any remedy shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies or other ordinances or
laws. [formerly known as § 149.19] [formerly known as § 149.20; covered at § 155.208.C.5]
I. CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS. In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this Chapter is found to
be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town, the provision which establishes the
higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents
of the Town shall prevail. [formerly known as § 149.21]
155.1006. Violation; Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the
same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Building Inspector duly made and served as
provided, within the time specified in such order, and each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to § 155.1005.D., to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same
after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing, and each day that
such occupancy continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The violation of any
provision of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by NCGS 14-4. In addition to the remedy specified in
this and in other sections of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter may also be enforced by the Town by injunction and
order or abatement or by any other equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction, as specified in NCGS
160A-175. (Ord. 1121, passed 6-26-00; Ord. 2025A, passed 6-9-14) [formerly known as § 149.22]
1
Table I. Franchises
Ordinance Date Description
21A Revised 8-8-77 Authorizing the North Carolina Telephone Company to use the public
streets of the town for the purpose of erecting, constructing,
maintaining, and operating lines of telephone and telegraph thereon
and thereunder.
363 8-25-86 Granting a franchise to Vision Cable of North Carolina, Inc., for
the operation and maintenance of a community antenna television
system in the town.