CODE OF THE CITY OF RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER AND 
THE GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Ordained and Published by 
Order of the Council 
____________ 
Originall Published in 1980 By: 
THE NORTH CAROLINA LEAGUE OF MUNICIPALITIES 
1010 Raleigh Building 
Raleigh, North Carolina 
____________ 
Supplemented Since 1980 and Republished in 1993 By: 
____________ 
 
CURRENT 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
MAYOR 
  
Charles C. Meeker 
____________ 
COUNCIL 
  
Mary-Ann Baldwin, Mayor Pro Tem (10/19/10—4/30/11) 
Thomas G. Crowder 
Bonner Gaylord 
Nancy McFarlane, Mayor Pro Tem (5/1/11—12/5/11) 
John Odom 
Russ Stephenson 
Eugene Weeks 
____________ 
CITY ATTORNEY 
  
Thomas A. McCormick 
____________ 
CITY MANAGER 
  
J. Russell Allen 
____________ 
CITY CLERK-TREASURER 
  
Gail G. Smith 
CITY OFFICIALS 
AT TIME OF PUBLICATION 
(1980) 
____________ 
MAYOR 
  
Isabella W. Cannon 
____________ 
COUNCIL 
  
Miriam P. Block 
S. Tony Jordan, Jr. 
William R. Knight 
Edward A. Walters 
William H. Wilson, Mayor Pro Tem 
James B. Womble 
G. Smedes York 
____________ 
CITY ATTORNEY 
  
Thomas A. McCormick 
____________ 
CITY MANAGER 
  
L.P. Zachary, Jr. 
____________ 
CITY CLERK-TREASURER 
  
Gail G. Smith 
FOREWORD 
This Code of Ordinances for the City of Raleigh was originally provided by the North Carolina League of Municipalities as part of its services program. Technical staff assistance was provided by Public Research and Management, Inc., of Atlanta, Georgia, which was responsible for the organization, codification, indexing and printing of the Code. 
The Code consists of: 
The Charter, followed by a tabulation of all local acts affecting the City of Raleigh: 
The Code of Ordinances, which includes citations referring to the official source and date of original ordinances, and those without citations representing new ordinances. 
This Code is designed to serve as a complete compilation of ordinances and as a reliable reference guide. The parts, chapters and articles of the Code follow in logical order. The table of contents, the sectional analysis at the beginning of each chapter and the indices provided sufficient points of reference for all elements of the code. 
Supplements will be published to keep the Code current. The supplements are printed in loose-leaf form so that all new ordinances may be inserted on a regular basis. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 3, 3-82, the Code was published by the editorial staff of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. 
In 1993, the Code was republished in a new format, using the format of the 1992 Zoning Ordinance, included as Part 10, Chapter 2. This republication was under the supervision of A. Lawton Langford, President, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation. 
ORDINANCE NO. (1979)-262 

AN ORDINANCE REVISING AND CONSOLIDATING THE ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY OF RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF RALEIGH AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Adoption of Code. 
The ordinances included in the volume entitled "THE CHARTER AND CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF RALEIGH" and set out immediately following DIVISION I, THE CHARTER and designated as DIVISION II, Parts 1 through 14, inclusive, are hereby adopted as the official "CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA," subject to the revisions herein enacted and incorporated into the CODE, and other provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 2. Repeal of prior ordinances. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City enacted on or before January 1, 1979 and not included within this Code, or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as provided in section 4. 
Section 3. Continuation of prior ordinances. 
To the extent that ordinances or portions of ordinances included within this code are the same in substance as ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this code, it is intended that they be treated as continuations and not as new enactments or amendments, in order that all rights and liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced. 
Section 4. Ordinances not affected. 
This code of ordinances contains all of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Raleigh, but it does not contain, and is not intended to repeal or affect, the following classes of ordinances or actions having the effect of ordinances: 
1.  Annexation ordinances; 
2.  Budget ordinances or amendments thereto; 
3.  Bond orders and ordinances; 
4.  Ordinances granting a franchise; 
5.  Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the exercise of the power of eminent domain; 
6.  Ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the levy of special assessments; 
7.  Ordinances amending the charter of the City of Raleigh, pursuant to article 5, part 4 of chapter 160A, General Statutes of North Carolina. 
8.  Ordinances, resolutions or orders naming, renaming or closing a street; 
9.  Ordinances or resolutions establishing or amending the boundaries of wards or election districts; 
10.  Ordinances establishing or amending the boundaries of zoning districts; 
11.  Resolutions of any type; 
12.  Ordinances establishing or amending a position classification and pay plan for municipal employees; and 
13.  Ordinances of any type which are not normally or customarily codified, including but not limited to, ordinances of limited interest or ordinances of a transitory nature. 
Section 5. Privilege license tax schedule. 
There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into the official Code of Ordinances of the City of Raleigh as provided by section 2-2031 thereof a "SCHEDULE OF PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES." Such schedule shall be in full force and effect following the effective date of this ordinance, as though fully set forth herein. The official "SCHEDULE OF PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES," as the same may be amended from time to time by the City Council, shall be kept and maintained in the offices of the Revenue Collector and the City Clerk, respectively, as a "technical ordinance" pursuant to G.S. 160A-76. 
Section 6. Traffic and parking schedule. 
There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference to the official Code of Ordinances of the City of Raleigh as provided by section 11-2004 thereof a "SCHEDULE OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS." Such schedule shall be in full force and effect following the effective date of this ordinance, as though fully set forth herein. The official "SCHEDULE OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS," as the same may be amended from time to time by the City Council, shall be kept and maintained in the offices of the Transportation Director of the City Clerk, respectively, as a "technical ordinance" pursuant to G.S. 160A-76. 
Section 7. Revisions upon adoption. 
The following revisions, corrections, modifications and amendments are hereby enacted and adopted into the official Code of Ordinances. 
Editor's note: As part of the ordinance adopting the revised Code of Ordinances for the City, textual changes were made in §§ 2-3001, 8-2031, 6-1002, 10-1002, 10-4005, 10-4008, 7-2002, and 10-3022. These changes are incorporated into the relevant text of each respective ordinance, and are not codified here. 
Section 8. Vested rights. 
No provision of this ordinance is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or private): 
(a)  No vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provision of any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this Code. 
(b)  Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any ordinance repealed by the adoption of this code. 
Section 9. Pending actions. 
No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative or otherwise) pending on the effective date of this ordinance by or against the City of Raleigh or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this code. 
Section 10. Severability. 
If any portion of this code or other application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this code which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this code are declared to be severable. 
Section 11. Later ordinances. 
Ordinances which are adopted after January 1, 1979 shall be forwarded to the North Carolina League of Municipalities for codification into this volume. The League, as directed by the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to make all necessary editorial changes to codify such ordinances appropriately. 
Section 12. Copies of code. 
A copy of this code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and it shall be the express duty of the clerk, or someone authorized by the clerk. to insert in their designated places all duly adopted amendments to this code, and to extract from this code all provisions which may be from time to time duly repealed. A copy of this code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it during reasonable times, under the supervision of the city clerk. 
Section 13. Tampering or defacing code unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this code, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the ordinances of the City of Raleigh to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in section 14-4 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
Section 14. Effective date. 
This ordinance, and the code of ordinances which it adopts, shall be in full force and effect from and after the 9th day of January, 1980. 
Adopted: November 20, 1979 
Effective: January 9, 1980 
By: /s/ Isabella W. Cannon     
       Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Gail G. Smith         
       Clerk  
DIVISION I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note: This charter codification contains the basic charter laws, as amended (Chapter 1184 Session Laws 1949, as amended). The charter materials are arranged and grouped according to the subject matter. Catchlines have been inserted and the sections renumbered by the codifiers to facilitate indexing and for ease of reference. 
Severability, repealer and effective date provisions are omitted. When a section has been specifically amended or repealed by a later Act, the amended or repealed section has been deleted. Any material contained within brackets has been added by the codifiers to clarify or correct the meaning of the text or to refer the reader to a section as renumbered within a given section. 
Immediately following the local law codification is a Local Acts Disposition Table, setting out in chronological order the old date and chapter number of the Act, the subject matter, and the charter disposition. Acts relating to the City but not amendatory of the charter or its amendments are summarized in the Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1.1 - SHORT TITLE. 
This Act shall be known as and may be cited as "The Charter of the City of Raleigh."  
Sec. 1.2 - INCORPORATION. 
The inhabitants of the City of Raleigh, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established by statute or otherwise as provided by law, shall be and continue, as they have heretofore been, a municipal body politic and corporate, under the name of "The City of Raleigh," and under such name shall have perpetual succession.  
Sec. 1.3 - CORPORATE LIMITS. 
The corporate boundaries of the City shall be those existing at the time of the ratification and effective date of this Charter and as the same may be altered from time to time in accordance with applicable laws and illustrated by a map on file in the Raleigh Municipal Building. In lieu of maintaining a written metes and bounds description of the corporate limits of the City, the City Council shall approve a map showing the then current corporate boundaries of the City and the electoral districts therein, from and after which time such map shall constitute the official map of the corporate boundaries and electoral districts of the City, as such map may be officially revised from time to time by appropriate action of the City Council. The Planning Director, in consultation with the Chief Engineer, shall draw the original map for City Council approval and shall revise such map as the City Council authorizes revisions thereto by appropriate action. From time to time, when additional territory shall have been annexed in accordance with law so as to become part of the municipal territory of the City of Raleigh, and from time to time when the electoral districts of the City shall have been revised and re-established in accordance with law, the official map of the corporate boundaries and electoral districts shall be revised accordingly and, as so revised, shall be presented to the City Council for appropriate action. Such revised map, when duly approved by the City Council, shall thereupon become the official map of the City of Raleigh and shall supersede all prior maps of the corporate boundaries and electoral districts of the City. All such prior official maps shall be preserved as public records and kept on file by the City Clerk, and shall be subject to public inspection during regular office hours. The latest official map, properly identified and bearing the certificate of the City Clerk evidencing its approval by the City Council and stating the date of such action by the City Council, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be subject to public inspection during the regular office hours of the City Clerk's office. Copies of the official map reproduced by any method of reproduction that gives legible and permanent copies, when certified by the City Clerk, shall be admissible in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map from which the copy is made. 
(S.L. 1955, Ch. 627, §1; H.B. No. 405, 4-24-59; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(a))  
Sec. 1.4 - FORM OF GOVERNMENT. 
The form of government for the City of Raleigh shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government" and shall be as set forth in Plan D of Part 4 of Article 22 of Chapter 160 [Article 7, Part 2, Chapter 160A] of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as heretofore adopted by the electorate of the citizens of Raleigh, subject to the modifications set forth in this Act. All powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council, hereinafter referred to as the "City Council" or as the "Council"; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to prevent the form of government of the City of Raleigh from being determined from time to time by a vote of the people of the City of Raleigh at an election as now or hereafter provided by law.  
Sec. 1.5 - GENERAL RIGHTS AND POWERS. 
The City of Raleigh is hereby vested with all the property and rights of property which now belong to the said municipal corporation, and the City of Raleigh shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the Constitution and by the General Laws of the State of North Carolina and by this Act, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The City may acquire real or personal property within or without its corporate limits for the government welfare, benefit or improvement of the City and its citizens, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, bequest, lease, condemnation, dedication or otherwise, and may acquire, sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control, such property, real or personal, as its interest may require and as shall be deemed advisable by the governing body of the City of Raleigh and as shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Charter and the General Laws of the State of North Carolina. The City of Raleigh shall have the power to adopt a corporate seal, to contract and be contracted with, to sue and be sued, and plead and be impleaded. Except as prohibited by the Constitution and the General Laws of the State of North Carolina or restricted by this Charter and other statutes applicable to the City of Raleigh, the City shall have and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every kind and nature whatsoever, as may be necessary, proper, or usually appertaining to municipal corporations. The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Raleigh shall have and may exercise all powers which, under the Constitution and the laws of the State of North Carolina, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
(S.L. 1967, Ch. 26, §1) 
Cross references: For additional grant of general power, see §2.13; for enumeration of express powers, see §2.14.  
Sec. 1.6 - PLATTING OF PROPERTY. 
Should any property lying within the corporate limits as established by this Act be hereafter platted into blocks and lots, then and in that event the owners of said property shall plat and lay the same off to conform to the streets and lots abutting on same, and shall file with the City Engineer a correct map of same; provided, that in no case shall the City of Raleigh be required to pay for any of said streets, at whatever date opened; but when opened by reason of the platting of said property, at whatever the date platted, they shall become by such act the property of the City of Raleigh for use as public highways, and shall be cared for as such.  
Sec. 1.7 - PROPERTY AND PROPERTY RIGHTS VESTED IN CITY. 
All property, real, personal and mixed, of whatsoever character or description, and wheresoever situated, now held, controlled, or used by the City of Raleigh for any purpose, or which may hereafter be held, controlled, or used by said City, or which may have been vested in said City by virtue of any law of the State of North Carolina, and any and all judgments, liens, rights of liens, and causes of action of any and all kinds in favor of the City of Raleigh, shall vest in and remain and inure to the City of Raleigh, its successors and assigns, under this Act.  
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATION, GOVERNING BODY, GENERAL POWERS 
 
Sec. 2.1 - CITY COUNCIL CONSTITUTES GOVERNING BODY. 
The government of the City and the general management and control of all of its affairs shall be vested in a City Council, which shall be elected as hereinafter set forth and shall exercise its powers in conformity to the provisions of this Act and the provisions of the General Statutes and laws of the State of North Carolina with reference to the powers, rights and privileges of municipalities wherein no provision has been made in this Act with respect thereto; provided, however, that the City Manager shall have the authority hereinafter specified.  
Sec. 2.2 - NUMBER AND ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF CITY COUNCIL. 
(a)  The City Council shall consist of eight (8) members, including the Mayor of the City. 
(b)  The mode of election of the City Council and Mayor shall be as follows: 
(1)  The City Council shall divide the City into five (5) electoral districts and shall cause a map of the districts to be prepared and filed as provided by G.S. 160A-22 and 160A-23; one member of the City Council shall be apportioned to each district so that each member represents the same number of persons as nearly as possible, except for the members apportioned to the City at large; and the qualified voters of each district shall nominate and elect candidates who reside in the district for the seat apportioned to that district. 
(2)  The qualified voters of the City shall nominate and elect two (2) candidates apportioned to the City at large. 
(3)  The Mayor of the City of Raleigh shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the City of Raleigh. 
(c)  The method of election of the City Council of the City of Raleigh shall be the nonpartisan election and runoff election method to be conducted as provided in G.S. 163-293. 
(d)  Each member of the City Council and the Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(e)  Vacancies in the City Council shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(f)  Vacancies in the office of Mayor shall be filled by the Council from their own number for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(b); as amended by Ord. No. 1978-837, §1, 7-5-78) 
Amendment note: By Ord. No. 1978-837, adopted July 5, 1978, the City Council amended §2.2 above by providing for the nonpartisan election and runoff method of election, pursuant to Part 4 of Article 5 of Chapter 10A of the General Statutes, G.S. 160A-101 et seq.  
Sec. 2.3 - POWER AND ORGANIZATION OF CITY COUNCIL. 
All legislative powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council. The City Council shall meet following their election as provided in the general law and shall select such officers as may be provided in this Charter or by general law. At that time, the Mayor, Mayor pro tempore and other members of the City Council shall take and subscribe the oath of office as provided by law. Any such officer not present at this time may take and subscribe the oath at a later time. 
(S.L. 1949, Ch. 1184, §10; S.L. 1961, Ch. 800, §1; S.L. 1969, Ch. 383, §1; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(c))  
Sec. 2.4 - MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL. 
The City Council shall fix a suitable time for its regular meetings. The Mayor, the Mayor pro tempore of the City Council, or any two (2) members thereof, may at any time call special meetings by causing a written notice setting the time, place and purpose of holding such meeting, and signed by the person or persons calling the same, to be delivered in hand to each member of the City Council, or if he cannot be found to be served personally, by leaving a copy thereof at his place of business, if the notice is to be served on any business day during business hours; or if the notice is not to be served on a business day during business hours, then by leaving a copy of said notice at his place of residence. If there is an adult person at the place of residence at the time of service, such notice shall be left in the hands of such person. Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., except legal holidays, shall constitute business days and business hours. Such notices shall be served at least six (6) hours before the time of such meeting. No business may be transacted by the City Council at such special meeting except the business set forth in the notice as being the business for which the meeting is called. Meetings of the City Council may also be held at any time when all the members of the Council are present and consent thereto. The City Council shall have the power at any regular, special or adjourned meeting of the Council to adjourn any such meeting to a specific date, hour and place set forth in the motion or resolution for adjournment and without further notice such adjourned meeting may be reconvened and held, and all action taken and matters transacted at such adjourned meeting shall be valid as if taken and transacted at the original meeting. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 970; S.L. 1959, Ch. 260, §1)  
Sec. 2.5 - QUORUM AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS. 
(a)  Five (5) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)  The Mayor shall have the right to vote on all questions before the City Council. When there are equal numbers of votes in the affirmative and in the negative and the Mayor has already voted, he shall not have an additional vote. The Mayor shall have no power to veto. 
(c)  The Mayor, who shall be the official head of the City, shall, if present, preside at all meetings of the City Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor pro tempore shall preside. In the absence of both, a Chairman pro tempore shall be chosen. 
(d)  The City Clerk and Treasurer shall be ex officio Clerk of the City Council and shall keep accurate minutes of its proceedings. In case of his temporary absence or in case of a vacancy in the office, the City Council may elect a temporary Clerk who shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his duties and may act as Clerk of the City Council until a City Clerk is chosen and qualified. The City Council may elect Assistant Clerks, who shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties and may act as Clerks of the City Council in the absence of the City Clerk. 
(e)  All final votes of the City Council involving the expenditure of fifty dollars ($50.00) or over shall be by ayes and noes and shall be entered in the minutes. 
(f)  Five affirmative votes, at least, shall be required for the passage of any motion, order, ordinance, resolution, or vote. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(d))  
Sec. 2.6 - ADOPTION OF RULES OF PROCEDURE; MEETINGS OPEN TO PUBLIC. 
The City Council may from time to time establish rules for its proceedings as may be deemed necessary and proper. All legislative sessions of the City Council shall be open to the public, and the City Council shall not by executive session or otherwise vote on any question in private session. A full and accurate journal of the proceedings shall be kept and shall be open to the inspection of any qualified registered voter of the City.  
Sec. 2.7 - ORDINANCES; VOTE FOR FINAL PASSAGE, AMENDMENT BY ORDINANCE. 
(a)  No ordinance shall be passed finally on the date on which it is introduced, unless by two-thirds vote of the members of the Council present. No ordinance making a grant, renewal or extension, whatever its kind or nature, of any franchise shall be passed until voted on at two (2) regular meetings of the City Council, and no such grant, renewal or extension shall be made otherwise than by ordinance. 
(b)  No ordinance or part thereof shall be amended or annulled except by an ordinance adopted in accordance with law. 
(S.L. 1967, Ch. 714, §1) 
Editor's note: 1967 Session Laws, Ch. 714, §1, amended §2.7 of the Charter by deleting the words "or special privilege" which formerly appeared in the second sentence of the first paragraph after the words "of any franchise."  
Sec. 2.8 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
All ordinances passed by the City Council shall become effective upon their adoption or at such time after their adoption as the City Council may specify. An ordinance annexing territory to the City of Raleigh may be made effective on a date subsequent to the date of its adoption. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 970, §2; S.L. 1959, Ch. 259, §1; S.L. 1979, Ch. 664, §2) 
Amendment note: 1959 Session Laws, Ch. 259, §1, amended §15 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding a proviso at the end of the section relating to the effective date of ordinances repealing other ordinances and of ordinances annexing territory; 1979 Session Laws, Ch. 664, §2, amended §15 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by completely rewriting the section.  
Sec. 2.9 - EXCEPTIONS AS TO NEWSPAPER PUBLICATION OF CODE OF ORDINANCES. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing section [2.8], ordinances establishing regulations for the construction of buildings, the installation of plumbing, the installation of electric wiring, or any similar construction code, and any other lengthy ordinances such as a zoning ordinance or a traffic code or a license tax ordinance or code, revised, rewritten and adopted as a code, need not be published in a newspaper as provided by §2.8 of this act, provided that the ordinance adopting any such code or lengthy ordinance shall prescribe that the ordinance or code shall be published in printed or mimeographed form for distribution. 
(b)  In lieu of making publication of any such ordinance or code referred to in this section in a daily newspaper published in the City of Raleigh, there shall be published in at least one (1) daily newspaper of general circulation in the City of Raleigh a notice describing the ordinance or code in brief and general terms and stating that the ordinance or code is available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk and that such ordinance or code will take effect twenty days after such publication of the notice unless submitted to referendum, in which event it will not take effect unless approved as required by law.  
Sec. 2.10 - RULE AS TO FINAL EFFECTIVE DATE. 
Every ordinance, unless it shall specify another date subsequent to the twenty-day period following publication, shall become effective at the expiration of twenty days after such publication following final passage, as herein provided, or, if the ordinance be submitted at a referendum election, then upon a favorable vote of a majority of those voting thereon except as otherwise expressly provided by this charter or by the general laws of the State.  
Sec. 2.11 - GRANTING OF FRANCHISES. 
(a)  No franchise initially granted to any public utility regulated by the North Carolina Public Utilities Commission shall be effective until the question has been submitted at a general or special election to the qualified voters of the City and until a majority of those voting on the proposition have voted in favor of granting such franchise. Any renewal of any franchise granted a public utility as hereinbefore defined or the grant of a franchise other than to a public utility company regulated by the North Carolina Public Utilities Commission may be granted in the Council's discretion; provided, however, that any franchise granted without a vote of the people shall be subject to a referendum as provided in §24 of Chapter 1184 of the Session Laws of North Carolina, 1949, as amended except that the number of qualified voters required by §24(b) [2.16(b)] for purposes of this section shall be five per cent (5%) rather than ten per cent (10%); and provided further that any franchise which initially requires a vote to become effective shall not be subject to the referendum provided in §24 of Chapter 1184 of the Session Laws of North Carolina, 1949, as amended. 
(b)  In all elections upon the granting of franchises, whether said election is held pursuant to an initial grant or otherwise, the person, persons or corporation applying for said franchise shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum which in the opinion of the City Council will be sufficient to defray the expenses of such election; provided that no franchise shall be granted for a longer time than 60 years from the date of the granting of such franchise. 
(c)  Every grant of any franchise or right, as hereinbefore provided, shall make provision, by way of the forfeiture of the grant or otherwise, for the purpose of compelling compliance with the terms of the grant, and to secure efficiency of public service at reasonable rates, and the maintenance of the property in good condition throughout the full term of the grant; and when the grant of any franchise or right is made, the City shall not part with the power to expressly reserve the right and duty at all times to exercise, in the interest of the public, full superintendence, regulation and control, in respect to all matters connected with the police powers of said City; and before any such grant of any such franchise or right shall be made, the proposed specific grant shall be embodied in the form of an ordinance, with all the terms and conditions that may be right and proper, including a provision for fixing a rate, fares and charges to be made if the grant provide for the charging of a rate, fares and charges; provided, that this act shall not modify any rights, privileges and franchises heretofore legally granted by the City to any person, firm or corporation; and provided further, that any and all rights, privileges and franchises that have been heretofore or that may be hereafter granted to or held by any person, firm or corporation in the streets, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds or places in said City shall, except when such imposition by the City is prohibited by any statute now or hereafter in effect, be subject to a tax by said City in such amount as the City Council may think to be just, separate from and in addition to the other assets of such person, firm or corporation, and in addition to a license tax; and the City Council may require the rendition and assessment thereof accordingly. 
(S.L. 1967, Ch. 915, §1) 
Annotation: Kornegay v. Raleigh, 269 N.C. 155, 152 S.E.2d 186 (1967). Franchises not authorized by general law must conform to all procedures required by local law. 
Editor's note: Subsequent to this court decision, this Charter provision was amended by 1967 Session Laws, Ch. 915.  
Sec. 2.12 - COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCES PAID TO COUNCIL AND MAYOR. 
The compensation paid to the members of the City Council and the Mayor for their services may be fixed, from time to time, by the Council as provided in G.S. 160A-64. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 341, §1; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(f)) 
Editor's note: Session Laws of 1965, Ch. 12, §1 which reads as follows: "Effective on the first of the month immediately following the ratification of this act [ratified February 26, 1965], the Mayor of the City of Raleigh shall receive an annual expense allowance of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) and the Mayor pro tempore of the City of Raleigh shall receive an annual expense allowance of three hundred dollars ($300.00)." 
"Effective on the first of the month following the ratification of this Act, the City Councilmen of the City of Raleigh shall receive an annual salary of seven hundred and fifty [dollars] ($750.00), payable in twelve (12) equal monthly installments," was enacted by the 1965 legislature without amending the Charter although §2 of the act repealed "laws and clauses of laws in conflict."  
Sec. 2.13 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS. 
The City Council shall continue under existing laws to have power to make and provide for the execution of such ordinances for the City as the City Council may deem proper not inconsistent with the laws of the land, and the City of Raleigh shall have all the powers granted to municipalities by the general laws of the State of North Carolina as the same may now or hereafter be enacted. 
Cross reference: For grant of power generally, see §1.5.  
Sec. 2.14 - EXPRESS POWERS ENUMERATED. 
In addition to the powers now or hereafter granted to municipalities under the general laws of the State of North Carolina, the City of Raleigh shall have the following expressed powers hereby granted to it: 
(1)  Payment of legal indebtedness. 
To provide for the payment of any existing legal indebtedness of the City of Raleigh and of any binding legal obligation that may from time to time be made by the City, and to appropriate funds for that purpose. 
(2)  Adopt ordinances, etc., for general welfare. 
To make and adopt and provide for the execution thereof of such ordinances, resolutions, motions, rules and regulations as the City Council may consider necessary or expedient for maintaining and promoting peace, health, comfort, convenience, good order, better government and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City as are not inconsistent with this act and the constitution and the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
(3)  Adopt ordinances, etc., for proper government; prescribe punishment for violation. 
To make, adopt, and pass such ordinances, resolutions, motions, rules and regulations consistent with the laws of the land and necessary or expedient for the proper government of the City, with full power and authority to provide for the execution of the same by imposition, as punishment for the violation thereof, of fines and imprisonment and by the imposition of penalties and forfeitures as by law provided. 
Amendment note: 1973 Session Laws, Ch. 319, §1(h)(1) amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by rewriting subparagraph (3). 
(4)  Regulate operation of trains, buses and other vehicles and driving or riding of animals. 
To regulate, not inconsistent with the Public Laws of the State of North Carolina, the speed of railroads, locomotives, trains, electric cars, buses, automobiles, bicycles, the driving or riding of horses or mules, and the speed of all other vehicles on the streets of the City, and to regulate their stops at street crossings and intersections; to require railroad companies to keep the streets through or across which they operate their trains, locomotives or cars in repair (at points of crossings only) and to light the streets over or across which their trains, locomotives or cars are operated (at points of crossing only) whenever deemed necessary or expedient by the City Council; to require all railroad companies operating within or through the City of Raleigh to maintain gates or watchmen at street crossings when deemed necessary or expedient by the City Council, unless such railroad company has installed proper and duly approved automatic warning devices at such crossings. 
(5)  Regulate and license vehicles. 
To regulate the use of automobiles, motor cars, taxicabs, motor buses, motorcycles and any other motor vehicles operated within the corporate limits of the City of Raleigh; to issue permits for the use of such vehicles and to require the same to be numbered and to issue City license plates and to charge therefor an amount not to exceed that permitted under the general laws of the State of North Carolina as the same may now or hereafter exist; to regulate the charges for the transportation of persons, baggage and/or freight for hire, with full power to license or prevent the operation of vehicles for hire not conforming to the regulations and ordinances adopted by the City Council. 
(6)  Regulate railroad track construction, etc. 
To direct, regulate, control and/or prohibit the laying and construction of railroad tracks, turnouts and switches in the streets, avenues and alleys of the City, and to require that they be constructed and laid so as to interfere as little as possible with the ordinary travel and use of the streets, and to require that they be kept in good repair; and to require that all railroad tracks, turnouts and switches shall be so constructed as not to interfere with the drainage of the City; and to require any railroad company operating within the City of Raleigh to construct and keep in repair, at the railroad company's own expense, such bridges, underpasses, turnouts, culverts, sewers, crossings and other things as the City Council may deem necessary, and as may be reasonable. 
(7)  Tax and license franchises, businesses, trades, etc. 
To tax and license all franchises, privileges, businesses, trades, service establishments, professions, callings and/or occupations conducted and carried on within the corporate limits of the City of Raleigh, not inconsistent with the general laws of North Carolina; to make, adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules and regulations as considered expedient and proper by the City Council for the proper exercise of the powers granted in this paragraph; to impose an annual franchise, license or privilege tax on all businesses, trades, service establishments, professions, callings, occupations and enterprises conducted for profit within the corporate limits of the City upon which a franchise, license or privilege tax is not prohibited by statute; power and authority being hereby specifically granted to the City Council to graduate any of the franchise, license or privilege taxes authorized by this charter, by dividing trades, businesses, professions, callings, service establishments, occupations and other enterprises into classes according to size, patronage, income, gross receipts or otherwise and by imposing such taxes accordingly; provided, however, that said taxes shall be uniform for all in a particular class; provided further, that if any person, firm or corporation shall commence to exercise any privilege or to promote any business, trade, profession, calling, service, occupation or other enterprise or to do any act requiring a City license under this act and under any ordinance adopted pursuant to this act or any other statute without such City license, or if any person, firm or corporation shall continue the business, trade, profession, calling, service, occupation or other enterprise or to do any act for which a license is required, after the expiration of a license previously issued, without obtaining a new license, he or it shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined and/or imprisoned in the discretion of the court, but the fine shall not be less than twenty per cent (20%) of the franchise, license or privilege tax in addition to the franchise, license or privilege tax and the court costs, and if such failure, neglect or refusal to apply for and obtain such City franchise or license be continued, such person, firm or corporation shall pay an additional tax of two and one-half per centum (2 1 /2 %) of the amount of such City franchise, license or privilege tax which was due and payable, in addition to the City franchise, license or privilege tax imposed by an ordinance adopted pursuant to this act or pursuant to any other statute, for each and every thirty days that such City franchise, license or privilege tax remains unpaid from the date that same was due and payable, and such additional tax shall be assessed by the tax collector of the City of Raleigh and paid with the City franchise, license or privilege tax and shall become a part thereof; provided further the additional tax shall be limited to fifty per cent (50%) of the tax originally levied, but in no event less than ten dollars ($10.00). The license year shall begin on the first day of June of each and every year. 
Amendment note: 1963 Session Laws, Ch. 87, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by rewriting subparagraph (7). 1969 Session Laws, Ch. 383, §2, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding a proviso to the next to the last sentence. 
(8)  Assess, levy and collect taxes. 
To assess, levy and collect such taxes as are authorized by law. 
(9)  Appropriate moneys. 
To appropriate the moneys and funds of the City for all lawful purposes. 
(10)  Regulate utilities. 
To regulate and supervise, by ordinance, the operation of all public utilities or quasi-public utilities which operate or do business within the City of Raleigh to the end that all citizens of Raleigh shall receive from said public utilities or quasi-public utilities equal treatment, and also to the end that said citizens shall have good service, just and reasonable rates from any and all such utilities, and to grant or refuse franchises or privileges to such utilities; provided, however, that such ordinances regulating and supervising such utilities shall not be in contravention of the public laws of the State of North Carolina applicable to such utilities as same are now or may hereafter be enacted; and provided, further, that nothing in this section shall supersede or conflict with the powers and duties of the North Carolina Utilities Commission, under any statute now or hereafter in effect, to regulate such utilities, and their service and rates, within or without the City of Raleigh. 
(11)  Terminate franchises. 
To declare forfeited and to terminate franchises granted to persons, firms or corporations for street railway, electric, light, telephone, telegraph, gas, power or other public utility or quasi-public utility, purposes, whenever the conditions upon which any such franchise or franchises were granted have been broken, or whenever, for any other reason, such franchise or franchises have been lost, surrendered or forfeited. 
(12)  Regulate use of streets by vehicles for hire. 
To make all suitable and proper regulations in regard to the use of the streets of the City for street cars, buses or other vehicles for hire and to regulate the speed and operation of street cars, buses and other vehicles for hire so as to prevent injury or inconvenience to the public, and from time to time prescribe reasonable fares for the transportation of intracity passengers. 
(13)  Construct, purchase, etc., public utilities. 
To construct, purchase, lease or otherwise acquire and to own, conduct and operate public utilities. 
(14)  Construct and maintain streets, sidewalks, alleys, etc. 
To establish, construct and keep in repair streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs, bridges, culverts, drains and conduits in the City; to regulate the construction and use of the same; and to provide for the punishment of any person, firm or corporation obstructing the same encroaching thereon. 
(15)  Open and close streets, etc. 
To open new streets, change, widen, extend, and/or close any street that is now open or is dedicated and proposed to be opened or may hereafter be opened, and adopt such ordinances for the regulation and use of the streets, squares and parks, and other public property belonging to the City as the City Council may deem best for the public welfare of the citizens of the City; and to purchase any land that may be necessary for the closing of any such street or alley. 
(16)  Prohibit vagrancy and begging. 
To prohibit vagrancy and street begging; impose punishment or penalties on such persons who habitually refuse to follow some usual trade or profession without adequate means of support, whether male or female, above the age of eighteen years. 
(17)  Provide for Sunday observance. 
To provide by ordinance for the proper observance of Sunday and for maintenance of order in the vicinity of churches and schools within the City and to provide for the preservation of peace, order and tranquility in the City. 
Annotation: Kresge Co. v. Tomlinson; Arlan's Dept. Store v. Tomlinson, 275 N.C. 1, 165 S.E.2d 236 (1968); Mobile Home Sales v. Tomlinson, 276 N.C. 661, 174 S.E.2d 542 (1970). Sunday blue laws are constitutional. 
(18)  Establish and regulate parks. 
To acquire, lay out, establish, and regulate parks within or without the corporate limits of the City for the use of the inhabitants of the same. 
(19)  Condemn land for public buildings. 
To condemn any land that may be required for the purpose of erecting any building or buildings, for City hall, civic center, market houses, fire companies, and for any other public buildings, whether like those enumerated above or not; provided, that the procedure in such condemnation proceedings shall be the same as is herein provided for the condemnation of lands for streets. 
Amendment note: Session Laws 1973, Ch. 850, amended §2.14(19) of this Charter by including the civic center under the City's condemnation authority. 
(20)  Erect, etc., public buildings. 
To erect, repair, and alter any and all public buildings. 
(21)  Accept money or property. 
To accept any money or property for the purpose of any public or corporate use. 
(22)  Regulate and prohibit running at large of animals and fowls. 
To regulate, restrain, and prohibit the running or going at large of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, and all other animals and fowls of whatsoever description, and to authorize the distraining and impounding and sale of the same for the cost of the proceedings and the penalty incurred, and to order their destruction when they cannot be sold, and to impose penalties on the owners or keepers thereof for the violation of any ordinance or regulation of the City Council, and to prevent, regulate, and control the driving of cattle, horses and all other animals into or through the streets of the City. 
(23)  Regulate plumbers and plumbing. 
To regulate and control plumbers and plumbing work and to enforce efficiency in the same. 
(24)  Regulate and prohibit storage of explosives and other dangerous materials. 
To regulate, control and prohibit the keeping and management of houses or any building for the storage of gunpowder and other combustible, explosive, or dangerous materials within the City, and to regulate the keeping and conveying of the same, and to authorize and regulate the laying of pipes and the location and construction of houses, tanks, reservoirs, and pumping stations for the storage of oil and gas. 
(25)  License, etc., use and sale of dynamite and fireworks. 
To license, tax, regulate, control, restrict, and prohibit the use and explosion of dynamite, firecrackers, or other explosive; or fireworks of any and every kind, whether included in the above enumeration or not, and the sale of same; and all noises, amusements, or other practices or performances tending to annoy persons or frighten persons or teams; and the collection of persons on the streets or sidewalks or other public places in the City, whether for purposes of amusement, business, curiosity or otherwise. 
(26)  Regulate butchers and market places. 
To make such rules and regulations as to butchers as they [it] may deem necessary and proper, to establish and erect market houses, and designate, control and regulate market places and privileges. 
(27)  Prohibit abuse of animals. 
To prohibit and punish the abuse of animals. 
(28)  Establish, etc., cemeteries and regulate burials. 
To establish and maintain cemeteries, and to regulate the burial of the dead. 
(29)  Prohibit prize fighting, etc. 
To prohibit prize fighting, cock fighting and dog fighting. 
(30)  License, etc., theaters and exhibitions. 
To license, tax, regulate, restrict, and prohibit theaters, carnivals, circuses, shows, parades, exhibitions of showmen and shows of any kind, and the exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities, caravans, manageries [menageries], musical and hypnotic exhibitions and performances. 
(31)  Create and administer special fund for relief of firemen and policemen. 
To create and administer a special fund for the relief of indigent and helpless members of the Police and Fire Departments who have become superannuated, disabled or injured in such service, and receive donations and bequests in aid of such fund, and provide for its permanence and increase, and to prescribe and regulate the conditions under which, and the extent to which, the same shall be used for the purpose of such relief. 
Amendment note: 1959 Session Laws, Ch. 813, amended §2.14(31) of this Charter, by adding the second paragraph as hereinabove set out. 
Also to insure any or all employees of the City of Raleigh against death by accident in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and to pay all or such part of the premiums on said insurance, as the City Council shall determine, out of current funds of the City. Such insurance, if taken, shall be in addition to any benefits accruing by virtue of the Workmen's Compensation Act or under the provisions of G.S. 160-200(25). 
Editor's note: G.S. 160-200(25) repealed by Session Laws 1971, Ch. 698, §2, effective January 1, 1972. 
(32)  Condemnation of property. 
When acquiring right-of-way for the construction or improvement of streets, the City may also locate and acquire such additional rights-of-way as may be necessary for the present or future relocation or initial location, above or below ground, of telephone, telegraph, electric and other lines, as well as gas, water, sewerage, oil and other pipelines to be operated by public utilities defined and regulated under Chapter 62 of the General Statutes. In acquiring real property by eminent domain the City may use the procedures of either Chapter 40A or Chapter 136 of the General Statutes. 
Amendment note: 1991 Session Laws, Ch. 312, §1, amended subparagraph 32 of §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by rewriting the subparagraph. 
Annotation: City vs. Hatcher, 18 S. E. 2d 207, 1942, City's power to condemn land for street purposes is not abridged by assistance agreement with state. 
(33)  Prevent nuisances. 
To define nuisances and prevent and abate the same, whether on public or private property. 
(34)  Provide for lighting streets, buildings, etc. 
To provide for the lighting of the streets, public grounds and public buildings and for furnishing lights to the citizens of said City by contract or otherwise, and to erect, own and operate plants, machinery, fixtures, appliances of every nature whatever necessary for the carrying out of said purposes. 
(35)  Regulate animal slaughtering business. 
To regulate, license or prohibit the business of slaughtering animals in the City limits; to revoke such licenses for malconduct in business, to provide for the regulation and maintenance of a standard of the quality of meats sold in the City and to impose penalties for the violation thereof, and to provide for the inspection of all slaughtering houses, inside or outside the corporate limits, whose products are sold within the corporate limits and to charge a reasonable inspection fee for such services; to own, lease or operate abattoirs or slaughterhouses. 
(36)  Regulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; parking meters. 
To provide for the regulation, diversion and limitation of pedestrians and vehicular traffic upon public streets, highways, sidewalks and public grounds of the City and to regulate and limit vehicular parking on streets, highways and public grounds within the corporate limits; provided, however, that in the regulation and limitation of vehicular traffic and parking within the corporate limits the City Council may, in its discretion, enact ordinances providing for a system of parking meters designed to promote traffic regulation and requiring a reasonable deposit (not in excess of five cents ($0.05) per hour) from those who park vehicles for stipulated periods of time in certain areas in which the congestion of vehicular traffic is such that the public convenience and safety demand such restrictions, as determined by the City Council in its discretion; and provided, further, that the proceeds derived from the use of such parking meters shall be used exclusively for the purpose of making such regulations effective and for the expenses incurred by the City in the regulation and limitation of vehicular parking, and traffic related to such parking, on the streets and highways of the City. 
(37)  Regulate parking of vehicles. 
To limit, control, prohibit or otherwise regulate the parking of automobiles, trucks and other vehicles upon and along the streets, alleys, and other public places within the corporate limits. The City of Raleigh shall have the authority to classify each additional hour that a vehicle remains parked beyond the legal time limit for the parking area where said vehicle is parked as a separate and distinct offense. No ordinance adopted to implement the preceding sentence of this subdivision shall be effective unless a public hearing is held on such ordinance and the ordinance adopted no earlier than 30 days after the public hearing. 
Amendment note: 1979 Session Laws, Ch. 277, §1, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding the second and third sentences to subparagraph (37). 
(38)  Operate municipal parking lots. 
To own, establish, regulate, operate and control municipal parking lots for parking of motor vehicles within the corporate limits of the City, and, in the discretion of the City Council, to make and collect charges for the use of such parking lots. 
(39)  Regulate smoke emission. 
To make, adopt and enforce ordinances for the regulation of the emission of smoke within the City including in any such ordinance appropriate regulations as may be deemed proper and expedient by the City Council for the purpose of reducing air pollution caused by excessive soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, noxious acids, fumes and gases, or other substances, the emission of which may be found by the City Council to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the residents of the City; to adopt as a standard to determine the density of smoke the "Ringlemann Chart" as published by the United States Bureau of Mines; and to provide that any violation of any such ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as such. 
(40)  Appropriation for advertising the City of Raleigh. 
To appropriate annually, in the discretion of the City Council, surplus public funds derived from sources other than taxation for the purpose of advertising the City of Raleigh by calling attention to its natural advantages, its resources, its enterprises, and its adaptability for industrial sites, with the object of increasing its trade and commerce and encouraging people to settle in the community. In expending the funds appropriated, the City Council may secure the advice and assistance of advertising agencies or others, with or without compensation, so that the best results may be had. The City Council of the City of Raleigh may also, by agreement with Wake County, appropriate surplus public funds not derived from taxation for the purpose of advertising the City of Raleigh and Wake County. 
Amendment note: 1961 Session Laws, Ch. 220, amended §2.14(40) of Ch. 1184, to read as set out above. Prior to amendment this subsection authorized an appropriation not exceeding $2,500.00 to any association in the City organized for the purpose of advertising or promoting the City. 
Annotation: Dennis v. Raleigh, 253 N.C. 400, 116 S.E.2d 923 (1960). The expenditure of funds by a municipality for the purpose of advertising to promote the economic growth of the City is for a public purpose. 
Editor's note: Subsequent to this court decision, the North Carolina Constitution was repealed, rewritten, and reenacted; portions of the Dennis decision are no longer applicable. 
(41)  Fix location of hospitals. 
To fix the location of hospitals in which contagious, infectious or other communicable diseases are to be treated. 
(42)  Regulate dangerous businesses. 
To regulate and prohibit the carrying on of any business or activity which may be dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
(43)  Establishment, etc. of Fire Department and facilities. 
To establish and own stations and other property for a Fire Department and to provide everything necessary for the regulation and maintenance of such department, including training facilities and all other equipment deemed necessary. 
(44)  Establish fire limits, regulate building therein. 
To establish fire limits, and prohibit the erection, building, placing, repairing or maintaining of wooden buildings within said limits; to prohibit the removal of any wooden building from one place to another within said limits and to require all buildings within said limits to be constructed with fireproof material; also to declare all dilapidated wooden buildings deemed dangerous on account of fire, [to be] nuisances, and require the same to be removed. 
(45)  Provide building regulations and installation of utility poles. 
To provide for an inspection of the construction of all buildings in said City, and to prescribe and enforce proper regulations in regard thereto; to regulate the erection and location of all poles, whether telegraph, telephone, electric light or otherwise, in the City; to require in the discretion of the City Council, that all wires, pipes and conduits be placed underground, where the public necessity and safety require, and to regulate the same. 
(46)  Building inspection, abatement of unsafe conditions. 
To enter in and upon all buildings within the City, through proper officials to inspect and discover whether the same are dangerous to either life or health on account of defects or their dilapidated condition and to cause all defects or unsafe conditions to be repaired or remedied, and all filth or trash in or around the same to be removed, or to condemn as unsafe and dangerous to life any such dilapidated or defective building, and if the owner of any such building which has been so condemned as unsafe and dangerous, after having been notified by the City building inspector in writing of the unsafe and dangerous character of said building, shall permit the same to stand or continue in that condition, he shall forfeit and pay a fine to be fixed by ordinance of not less than ten dollars ($10) or more than fifty dollars ($50) for each day said condition continues after such notice, and if the owner or owners of said building cannot be located or found, then the City of Raleigh, through appropriate officials, is authorized to enter upon said premises and remedy such unsafe and dangerous condition or demolish said building, if necessary, and to charge reasonable costs for making any such repair or of demolishing against the owner or owners of said premises and the same shall be and remain a lien against the said premises until such reasonable costs are paid in full, and the lien herein provided may be collected or foreclosed as now provided by law for the collection of unpaid taxes, and the City of Raleigh shall not be liable in any manner for carrying out the terms and provisions of this section. 
The City may require the owners of all rental residential dwelling units that are not required to have smoke detectors under the North Carolina State Building Code to have smoke detectors installed in the units within one hundred eighty (180) days after the passage of an ordinance requiring their installation. 
Amendment note: 1991 Session Laws, Ch. 312, §2, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding a second subparagraph to subparagraph (46). 
(47)  Prevent dangerous boiler, furnaces, etc., construction. 
To prevent dangerous construction and condition of chimneys, fireplaces, hearths, stoves and stovepipes, boilers, furnaces and other heating apparatus, and cause the same to be made safe or removed. 
(48)  Regulate public assembly exits. 
To regulate the size, number and manner of construction of doors and stairways of theatres, tenement houses, audience rooms, public halls and all buildings used for the gathering of the public, whether now built or hereafter to be built, so that there may be convenient, safe and speedy exit in case of fires or other casualties, and to require that such exits shall be appropriately marked. 
(49)  Establish incinerators and crematories. 
To establish one or more incinerators and crematories and to provide for the removal of all filth, carcasses of dead animals, and other unhealthful substances by cremation, or otherwise, and to require the owners and occupants of all premises to keep them in a cleanly condition. 
(50)  Require drains, etc. 
To require the owners of private drains, sinks and privies, to fill up, cleanse, drain, repair, fix, and improve the same, as they may be ordered by ordinance, and impose penalties upon persons failing to do the same; provided, that if there be no person in the City upon whom such order be served, the City may have such work done, and costs of the same shall be a lien on the premises and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected, and to cause all drains, toilets, sinks and all other water or sewerage facilities to be connected with the City systems. 
(51)  Require cleanliness of lots and premises. 
To require the owner or owners of vacant or improved premises to keep same free from trash, obnoxious weeds or undue growth, and in the event such owner or owners shall, after due notice given by the City, fail to remedy such existing condition, then the City shall cause the same to be remedied and charge the reasonable cost thereof to such owner or owners, and such reasonable cost shall constitute a lien upon such premises and be collected in the same manner as taxes upon real estate. 
(52)  Purchase of insurance for City. 
To purchase any and all forms and kinds of insurance deemed necessary or expedient by the City Council for the protection of the interests and liabilities of the City, and to accept surety bonds in proper form and amount as required or authorized by law, and to pay the lawful premiums thereon; and such insurance policies and contracts and such bonds may be furnished and executed by either stock or mutual companies duly authorized to do an insurance or surety business in the State of North Carolina, determined from time to time by the City Council. 
(53)  Regulate keeping, etc., of inflammable materials and explosives. 
To regulate the keeping, storing and transporting of highly inflammable liquids or materials and explosives so that the life, limb or property of its inhabitants may not be endangered. 
(54)  Prohibit shows in dangerous conditions. 
To require any shows or expositions to keep the buildings or grounds upon which they are showing in such a condition so that the same shall not constitute a fire or health menace and to prevent the showing of obscene or licentious performances, and to prevent any undue sounds or noises connected therewith, and to prescribe penalties for the violation of any ordinances exercising the powers herein given. 
(55)  Own, etc., hospitals, auditoriums and other facilities. 
To own, operate or maintain hospitals, auditoriums, armories, markets, airports and such other facilities for the benefit and welfare of its citizens. 
(56)  Operate public toilets. 
To operate and maintain public toilets within said City for the use and convenience of the public. 
(57)  Require drainage facilities. 
To require that all property owners provide adequate drainage facilities to the end that their premises and adjoining lands be free from standing water and permit the natural flow of water thereon to be taken care of, and to provide that in case of failure on the part of such owner or owners to so provide the same, to go upon their premises and construct the necessary facilities and to charge the reasonable cost thereof against the premises so improved, such reasonable cost to constitute a lien upon such premises and be collected as in the case of taxes. 
(58)  Regulate utility installations. 
To require in all instances where it is reasonable and practical for such persons, firms or corporations to do so, that all persons, firms or corporations having franchises or permits to use the sidewalks, alleys or streets of the City of Raleigh for the maintenance and laying of pipes, poles, wires or conduits, or for other purposes, which necessitate excavation in said sidewalks, alleys or streets, shall lay or place the same, or shall do such work as may be authorized under such franchise or permit, before the beginning of any improvement by said City of such sidewalks, alleys or streets, and to prohibit the laying or construction of same, after such improvements have been completed, unless such person, firm or corporation shall agree, either to restore, at its expense, that portion of said improvement, disturbed by such laying or construction, to the condition in which it existed at the time such laying or construction was commenced, or to bear the cost of such restoration; and to require such persons, firms or corporations owning or using any such pipes, mains or conduits whatsoever, or underground electric or other wires or conduits or other facilities in or under such sidewalks, alleys, or streets so being paved, improved or about to be paved or improved, to make forthwith, insofar as it is reasonable and practical for such persons, firms or corporations to do so, all lateral connections in said sidewalks, alleys or streets at least to the edges thereof; and to require such persons, firms or corporations to complete the laying and placing of such mains, pipes, wires or other conduits, facilities and to complete the making of such lateral connections, in or under such streets, sidewalks, or alleys by a designated date so that the progress of paving or the improving of such streets, sidewalks or alleys will not be delayed or interfered with by the work of such persons, firms or corporations; and to compel compliance with such requirements by such persons, firms or corporations. 
(59)  License and regulate poolrooms, billiard rooms and dance halls. 
To license, prohibit and regulate poolrooms, billiard rooms and dance halls, and in the interest of public morals provide for the revocation of such licenses. 
(60)  Regulate electricians and electrical work. 
To regulate and control electricians and electrical work and to enforce efficiency in the same by examination of such electricians and inspection of such electrical work. 
(61)  Sell, lease, etc., real and personal property. 
To sell, lease, hold, manage and control real property and personal property of all kinds and to make all rules and regulations by ordinance or resolution which may be required or deemed expedient by the City Council to carry out fully the provisions of any conveyance, deed, will or other legal instrument in relation to any gift or bequest or the provisions of any lease by which the City may acquire property; provided, that in lieu of foreclosure of any lien on real estate for delinquent taxes and/or special assessments for improvements, the City shall have the right and power to accept a conveyance by deed or quitclaim deed from the property owners in consideration of the outstanding taxes and/or assessments and interest and penalties then due to the City on the particular property, together with any court costs accrued in connection with any foreclosure proceeding previously commenced, and to accept such conveyance subject to taxes, penalties, interest and costs due and payable to Wake County on any such real estate; and the City shall have the right and power to procure and accept a quitclaim deed from the former owners of real estate purchased by the City from any commissioner or commissioners in proceedings for the foreclosure of liens for taxes and/or assessments. 
(62)  Regulate fences, billboards, etc. 
To regulate the erection of fences, billboards, signs and other structures and provide for the removal or repair of insecure billboards, signs and other structures. 
(63)  Regulate driveways. 
To limit, restrict, regulate, control and, except as hereinafter provided, to prohibit the establishment, construction, maintenance and repair of all driveways sought to be opened and/or already opened leading from any private property into any street or highway in the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction; provided, that in the exercise of this power, the City Council shall permit, under reasonable rules and regulations established by ordinance, at least one (1) driveway permitting ingress and egress into and from at least one (1) adjacent street, but the City Council shall have power to limit the number and width of such driveways and to prescribe reasonable regulations relating to the opening, closing, construction, maintenance and repair of all driveways leading across adjacent sidewalks and the right-of-way of adjacent streets; and the City Council shall have power to close driveways from property into the public streets according to reasonable rules and regulations prescribed by ordinance where there is more than one (1) driveway leading from any property into one (1) or more adjacent public streets and to require a reduction in the width of any existing driveway at the points where the driveway enters and crosses the sidewalk and street right-of-way; and the City Council may require written permit to be procured from the City and a reasonable charge to be paid therefor before any driveway may be opened into any street. 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 498, §1, amended subparagraph (63) of §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding "or its extraterritorial jurisdiction" in the first sentence. 
(64)  Control, etc., streets and sidewalks. 
To control, grade, macadamize, cleanse, pave and repair the streets and sidewalks of the City and make such improvements thereon as the City Council may deem best for the public good; and to regulate and control digging in said streets and sidewalks or placing therein of pipes, poles, wires, fixtures and appliances of every kind, whether on, above or below the surface thereof; and regulate and control the use thereof by persons, animals and vehicles; to prevent, abate and remove obstructions, encroachments, pollution or litter thereon. 
(65)  Operate, contract for, etc., waterworks and sewerage systems. 
To acquire, provide, construct, establish, maintain and operate a system of waterworks and a system of sewerage for the City and the citizens thereof, and to protect, control, and regulate the same by such adequate rules and regulations as may be deemed appropriate and expedient by the City Council; and to extend the systems of waterworks and/or sewerage beyond the corporate limits; and to enter into written contracts with persons, firms, and corporations, when authorized by the City Council by ordinance or otherwise, permitting any such person, firm or corporation to connect private water and/or sewer lines with the water and/or sewer systems of the City upon such terms and conditions as prescribed by the City Council by ordinance or otherwise; and the City Council shall have the power to prescribe rates of charges for and as a condition to making any lateral connection with any sewer mains lying outside the corporate limits of the City connecting with or emptying into the mains of the City sewerage system, and to prescribe rates of charges for water and/or sewer service, and to prescribe inspection fees for inspecting connections in addition to the other charges; and the City Council is authorized to fix a different schedule of rates of charges for connections, for sewer and/or water service, and for inspections to be charged consumers outside the corporate limits which may be higher than the charges applicable to residents of the City. 
Before any person, firm or corporation shall connect in any manner any privately owned water or sewer line or lines or system with any water or sewer line or lines of the City of Raleigh, such person, firm or corporation shall, by proper written instrument, in consideration of making such connection and the benefits to be derived therefrom, dedicate, give, grant and convey such water or sewer line or lines or system to the City of Raleigh; no such connection shall be made with the City water or sewer line or lines without the express approval of the City, nor shall such connection be effected except by the forces or employees of the City, properly supervised, for which a charge may be made; and should any person, firm or corporation connect any privately owned water or sewer line or lines or system with any City water or sewer line or lines without first dedicating, giving, granting and conveying same to the City the act of connecting such water or sewer line or lines to the water or sewer line or lines of the City shall be deemed a dedication, gift, grant and conveyance of such water or sewer line or lines to the City of Raleigh; provided, however, that the privately owned water or sewer line or lines or systems referred to in this sentence shall mean and include only main distribution lines laid in streets, roads, highways, and alleys or across private property, and shall not include lateral lines leading from mains to building connections, and shall not include the water or sewer lines within any residence or other privately owned building. 
(66)  Rewards. 
To offer and pay rewards in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons who: (a) willfully takes, defaces, damages or destroys property, either personal or real; or (b) willfully injures or takes the life of any person in the City of Raleigh; or (c) commits any felony on the City of Raleigh. 
The Council shall fix the terms, conditions and amounts of such rewards and shall be the sole judge as to those persons entitled to receive any rewards offered. Such rewards shall be paid only by order of the Council out of nontax revenues. 
In cases involving minors, the term "conviction" as used in section (66) shall include any punishment administered by a Juvenile or District Court. 
Amendment note: 1967 Session Laws, Ch. 71, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (66). 
(67)  Terms of commissions, committees and boards. 
To fix the terms of members of all commissions, committees and boards of the City regardless of the terms established by General Statute or special act or this charter for the particular commissions, committees, or boards and the Council shall by ordinance establish uniform overlapping terms for all members of all commissions, committees and boards of the City. Nothing herein shall permit the City to abolish or alter the basic structure of the Civil Service Commission. 
Amendment note: 1971 Session Laws, Ch. 1209, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (67). 
(68)  Contracts with municipal corporations, body politic and governmental agencies. 
To make such contracts as the Council may desire with municipal corporations, body politic and other governmental agencies including agencies and departments of the United States government concerning services which the City of Raleigh is authorized to furnish, or for services which the contracting party is authorized to furnish. All municipal corporations, bodies politic and governmental agencies are hereby authorized to enter into such contracts with the City of Raleigh. 
Amendment note: 1971 Session Laws, Ch. 1209, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (68). 
(69)  Combat drug abuse. 
To provide, through the creation or designation of an administrative department or City committee, commission, or board, for the prevention and treatment of narcotic, barbituric and other types of drug abuse and addiction and to appropriate funds to provide education, medication, medical care, hospitalization and outpatient housing in connection therewith, alone or jointly with Wake County. 
Amendment note: 1973 Session Laws, Ch. 319, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (69). 
(70)  Engage in socio-economic programs. 
a.  Subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, the City of Raleigh, through its governing body, shall have the power to undertake, endorse, administer, operate and maintain, and to expand Federal tax revenues returned to the City under the designation of general or special revenue sharing funds, or any other title, and consistently with the terms under which such funds are returned, and all other public funds with the exception set forth in subparagraph (e) below, for "socio-economic public improvement programs" and "crime prevention programs," including but not being limited to those initiated pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Economic Opportunity Act (42 U.S.C. Subsection 2701 et seq.) for the purpose of serving the public interest and well-being of the community and its citizens. 
b.  The City Council may appoint or create such agencies, committees or boards as it may deem necessary in carrying out such programs and may authorize their employment of personnel. In undertaking and engaging in such programs, the City Council may enter into contracts with and accept grants from appropriate branches of the State and Federal governments and from public or private corporations, foundations and individuals, and is authorized to make grants to, or to contract with, appropriate public or private nonprofit agencies or combinations thereof, to pay part of or all of the costs of programs conducted by such agencies which assist in fulfilling the purposes of this section. 
Amendment note: 1973 Session Laws, Ch. 319, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (70). 
c.  For the purposes of this section, a "social, economic public self-improvement program" shall be defined as one devoted to and designed toward improving and promoting the general well-being of certain classes of citizens, without regard to race, religion, sex or national origin, in their human and economic relationship with society and which provides services, assistance, and other activities of sufficient scope and size to give promise of progress toward elimination of poverty or a cause or causes of poverty through developing employment opportunities, improving human performance, motivation and productivity, or bettering the conditions under which people live, learn and work; including but not limited to programs: 
1.  To promote development of community facilities and services; 
2.  To promote consumer education; 
3.  To assist all participants to secure and retain meaningful employment; 
4.  To assist all participants to attain an adequate education; 
5.  To assist participants in making better use of available income; 
6.  To provide and maintain adequate housing and a suitable living environment; 
7.  To promote family planning, consistent with personal and family goals, religious and moral convictions; 
8.  To provide assistance to citizens through loans or grants to meet immediate and urgent individual and family needs, including the need for health services, nutritious food, housing and employment-related assistance; 
9.  To remove obstacles and solve personal and family problems which block the achievement of self-sufficiency; 
10.  Designed to assist participants to achieve greater participation to the affairs of the community; 
11.  Designed to assist participants in making more frequent and effective use of other programs related to the purposes of this article. 
For the purposes of this section, a "crime prevention program" shall mean any type of citizen participation program primarily designed as a deterrent to crime and for the purpose of reducing the level and the magnitude of crime in the City; any such program shall be coordinated with the general efforts of the law enforcement agency of the City of Raleigh to minimize the occurrences of crime in the community. 
Cross reference: Enabling law to engage in low and moderate income housing programs, 1987 Session Laws Ch. 653. 
d.  The powers expressed herein are not intended to, nor shall they encroach in any manner upon the powers, duties and responsibilities of Wake County in any health, social, educational or welfare programs being administered by said County. 
Amendment note: 1975 Session Laws, Ch. 561, amended §22 of 1949 Session Laws, Ch. 1184, by substituting a new subparagraph (70). 
e.  Property tax revenues may be expended for "social-economic public improvement programs" and "crime prevention programs" as defined in this section if approved by a majority of the qualified voters as required by Article V, §2 of the North Carolina Constitution. 
(71)  [Schedules of exemptions.] 
To establish schedules of exemptions from special assessments for lots at the intersection of streets or other lots which would be assessed for a duplicating service when a project is or has been undertaken along or across two sides of such lots. The schedules of exemptions may be based on categories of land use (residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural) and shall be uniform for each category. The schedule of exemptions may not provide exemption of more than seventy-five (75) per cent of the frontage of any lot abutting on the project, or one hundred fifty (150) feet, whichever is greater. 
(72)  Equal housing. 
To adopt ordinances designed to insure that housing opportunities in the City of Raleigh shall be equally available to all persons without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or handicap. Such ordinances may regulate or prohibit any act, practice, activity or procedure related directly or indirectly to the sale or rental of public or private housing which affects or may tend to affect the availability or desirability of housing on an equal basis to all persons. Such ordinances may provide that violations constitute a criminal offense; may subject the offender to civil penalties; may provide that the City may enforce the ordinances by application to the General Court of Justice for appropriate equitable remedies, including mandatory and prohibitory injunctions and orders of abatement. 
Amendment note: 1989 Session Laws, Ch. 816, §1, amended subparagraph (72) of §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding reference to age or handicap in the first sentence. 
(73)  Reserved. 
Amendment note: In its amendment of this section, 1975 Session Laws, Ch. 561, failed to include a subparagraph (73). 
(74)  Establishment of transit authority. 
a.  To establish, by ordinance, a Raleigh Transit Authority (hereinafter referred to the "authority"), a body corporate and politic, which shall consist of no less than five (5) nor more than eleven (11) members, to exercise and to have all or any combination of powers and duties, as determined by the Raleigh City Council, conferred by this act or by General Statutes upon municipal corporations relating to acquisition, establishment, operation, maintenance, control and financing of transit systems. The City Council of the City of Raleigh is hereby authorized to exercise all powers and duties conferred by this act or by General Statutes relating to acquisition, establishment, operation, maintenance, control and financing of transit systems. 
b.  Members of the Raleigh Transit Authority shall reside within the area comprised of the corporate limits and the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the City of Raleigh, as such area now exists or as it may change in accordance with law. The Chairman and membership of the authority shall be appointed by the City Council of the City of Raleigh for such terms as the City Council may determine. The membership of the authority shall elect a Vice-Chairman and whatever other officers it deems appropriate from its membership. 
A majority of the membership of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and an affirmative vote of the majority of the members present at a meeting shall be required to constitute action of the authority. Members of the authority shall receive such compensation, if any, as may be fixed by the City Council of the City of Raleigh. 
c.  The purpose of the authority shall be to provide for a safe, adequate and convenient public transportation system for the City of Raleigh and its environs. 
d.  The general powers of the authority shall be: 
1.  To sue and be sued; 
2.  To have a seal; 
3.  To purchase, acquire, hold, own, control and lease real and personal property, and to surrender to the City of Raleigh by appropriate instrument any property no longer required by the authority; 
4.  To make or enter into contracts, agreements, leases, conveyances or other instruments, including grants, contracts and agreements with the State of North Carolina and the United States; 
5.  With the approval of the City Manager, to use officers, employees, agents and facilities of the City of Raleigh on such basis as may be agreed upon; 
6.  To contract with private management companies for operation of a transit system; 
7.  To establish rates, fares and schedules for operation of a transit system; 
8.  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out its purpose and for the exercise of the powers granted herein, consistent with the ordinance or ordinances adopted by the Raleigh City Council for its establishment and operation, and consistent with this act. 
e.  The authority shall be fiscally accountable to the City of Raleigh and the City Council, and the City finance direct [director] shall have authority to examine all records and accounts of the authority at any time. 
f.  The establishment and operation of an authority as herein authorized as a governmental function and a public purpose and the City of Raleigh is hereby authorized to appropriate funds to support the establishment and operation of the authority. The City of Raleigh may also dedicate, sell, convey, donate or lease any of its interest in any property to the authority. 
g.  The City Council of the City of Raleigh shall have authority to terminate the existence of the authority at any time. In the event of such termination, all property and assets of the authority shall automatically become the property of the City of Raleigh and the City of Raleigh shall succeed to all rights, obligations and liabilities of the authority. 
Provided, insofar as the provisions of this section are not consistent of any other section or law, public or private, the provisions of this [sub] section shall be controlling. 
(75)  [Credit of accumulated leave.] 
To credit a new employee with accumulated sick leave and vacation leave earned with another municipality of this State, North Carolina state government, or the Federal government (including military service), provided such new employee's last prior employment was with such named governmental entity. 
(76)  [Bicycle regulations.] 
To develop and adopt regulations concerning the use of bicycles within the City limits and the establishment of bikeways (thoroughfares suitable for bicycles) on City streets which may exist within the right-of-way of other modes of transportation, such as highways, or along separate and independent corridors. Such regulations may include the establishment of traffic regulations for bicycles traveling on designated bikeways different than those established for other types of vehicular traffic, including the establishment of two-way bicycle traffic lanes on existing roadways. The City of Raleigh shall not establish bikeways or adopt traffic regulations concerning bicycle traffic on streets or highways under the authority and control of the board of transportation without first obtaining approval of any such proposals from said board. 
(77)  Community development programs and activities. 
(a)  The City of Raleigh, through its governing body, is authorized to engage in, to accept Federal and State grants and loans for, and to appropriate and expend funds for community development programs and activities. In undertaking community development programs and activities, in addition to other authority granted by law, the City of Raleigh may engage in the following activities: 
(1)  Programs for the assistance and financing of rehabilitation of private buildings, including direct repair, the making of grants or loans, the subsidization of interest payments on loans, and the guaranty of loans, for: (a) the principal benefit of low- and moderate-income persons, or (b) the revitalization of deteriorating or deteriorated neighborhoods to attract persons of higher income, or (c) the restoration and preservation of properties or neighborhoods of special value for historic, architectural or aesthetic reasons, or of special value to efforts to conserve, rehabilitate and enhance older segments of the community. 
(2)  Programs concerned with employment, economic development, crime prevention, child care, health, drug abuse, education, and welfare needs of persons of low and moderate income. 
(b)  The City Council of the City of Raleigh may exercise directly those powers granted by law to municipal redevelopment commissions and those powers granted by law to municipal housing authorities. The City Council may delegate to any redevelopment commission or to any housing authority the responsibility of undertaking or carrying out any specified community development activities. The City Council and the Board of County Commissioners of Wake County may by agreement undertake or carry out for each other any specified community development activities. The City Council may contract with any person, association, or corporation in undertaking any specified community development activities. The County or City Board of Health, Wake County Board of Social Services, or the Board of Education of any unit within Wake County may by agreement undertake or carry out for the City Council any specified community development activities. 
(c)  The City Council of the City of Raleigh in undertaking community development programs or activities may create one (1) or more advisory committees to advise it and to make recommendations concerning such programs or activities. 
(d)  The City Council of the City of Raleigh in proposing to undertake any loan guaranty or similar program for rehabilitation of private buildings is authorized to submit to its voters the question whether such program shall be undertaken, such referendum to be conducted pursuant to the general and local laws applicable to special elections in the City of Raleigh. 
(e)  No property taxes shall be appropriated or expended by the City of Raleigh pursuant to this section for any purpose not expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-209, unless the same is first submitted to a vote of the people as therein provided. 
Amendment note: 1975 Session Laws, Ch. 537, §1, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (77). 
Cross reference: Enabling law to engage in community development programs, 1987 Session Laws, Ch. 653. 
(78)  [Reservation of sites.] 
To adopt ordinances providing for the reservation of sites for public buildings or rights-of-way for public facilities and utilities including but not limited to fire stations, police stations, streets, water systems and sanitary sewer systems. The City Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission shall determine the location and size of any such reservations and shall cause those locations to appear on the City's Comprehensive Land Use Plan. If the City enacts ordinances pursuant to this authority those ordinances shall provide, in part, that any subdivision submitted for approval which includes any such reservation or any request for a building permit not involving subdivision approval which includes such a reservation, the administrative official charged with receiving such request shall give notice of the request to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The Council shall decide at that meeting whether it still wishes to require the reservation. If the Council does wish the reservation, it shall have a period of seven (7) months in which to acquire the reserved area by purchase or by eminent domain. If the Council has not purchased the reservation interest or begun condemnation proceedings within the seven-month period, the subdivider or building permit applicant may treat the land as freed of the reservation. 
Amendment note: 1983 Session Laws, Ch. 272, §1, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (78). 
(79)  [Street construction.] 
To construct streets outside the corporate limits but within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Such a street may be built only after a finding by the City Council that the street is essential to the operation of an orderly transportation system for the City and the surrounding urbanized area. Upon annexation of any area in which such streets are located, the City is authorized to make special assessments against the property benefited by the improvements which were installed prior to the annexation. The City is also authorized to reimburse for overwidth streets those who build streets outside the City limits but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction for the City through the subdivision process or any other development process. In order to effect this reimbursement the City is authorized to establish reimbursement zones and to determine reimbursement rates for each zone. 
Amendment note: 1983 Session Laws, Ch. 272, §1, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (79). 
(80)  Site plans. 
The City Council may as part of its zoning regulations require that a site plan be prepared, submitted, and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction, excluding renovation and repair of existing structures, and excluding accessory uses and their structures, unless such renovations and repairs and accessory uses shall cause an increase in the off-street parking requirement or a change in occupancy as occupancy is defined by the North Carolina State Building Code. Such local law shall specify the elements to be included in site plans submitted for approval in accordance with standards of the zoning code; such elements may include, where appropriate, those relating to off-street parking, driveway access, internal circulation, screening, signs, landscaping, architectural features, locations and dimensions of buildings, topography and grading, utilities, drainage structures, street and sidewalk improvements, loading and service areas, fire hydrants, and such other elements as may reasonably be related to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. Where appropriate, approval of site plans may be conditioned to include requirements that street and utility and drainage rights-of-way, open space and recreation areas be dedicated or reserved for the public, or street, drainage, recreation, and utility improvements be made to the same extent as required by the local subdivision regulations. This provision shall not apply to additions of less than five (5) per cent of gross floor area on an annual basis unless such addition causes an increase in the off-street parking requirement or a change in occupancy as occupancy is defined by the North Carolina State Building Code. The City Council shall prescribe procedures for review and approval of such site plans to insure that development of property shall conform to applicable zoning or other relevant laws or regulations, with approvals by designated City staff, or the City Council. Appeals shall lie from the staff to the City Council. The City Council may require that site plans be in conformity with previously approved subdivision plans for the same property; further, in the event of conflict between a requirement for site plan approval and requirements for previously approved subdivision plans, the latter shall control. 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 498, §1, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (80). 1987 Session Laws, Ch. 514, §2, amended subparagraph (80) by adding reference to drainage and open space and recreation areas in the third sentence. 
(81)  Road or drainage projects fee. 
(a)  Definitions. 
The following words in this subdivision are defined for this subdivision as follows, unless the contrary clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  Capital costs. 
"Capital costs" shall mean costs spent for developing new road or public storm drainage projects or road or public storm drainage improvements; such costs may include land acquisition, design, and construction, and no other. 
(2)  Road or drainage project. 
"Road or drainage project" shall mean road or public storm drainage improvements provided or established by the City or in conjunction with other units of government which are required in addition to those required by the subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Developer. 
"Developer" shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, organization, association, firm, political subdivision, or other legal entity constructing or creating new construction. 
(4)  Road or drainage project fee. 
"Road or drainage project fee" shall mean the charge imposed upon new construction pursuant to the grant of regulatory authority contained herein. 
(5)  New construction. 
"New construction" shall mean any new development, construction, or installation that results in real property improvement or which requires a building permit. This term shall include the installation of a mobile home and factory-built and modular housing. This term shall not include fences, billboards, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, advertising signs, or similar structures and improvements, or renovations and repairs, which do not generate the need for additional or expanded road or drainage projects upon completion of the new construction. 
(b)  [Regulatory fee.] 
Subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, the City of Raleigh, following the adoption of an ordinance or ordinances, shall have the right, power, and authority to impose and collect a regulatory fee defined herein as a road or drainage project fee on all new construction within its City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(c)  Requirements and limitations. 
(1)  No road or drainage project fee shall be enacted until the City Council has caused to be prepared a report containing: (i) a description of the anticipated capital costs to the City of each additional or expanded road or drainage project; (ii) a description of the relevant characteristics of construction which give rise to additional or expanded road and drainage projects, such as population, trip generation, stormwater runoff, and flow characteristics; (iii) a plan for providing one or more road or drainage projects has been prepared. 
(2)  Before adopting or amending any road or drainage project fee ordinance authorized by this section, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. A notice of the public hearing shall be given so as to conform with G.S. 160A-364, as it may be amended from time to time. No such ordinance shall be adopted or amended without receiving the Planning Commission recommendation to the City Council. If the Planning Commission shall fail to return a recommendation within sixty (60) days of submittal of an ordinance, the ordinance shall be returned to the City Council and deemed to have a favorable recommendation as submitted to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  The amount of each fee imposed and collected hereunder shall be based upon reasonable and uniform considerations of capital costs to be incurred by the City as a result of new construction and shall bear a reasonable relationship to such capital costs. Such fee shall be based upon reasonable classifications and rates which shall be uniformly applied to all members of a class; however, the fees may differ within zones which may be established depending on the special needs and costs of road and drainage projects in such zones. To the extent that the developer installs and dedicates road or drainage projects for which the use of the fee is designated, which immediately become the property of the City or another unit of government, and which are not otherwise reimbursed by the City, the fee shall be reduced by an amount equal to the value of the improvements or dedications. 
(4)  All monies from fees collected hereunder shall be placed in a separate trust fund. Expenditures from such trust fund shall be matched by an equal sum of money approved from non-fee sources and shall be spent for road or drainage projects located in the same zone in which the fees were collected. No expenditures from such trust fund shall be made for any purpose other than a road or drainage project undertaken by the City, or by the City in conjunction with other units of government. Facility fees shall be spent for those community service facilities authorized by this Section [subparagraph] (81) which the City provides within six (6) years after its collection and within ten (10) years for those community service facilities authorized by this Section [subparagraph] (81) which the City provides in conjunction with other units of government. 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 498, §2, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (81). 1987 Session Laws, Ch. 514, §3, amended subparagraph (c)(4) by completely revising the second sentence. 
(82)  Open space projects fee. 
(a)  Definitions. 
The following words in this subdivision are defined for this subdivision, as follows, unless the contrary clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  Capital costs. 
"Capital costs" shall mean costs spent for the purchase only of land for open space but not for development thereof. 
(2)  Open space project. 
"Open space project" shall mean either the acquisition of land for parks, greenways or open spaces or the construction of recreation facilities. 
(3)  Developer. 
"Developer" shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, organization, association, firm, political subdivision, or other legal entity constructing or creating new construction. 
(4)  Open space projects fee. 
"Open space projects fee" shall mean the charge imposed upon new construction pursuant to the grant of regulatory authority contained herein. 
(5)  New construction. 
"New construction" shall mean any new development, construction, or installation that results in real property improvement or which requires a building permit. This term shall include the installation of a mobile home and factory-built and modular housing. This term shall not include fences, billboards, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, advertising signs, or similar structures and improvements, or renovation and repairs, which do not generate the need for additional or expanded open space projects upon completion of the new construction. 
(b)  [Regulatory fee.] 
Subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, the City of Raleigh, following the adoption of an ordinance or ordinances, shall have the right, power, and authority to impose and collect a regulatory fee defined herein as an open space project fee on all new construction within its City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(c)  Requirements and limitations. 
(1)  No open space project fee shall be enacted until the City Council has caused to be prepared a report containing: (i) a description of the anticipated capital costs to the City of each additional or expanded open space project; (ii) a description of the relevant characteristics of construction which give rise to additional or expanded open space projects; (iii) a plan for providing one or more open space projects has been prepared. 
(2)  Before adopting or amending any open space project fee ordinance authorized by this subdivision, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. A notice of the public hearing shall be given so as to conform with G.S. 160A-364, as it may be amended from time to time. No such ordinance shall be adopted or amended without receiving the Planning Commission's recommendation to the City Council. If the Planning Commission shall fail to return a recommendation within sixty (60) days of submittal of an ordinance, the ordinance shall be returned to the City Council and deemed to have a favorable recommendation as submitted to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  The amount of each fee imposed and collected hereunder shall be based upon reasonable and uniform considerations of capital costs to be incurred by the City as a result of new construction and shall bear a reasonable relationship to such capital costs. Such fee shall be based upon reasonable classifications and rates which shall be uniformly applied to all members of a class; however, the fees may differ within zones which may be established depending on the special needs and costs of open space projects in such zones. To the extent that the developer acquires and dedicates open space for open space projects for which the use of the fee is designated, which immediately becomes the property of the City, or another unit of government, and which are not otherwise reimbursed by the City, the fee shall be reduced by an amount equal to the value of the open space dedications. 
(4)  All monies from fees collected hereunder shall be placed in a separate trust fund. Expenditures from such trust fund shall be matched by an equal sum of money appropriated from non-fee sources and shall be spent for open space projects located in the same zone in which the fees were collected. No expenditures from such trust fund shall be made for any purpose other than an open space project undertaken by the City, or by the City in conjunction with other units of government. Open space project fees shall be spent for those community service facilities authorized by this Section [subparagraph] (82) which the City provides within six years after its collection and within 10 years for those community service facilities authorized by this Section [subparagraph] (82) which the City provides in conjunction with other units of government. 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 498, §2, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (82). 1987 Session Laws, Ch. 514, §4, amended subparagraph (a)(2) by rewriting the first sentence; and §5 rewrote the first sentence of subparagraph (c)(4). 
(83)  [Passage of necessary legislation.] 
The City is authorized to enact ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations that are reasonable, necessary or expedient to carry subdivisions (80), (81) and (82) into execution and effect. 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 498, §2, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (83). 
(84)  [Supplementary nature of (80)(82).] 
The powers conferred in subdivisions (80), (81) and (82) shall be supplementary in addition to all other powers and procedures authorized by any other general or local law. Assessments, charges, fees, or rates authorized by any other general or local law shall not be affected by the provisions of this section. Nothing contained in subdivisions (80), (81) and (82) shall be construed to prevent the use of facility fee proceeds to retire debt which was used to fund facility fee eligible project. 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 498, §2, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (84). 1987 Session Laws, Ch. 514, §1, amended subparagraph (84) by adding the third sentence. 
(85)  Cooperation with Federal agencies. 
The City may enter into contracts or agreements with any agency or department of the United States Government in order to execute any undertaking. Such contracts or agreements may involve activities carried out to benefit a foreign government but the contract or agreement shall be with an agency or department of the United States Government and shall substantially comply with the requirements for interlocal agreements set out in G.S. 160A-464. 
Amendment note: 1991 Session Laws, Ch. 843, §1, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (85). §2 of the act declared the provisions applicable only to contracts or agreements entered into prior to Dec. 1, 1993. 
(86)  [Development funds.] 
The City Council may, as part of its land development ordinances, provide that in lieu of required street right-of-way improvements, a developer may be required to provide funds that the City may use for the construction of right-of-way improvements to serve the occupants, residents, or invitees of the subdivision or development and these funds may be used for improvements which serve more than one subdivision or development within the area. All funds received by the City pursuant to this paragraph shall be used only for development of right-of-way improvements, including design, land acquisition, and construction. However, the City may undertake these activities in conjunction with the Department of Transportation under an agreement between the City and the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The ordinance may require a combination of partial payment of funds and partial dedication of constructed improvements when the governing body of the City determines that a combination is in the best interest of the citizens of the area to be served. 
(S.L. 1949, Ch. 1184, §22; S.L. 1959, Ch. 813, §1; S.L. 1961, Ch. 220, §1; S.L. 1963, Ch. 87, §1; S.L. 1963, Ch. 714, §1; S.L. 1967, Ch. 71, §§1, 2; S.L. 1969, Ch. 383, §2; S.L. 1971, Ch. 1209, §1(a), (b); S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §§1(g), (h)(1), (2); S.L. 1973, Ch. 850, §1; S.L. 1975, Ch. 537, §1; S.L. 1975, Ch. 561, §§38; S.L. 1979, Ch. 277, §1; S.L. 1981, Ch. 992, §1; S.L. 1981, Ch. 1166, §1; S.L. 1983, Ch. 159, §1; S.L. 1983, Ch. 272, §1; S.L. 1985, Ch. 35, §1; S.L. 1985, Ch. 498, §§1, 2; S.L. 1987, Ch. 365, §1; S.L. 1987, Ch. 514, §§16; S.L. 1989, Ch. 816, §1; S.L. 1991, Ch. 312, §§1, 2; S.L. 1991, Ch. 843, §§1, 2) 
Amendment note: 1987 Session Laws, Ch. 514, §6, amended §22 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by adding subparagraph (86).  
Sec. 2.15 - EXTENSION OF APPLICATION OF HEALTH, SANITARY AND PROTECTIVE ORDINANCES. 
All ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Raleigh now in force, or that may hereafter be adopted by the City Council in the exercise of the police powers given to it for sanitary and health purposes, or for the protection of the property of the City, unless otherwise provided by the City Council, shall, in addition to applying to the territory within the City limits, apply with equal force to the territory outside of said City limits, within one mile in all directions of same, and to the right-of-way of all sewer, water, and electric light lines of the City, without the corporate limits, and to the rights-of-way, without the City limits, or any street railway company, or extension thereof, operating under a franchise granted by the City, and upon all property and rights-of-way of the City outside the said corporate limits and the above mentioned territorial limits, wheresoever the same may be located.  
Sec. 2.16 - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM. 
(a)  Power of Initiative. 
The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance, except an ordinance appropriating moneys or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the Council by a petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least ten per centum of the registered voters at the last regular municipal election. 
(b)  Power of Referendum. 
The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the Council, or submitted by the Council to a vote of the electors, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the Council by initiative petition and passed by the Council without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty days after the enactment and publication by the Council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least ten per centum of the registered voters at the last preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the City Clerk requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors. 
(c)  Form of Petitions; Committee of Petitioners. 
All petition papers circulated for the purpose of an initiative or referendum shall be substantially uniform in size and style. Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any such petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of the same five electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
(d)  Filing, Examination, Amendment and Certification of Petitions. 
All petition papers shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument. Within five (5) business days after a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall examine the petition papers to determine whether each paper conforms to the requirements set forth in paragraph (c) herein and whether the number of signatures on valid petition papers is prima facie equal at least to the minimum number required. In making his examination, the City Clerk shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which lacks any one of the following items; viz: The text of the proposed ordinance or the identification of the ordinance upon which a referendum is asked, the names of the committee members responsible for the petition, or the affidavit of the circulator. If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded and the City Clerk shall clearly indicate the cutoff point. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified, the Clerk shall indicate the actual number of signatures. If the number of signatures on the valid petition papers shall be less than the number necessary, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate addressed to the committee of the petitioners setting forth the particulars in which the petition is defective. The committee shall be allowed ten business days to amend their petition by filing additional petition papers, but in no case shall any invalid petition paper be returned to the committee for perfection. In the event an amendment is filed, the City Clerk shall determine within five business days whether the petition as amended is now sufficient. If he find it still to be insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. Provided, however, that the finding of the insufficiency of an initiative petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. If the City Clerk find the petition to be prima facie sufficient, he shall deliver the same to the Wake County Board of Elections for a checking of the names of the signers against the registration books. The board of elections shall complete its check within fifteen business days; provided, however, that the said board shall not be obligated to conduct a check in any thirty-day period immediately preceding, or in any ten-day period immediately following, a County-wide or City-wide election. In making its check of names, the said board shall be bound by the finding of the City Clerk as to validity of any particular petition paper and shall follow the rules set out above concerning petitions found to have different numbers of signers than those stated in the affidavits. Upon the completion of its check, the board of elections, through its Chairman or other duly authorized official, shall certify the outcome to the City Clerk. This certificate shall state (1) the total number of registered voters at the time of the most recent regular election of the members of the City Council, [(2)] the number of voters registered in the City of Raleigh whose names appear on the petition papers that the board found it necessary to examine, and [(3)] whether or not this number is sufficient for the submission of the proposed issue or issues to popular vote. If it was found unnecessary to check all names on the petition papers, this fact shall be indicated in the certificate. The petition papers shall be returned to the City Clerk by the County Board of Elections together with its certificate. 
(e)  Certification of Sufficient Petition; Effect on a Referendum Petition of Certification. 
Upon receiving the certificate of the Wake County Board of Elections, the City Clerk shall prepare a final certificate indicating the result of the board's examination and shall submit this certificate to the next regular meeting of the City Council. Whenever a referendum petition, or amended petition, has been certified as sufficient by the City Clerk, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect until and unless approved by the electors, as hereinafter provided. 
(f)  Consideration by the City Council. 
Whenever the City Council shall receive an initiative or referendum petition certified to be sufficient by the City Clerk as provided in paragraph (e) hereof, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The Council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the Council by the City Clerk. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the Council and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be taken not later than the second regular meeting of the Council following the certification and shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?". 
(g)  Submission of Ordinance to Electors. 
If the Council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, or if the Council fail to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors not less than thirty days nor more than one year from the date the Council takes its final vote thereon. The Council may, in its discretion, and if no regular election is to be held within such period shall, provide for a special election. Provided that, in case the Council shall pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition in a form different from that set forth in the petition, the initiative form of the ordinance shall be submitted to the electors of the City only if, within twenty business days after the passage and publication of the ordinance in different form by the City Council, an additional petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least five per centum of the registered voters at the time of the last regular municipal election is submitted to the City Council. The same rules that governed the filing, examination, amendment and certification of the original petition shall apply to the additional petition. 
(h)  Form of Ballot for Initiated and Referred Ordinances. 
Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the principal legal adviser of the City. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. The ballot used in voting upon any ordinance, if a paper ballot, shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." Immediately at the left of each proposition there shall be a square in which by making a cross (X) the elector may vote for or against the ordinance. Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall be presented in such manner as to permit the elector to vote for or against the ordinance. 
(i)  Result of Election. 
If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the City. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(j)  Publication, Amendment, and Repeal of Initiative or Referendum Ordinances. 
Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors shall be published and shall take effect as do other ordinances. Such initiative or referendum ordinances may be repealed only by vote of the electors of the City. The City Council may request the Wake County Board of Elections to submit a proposition for the repeal of any such ordinances, or for amendments thereto, to be voted upon at any succeeding general City election; and should any such proposition so submitted receive a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election, such ordinance shall thereby be repealed or amended accordingly. 
(k)  Restrictions on Use of Initiative Process. 
The initiative process shall not be used to reverse the result of a referendum until one (1) year shall have passed since the referendum vote or the effective date of the referred ordinance, whichever shall be the more recent. Nor shall the same question be submitted to the voters twice in the same twelve-month period. 
(l)  Use of Initiative Process To Repeal an Existing Ordinance. 
In the event the initiative process is used for the purpose of the repeal of an existing ordinance, the petition shall set out the ordinance the repeal of which is sought, and a vote shall be had only on the question of the repeal of such ordinance. If such process is used for the purpose of the repeal of a part of an existing ordinance, the vote shall be had only on the question of the repeal of that part of the ordinance set out in the petition. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 970, §1)  
ARTICLE III. - APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; INTEREST OF OFFICIALS IN CONTRACTS 
 
Sec. 3.1 - CITY MANAGER; APPOINTMENT. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager, who shall be the administrative head of the City government, and shall be responsible for the administration of all departments. He shall be appointed with regard to merit only, and he need not be a resident of the City when appointed. He shall hold office during the pleasure of the City Council, and shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall fix by ordinance.  
Sec. 3.2 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The City Manager shall (1) be the administrative head of the City government; (2) see that within the City laws of the State and the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the Council are faithfully executed; (3) attend all meetings of the Council, and recommend for adoption such measures as he shall deem expedient; (4) make reports to the Council from time to time upon the affairs of the City, keep the Council fully advised of the City's financial condition and its future financial needs; (5) appoint and remove all heads of departments, superintendents, and other employees of the City, except as herein otherwise provided.  
Sec. 3.3 - APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS. 
Except as to such officers and members of commissions, boards, and committees which the City Council is authorized by this act to appoint, all City officers and employees as the Council shall determine are necessary for the proper administration of the City shall be appointed by the City Manager, and any such officer or employee (subject to the foregoing exceptions) may be removed by him; but the City Manager shall report to the Council the appointment or removal of any of the heads of departments of the City of Raleigh following such appointment or removal. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 121, §1)  
Sec. 3.4 - CONTROL OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The officers and employees of the City subject to appointment by the City Manager shall perform such duties as may be required of them by the City Manager, under general regulation of the City Council.  
Sec. 3.5 - CITY COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS. 
The City Council shall appoint and employ and may discharge and remove the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, the City Clerk and Treasurer (when duties of City Clerk and City Treasurer are combined and conferred and imposed upon one (1) officer), the City Attorney, and the auditor of such public accountant as may be deemed proper for the auditing of the accounts of the City; and the City Council shall likewise fill vacancies on or make appointments to such boards, commissions, or committees as the governing body of the City of Raleigh is authorized or permitted by law or ordinance to fill or appoint; provided, that the officers named in this section, when appointed by the City Council and qualified, shall hold office and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(i))  
Sec. 3.6 - COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE IN APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS BY CITY MANAGER. 
Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the City Manager or by any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.  
Sec. 3.7 - SALARIES. 
Every officer, agent, employee and assistant of the City government (except the Mayor and members of the City Council whose salaries are otherwise provided for), shall receive such salary or compensation as the City Council shall by budget appropriation or other appropriate action provide, payable in equal semi-monthly installments, unless the City Council shall order payments to be made at other intervals.  
Sec. 3.8 - BONDS REQUIRED OF OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY. 
(a)  Every official, employee or agent of the City who handles or has custody of more than one hundred dollars ($100) of the funds of the City at any time shall, before assuming his duties as such, and thereafter annually on or before the first day of the fiscal year of the City, be required to furnish the City a good and sufficient bond in an amount determined by the City Council to be sufficient to protect the City, payable to the City of Raleigh and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties and a true accounting for all funds of the City which may come into his hands, custody or control during the particular fiscal year, which bond shall be approved by the City Council and deposited with the City Clerk; provided, however, that such bond of any employee or employees may, in the discretion of the City Council and authorized by resolution, be conditioned only upon a true accounting for funds of the City. The City shall pay the premiums for such bonds. The bond required by this section may be a bond executed by the particular official, employee, or agent, as principal, and by the surety or sureties required and approved by the City Council, or the bond may be a schedule bond executed by a surety company, insurance company or other company authorized to execute such bonds and authorized to do a surety business in the State of North Carolina, without the necessity of the signature of the particular officials, employees or agents constituting the principals of such bond, which bonds shall list the names of the officials, employees and agents covered as principals by the bond and their respective positions with the City of Raleigh, or the said bond may be a schedule position bond or blanket position bond which lists the particular positions of employment and offices whose incumbents are covered by said bond; and when any authorized company shall execute, as surety, any such schedule bond, listing, by name or position, the officials, employees and agents of the City covered by the bond, it shall be conclusively presumed that the bond was executed and furnished by the particular officials, employees and agents of the City, respectively specified therein, by name or position, and each such official, employee and agent required to furnish bond and each surety executing any such bond is hereby charged with notice of this section of this act, which shall be a part of the obligation of every such bond. 
(b)  The City Council shall not accept any continuing bond or renewal bond but shall require a new bond for the period of each fiscal year of the City, and such bond shall be and shall be known as "Official Bond of Public Officials," and the six-year statute of limitations shall apply as to actions for recovery under any such bond.  
Sec. 3.9 - REGULATION OF PRIVATE TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN CITY AND ITS OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES. 
(a)  No member of the City Council, official, or employee of the City of Raleigh shall be financially interested, or have any personal beneficial interest, either directly or indirectly, as agent, representative, or otherwise, in the purchase of, or contract for, or in furnishing any materials, equipment or supplies to the City of Raleigh, nor shall any official or employee of the City of Raleigh accept or receive, or agree to accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation to whom any contract may be awarded or from whom any materials, equipment or supplies may be purchased by the City of Raleigh, by rebate, gift, or otherwise, any money or anything of value whatsoever, or any promise, obligation or contract for future reward or compensation, for recommending or procuring the use of any such materials, equipment or supplies by the City of Raleigh; no member of the City Council, official or employee of the City of Raleigh shall for his own personal benefit operate, directly or indirectly, any concession in any building or on any lands of the City of Raleigh, nor shall any official or employee of the City of Raleigh bid for or be awarded any contract granting concessionary rights of any nature or kind from the City of Raleigh; it shall be unlawful for any member of the City Council, official or employee of the City of Raleigh to bid for or to purchase or to contract to purchase from the City of Raleigh any real estate, equipment, materials, or supplies of any nature or kind whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, at either public or private sale, either singly or through, or jointly with any other person. Any member of the City Council, official, or employee of the City of Raleigh, who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by statute in such cases. If the City Council shall find that any official or employee has violated any provision of this section, such official or employee may be forthwith discharged by the City Council or by the City Manager from the service of the City of Raleigh. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), nothing herein shall be construed as preventing any official or employee covered by this section from purchasing a plot or plots from the City in a City-owned cemetery, nor shall any such official or employee be prohibited from participating in any rental or home ownership program sponsored or operated by the City, so long as the official or employee meets all the criteria for the program and so long as the income of the recipient does not exceed sixty-five (65) per cent of the median area income based on household size. Participants in such a program must commit to occupying the unit acquired or rented as their personal dwelling and must commit to reside there at least three years unless prevented from doing so by extraordinary circumstances such as divorce, transfer of job, or death. The award of any such housing assistance to an employee shall be noted in the minutes of the City Council. 
(S.L. 1991, Ch. 312, §1) 
Amendment note: 1991 Session Laws, Ch. 312, §3, amended §33 of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949 by designating the existing text subsection (a) and adding subsection (b). 
Cross reference: Police officer purchase of revolver, 1981 Session Laws, Ch. 255.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: 1973 Session Laws, Ch. 319, §1(j), amended the Charter by repealing former §§34-42, 44-47 and 49-53 pertaining to municipal elections. The former sections were derived from: 1951 Session Laws, Ch. 464, §1; 1953 Session Laws, Ch. 347, Art. 2; 1957 Session Laws, Ch. 970, §1; 1959 Session Laws, Ch. 811, §1; and 1965 Session Laws, Ch. 204, §1. 
 
Sec. 4.1 - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS. 
(a)  All nominations, primary elections, general elections and special elections in the City shall be held, conducted, supervised and governed by and pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 163, Elections and Election Laws, and Subchapter IX thereof, Municipal Elections, of the General Statutes of North Carolina, with the exception of G.S. 163-303, relating to the nonapplicability of campaign expense regulation in nonpartisan elections and except as otherwise provided by this act. 
(b)  All nominations and elections in the City shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 163, Elections and Election Laws, and Subchapter VIII thereof, Criminal Offenses, including, but not being limited to, the sections of the General Statutes numbered G.S. 163-259 through G.S. 163-278. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(k); S.L. 1975, Ch. 561, §1; S.L. 1979, Ch. 664, §1) 
Amendment note: 1979 Session Laws, Ch. 664, §1, amended §1 of Ch. 561 Session Laws 1975 which was included in subsection (a), deleting the requirement that candidates for City office file campaign reports with the Clerk of Superior Court.  
Sec. 4.2 - RECALL OF OFFICIALS BY THE PEOPLE. 
The holder of any elective office may be removed at any time by the electors qualified to vote for a successor of such incumbent. The procedure to effect the removal of an incumbent of an elective office shall be as follows: 
(1)  A petition signed by electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be removed, equal in number of at least twenty-five (25) per centum of the entire number of voters casting votes at the last preceding general municipal election, demanding an election of a successor of the person sought to be removed, shall be filed with the Clerk, which petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds on which the removal is sought. The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but each signer shall add to his signature his place of residence, giving the street and number. One (1) of the signers of each such paper shall make oath before an officer competent to administer oaths that the statements therein made are true as he believes, and that each signature to the paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Within ten days from the date of filing such petition, the City Clerk shall examine and from the voters' register ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors, and he shall attach to said petition his certificate showing the results of such examination. 
(2)  If, by the Clerk's certificate, the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within ten days from the date of said certificate. The Clerk shall, within ten days after such amendment, make like examination of the amended petition, and if his certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing the same; without prejudice, however, to the filing of a new petition to the same effect. 
(3)  If the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the Wake County Board of Elections shall order and fix a date for holding a primary, as provided for in cases preceding regular municipal elections, the said primary to be held not more than sixty days from the date of the Clerk's certificate to the Wake County Board of Elections that a sufficient petition is filed. If in the primary election any candidate receives a majority of all the votes cast, he shall be declared to be elected to fill out the remainder of the term of the officer who is sought to be recalled. If there be more than two candidates in such primary, and no one receives a majority of all the votes cast therein, then there shall be an election held within twenty days from the date of the primary, at which election the two candidates receiving the highest vote in the primary shall be voted for. Candidates named shall be placed on the ticket in the primary and election held and the results canvassed, under the same rules, conditions, and regulations as are prescribed for the primaries preceding a regular municipal election in the City of Raleigh. 
(4)  The Wake County Board of Elections shall make, or cause to be made, publication for ten days of notice and all arrangements for holding such election, and the same shall be conducted, returned, and the results thereof declared in all respects as other City elections in the City of Raleigh. The successor of any officer so removed shall hold office during the unexpired term of his predecessor. Any person sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself, and unless he requests otherwise in writing, his name shall be placed on the official ballot without nomination. At such election, if some other person than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from the office upon qualification of his successor. 
(5)  In case the person elected should fail to qualify within ten days after receiving notification of election, the office shall be filled by election by the City Council, but the officer or councilor removed shall not be eligible to election by the City Council, and the person so elected by the City Council shall be subject to recall as other officers and councilors. If the incumbent received a majority of votes in the primary or the election, he shall continue in office. The said method of removal shall be cumulative and additional to any other method provided by law. The expense of calling and conducting any such election shall be paid by the City of Raleigh. 
(S.L. 1953, Ch. 347, Art. 2; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(1))  
Sec. 4.3 - REMOVAL OF RESIDENCE. 
(a)  In the case of removal of residence of any elective officer from the territorial limits of the City, such removal shall, ipso facto, create a vacancy in his office. 
(b)  In the case of removal of residence of any officer elected to represent a specific electoral district from the electoral district for the representation of which he was elected, such removal shall, ipso facto, create a vacancy in his office. 
(S.L. 1953, Ch. 347, Art. 2; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(m))  
Sec. 4.4 - OCCURRENCE OF VACANCIES. 
(a)  All vacancies in elective offices shall be permanent and shall occur upon the death, removal or residence, other disqualification (such as that associated with a violation of the law), or disability of the elective office holder. For this purpose, a person shall be deemed to be disabled if, as a result of the certification of a physician, or as a result of an independent investigation by the City Council, it determines that a member is too infirm, either physically or mentally, to discharge his duties adequately and consistently. A member shall also be deemed to be disabled when he fails to attend six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the City Council. 
(b)  A person appointed to fill a vacancy on the City Council, due to disqualification or disability, shall be clothed with all the authority and powers given under the laws of North Carolina to such office; but the officer so chosen, shall be subject to recall as any other officer. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(n))  
ARTICLE V. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR, CITY CLERK AND TREASURER, AND CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 5.1 - MAYOR, POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall be recognized as the Chief representative of the City; he shall keep himself informed concerning the financial and other affairs of the City government and he shall, from time to time, present to the City Council information about the affairs of the City and recommend for consideration such measures as he deems best for the City; he shall, from time to time, by issuing statements and reports and by making addresses by radio and otherwise, report to the citizens of the City of Raleigh concerning the condition of the City affairs; the Mayor shall be and serve as a member of all boards, commissions and committees as required by any statute or as required by action of the City Council; the Mayor shall sign all contracts on behalf of the City unless otherwise provided by law or by ordinance or resolution of the City Council; and the Mayor shall do such other things and perform such other duties as shall be required of him by statute or by action of the City Council. The Mayor shall have authority to administer oaths. In the absence or incapacity of the Mayor, all of his duties, powers and obligations shall be vested in the Mayor pro tempore.  
Sec. 5.2 - CITY CLERK, CITY TREASURER AND CITY ATTORNEYAPPOINTMENT. 
At the first meeting of the City Council after their election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the City Council shall appoint the following officers, who shall each serve at the pleasure of the City Council and at a compensation to be fixed by the Council, and who may be required to furnish bond in such amount and with such surety as ordered by the City Council, in accordance with the provisions of this act relating to the bonds of public officials, and whose duties shall be as prescribed by this act and by the general laws of North Carolina, a City Clerk and a City Treasurer, or in lieu thereof, a City Clerk and Treasurer, and a City Attorney.  
Sec. 5.3 - DUTIES OF CITY CLERK. 
The City Clerk shall act as Clerk of the City Council and it shall be his or her duty to attend each meeting of the City Council and to keep the minutes and records of all the proceedings of the Council in well-bound books provided for that purpose, and to preserve all books, papers and writings of all kinds submitted to his or her care during his or her continuance in office, and deliver them to his or her successor; the City Clerk shall be custodian of all written claims and demands made upon the City arising out of tort actions, the City Clerk shall be the custodian of all signed petitions with reference to public improvements, condemnation proceedings and all contracts made and entered into by the City and of all notices and affidavits of publishers with reference to publication of ordinances, budgets, or other legal advertisements required to be made by the City; the City Clerk shall be the custodian of the official corporate seal of the City of Raleigh and shall attest and affix said official seal to all documents or instruments of the City required to be so attested and sealed; he or she shall be custodian of all bonds required by ordinance, contract or by law to be executed and deposited with the City; he or she shall be the custodian of all deeds or conveyances of all types made to the City, and it shall be his or [her] duty to file with the Register of Deeds of Wake County for the purpose of being recorded in the Registry of Wake County; and the City Clerk shall account and pay over all moneys which may come into his or her hands by virtue of his or her office; and the City Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be required by law or by the City Council. 
(S.L. 1975, Ch. 561, §2)  
Sec. 5.4 - SAME; DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER. 
The duties and obligations of the City Treasurer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds of the City of Raleigh and shall cause to be kept a proper record showing the source from which said funds are derived and shall disburse the same in accordance with due authority given by the City Council, or otherwise by law. 
(2)  He shall see and require that all departments of the City of Raleigh which receive funds for said City make or cause to be made daily deposits of same to credit of the City of Raleigh in a depository approved and designated by the City Council, and he shall require that duplicate deposit slips be presented to him by the official or officials having responsibility for making such deposits upon the same day upon which the deposit is made. 
(3)  He shall sign all checks issued for disbursement of funds of the City of Raleigh which are by this charter or otherwise required to be deposited to the credit of said City and require that due authority be given for the execution of such checks and only after the same have been duly audited. 
(4)  He shall execute all notes, bonds or other evidences of indebtedness for the City of Raleigh where the same are required by private or public law to be executed by the City Treasurer. 
(5)  He shall see that all depositories designated by the City Council post depository bonds, keep the same in force and on file with the City Clerk, or in lieu thereof place sufficient and proper collateral as may be allowed by law or action of the City Council; and he is specifically charged with the duties imposed by G.S. 159-28. 
(6)  He shall assist the City Manager and the City Accountant in the preparation of the budget for the City of Raleigh and shall advise with them and with the City Council upon the finances and issuance of bonds and other obligations of the City. 
(7)  He shall pass upon the sufficiency of the surety of all bonds required to be deposited with the City of Raleigh by contract, ordinances or otherwise. 
(8)  He shall attend to all duties as may be required of him by ordinances or laws heretofore or hereafter enacted. 
(9)  He shall attend to such other duties as may be required of him by the City Council.  
Sec. 5.5 - SAME; POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY CLERK AND TREASURER. 
The City Council shall have power and authority to provide that the City Clerk shall have the powers and perform the duties of City Treasurer, such powers and duties to be prescribed from time to time by the governing body, and to be in addition to all powers and duties as may be prescribed by law; and in such event, the City Clerk shall be known as the "City Clerk and Treasurer." The power and authority in this section conferred upon the City Council shall be exercised by ordinance duly adopted by the City Council, in the event the City Council shall determine to exercise such power and authority, which ordinance shall provide that the person or persons appointed from time to time to be City Clerk of the City of Raleigh shall have the powers and perform the duties of City Treasurer, as such powers and duties may be prescribed from time to time by the City Council or by law, and that any person so appointed shall be known as City Clerk and Treasurer of the City of Raleigh; provided, that in such event all powers conferred upon the City Clerk or upon the City Treasurer and all duties imposed upon the City Clerk or the City Treasurer by this act or by any other law or by action of the City Council shall be powers conferred upon and duties imposed upon the City Clerk and Treasurer of the City of Raleigh.  
Sec. 5.6 - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY. 
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prosecute and to defend all suits-at-law or in equity in which the City of Raleigh may become the plaintiff or defendant in any such suit; to render advisory opinions to the Mayor, the City Council, the City Manager, and the heads of the various departments of the City, provided that such request for advice be made in writing and signed by the person requesting said advice; and it shall be his duty, when required to do so, to attend the meetings of the City Council and to prepare such deeds, contracts, bonds and other legal papers as may be required for the City's business, and to perform such other services of a legal nature as required by the City Council. The City Council may also appoint one (1) or more Associate City Attorneys whose compensation shall be fixed by the Council and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council; it shall be the duty of the Associate City Attorneys to assist the City Attorney as required by the City Attorney or by the City Council. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney and the Associate City Attorneys to institute and handle all civil actions and proceedings required for the foreclosure of liens against real estate on account of delinquent taxes and/or assessments for special improvements, when requested to take such action by the City Tax Collector or by the City Council. The City Council shall have power and authority to employ additional counsel in special cases when considered expedient by a majority of the City Council. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(p))  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL FUNCTIONS 
 
Sec. 6.1 - DEPARTMENTS ENUMERATED. 
There shall be and there are hereby created the following departments of the City of Raleigh: 
(1)  Department of Finance, which shall be headed by the City Accountant, who shall also have the title of Director of Finance. 
(2)  Department of Public Safety, which shall be headed by the Director of Public Safety. 
(3)  Department of Public Works, which shall be headed by the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  Department of Planning, which shall be headed by the director of planning. 
(5)  Department of Public Utilities, which shall be headed by the Director of Public Utilities. 
(6)  Department of Parks and Recreation, which shall be headed by the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(7)  Health Department and such other departments as may be created from time to time by ordinance adopted by the City Council. Each of the departments and the department heads shall be under the supervision of and directly responsible to the City Manager. Department or division heads need not be resident[s] of the City when appointed, except as herein specifically otherwise provided.  
Sec. 6.2 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; DIVISIONS. 
The Department of Finance shall consist of the following divisions: (a) Accounting Division; (b) Collections Division; (c) Purchases and Contracts Division.  
Sec. 6.3 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE, CITY ACCOUNTANT; APPOINTMENT; BOND. 
It shall be the duty of the City Council on or before the first day of June 1949, and biennially thereafter before the first day of June in each odd year, to appoint, upon the advice and recommendation of the City Manager some person of honesty and ability whose experience, training and qualifications have been approved by the Local Government Commission of the State of North Carolina, as City Accountant of the City of Raleigh, who shall also be known as the Director of Finance, and he shall hold such office or position at the will of the City Council or until such approval has been revoked by the Local Government Commission, or until the appointment of his successor. The City Accountant shall furnish bond annually in such amount as required by the City Council, which bond shall be approved both by the City Council and by the Local Government Commission, and shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties imposed by law as City Accountant and Director of Finance.  
Sec. 6.4 - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The Director of Finance (City Accountant) shall have general charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the City and to that end he shall have the powers and the duties hereinafter set forth and such as may now or hereafter be prescribed by law. 
(1)  He shall act as accountant for the City and its various departments in settling with all City officers, and shall be head of the accounting division. 
(2)  He shall compile the current expense estimates for the budget for the City Manager. 
(3)  He shall compile the capital estimates for the budget for City Manager. 
(4)  He shall supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
(5)  He shall maintain a general accounting system for the City government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the City budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the City government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient. 
(6)  He shall keep a record of the date, source and amount of each item of receipt, and the date, payee or contractor, the specific purpose and the amount of the disbursement made. 
(7)  He shall require officers and departments receiving or disbursing money of the City, or its subdivisions, to keep a record of the date, source and amount of each item of receipts, and the date, the payee or contractor, the specific purpose and the amount of the disbursement made, and shall require the officer or department to keep a copy of such contract. 
(8)  He shall examine or test check once a month, and at such other times as the City Council may direct, all books, accounts, receipts, vouchers and other records of all City officers and employees and departments of the City administration receiving or expending public money. 
(9)  He shall require all officers and employees of the City, whose duty it is to collect fines, penalties or other money, to be applied to public purposes, to file with him each month, or more often if the City Council so directs, a report of all fees collected by such officers. 
(10)  He shall monthly, or as often as he may be directed by the City Council, file with the Council a complete statement of the financial condition of the City, and its subdivisions, showing receipts and expenditures of the different departments of the City. 
(11)  He shall advise with the Mayor, City Manager, Treasurer and the various department heads of the City of Raleigh, and its subdivisions, and with the Local Government Commission of the State of North Carolina, and he shall inform himself as to the best and simplest methods of so doing so as to bring about, as far as possible, a simple, accurate and uniform system of keeping accounts of the City and its various departments. 
(12)  He shall, in conjunction with the City Manager and Treasurer, submit to the City Council, at the proper time, an annual budget estimate and budget which shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of North Carolina as the same are now or may hereafter exist. 
(13)  He shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the City Council and those which may be now or hereafter required of municipal accountants by the general laws of the State of North Carolina and as applicable to the City of Raleigh. 
(14)  He shall certify on all contracts of the City as to whether or not funds of said City have been properly provided for the carrying out of said contracts on the part of the City.  
Sec. 6.5 - CERTIFICATE OF CITY ACCOUNTANT PREREQUISITE TO EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC FUNDS. 
(a)  No contract or agreement requiring the payment of money, or requisition for supplies or materials, shall be made, and no warrant or order for the payment of money shall be drawn upon the treasury of the City unless provision for the payment thereof has been made by (a) an appropriation ordinance or resolution as required by law, or (b) through the means of bonds or notes duly authorized by the General Assembly and by the City Council, and further authorized, in all cases required by law or by the constitution, by a vote of qualified voters or taxpayers, or otherwise; nor shall such contract, agreement or requisition be made unless the unencumbered balance of such appropriation or provision remains sufficient for such payment. No contract or agreement or requisition requiring the payment of money shall be valid unless the same be in writing, and unless the same shall have printed, written or typewritten thereon a statement signed by the City Accountant as follows: "Provision for the payment of the moneys to fall due under this agreement has been made by appropriation duly made, or by bonds or notes duly authorized, as required by the Local Government Act." 
(b)  Before making such certificate, the City Accountant shall ascertain that a sufficient unencumbered balance of the specific appropriation remains for the payment of the obligation, or that bonds or notes have been so authorized proceeds of which are applicable to such payment, and the appropriation or provision so made shall thereafter be deemed unencumbered by the amount to be paid on such contract or agreement until the City is discharged therefrom. No claim against the City shall be paid except by means of a warrant or order on the City Treasurer signed by the head of the department for which the expense was incurred, nor unless the bill or claim for which the warrant or order is given shall have been presented to and approved by the City Accountant, or in case of his disapproval of such claim or bill, by the City Council. The City Council shall not approve any claim or bill which has been disallowed by the City Accountant without entering upon the minutes of the City Council its reason for approving the same in such detail as may show the City Council's reason for reversing the City Accountant's disallowance. No warrant or order, except a warrant or order for payment of maturing bonds, notes or interest coupons thereto appertaining, and except a warrant or order for the payment of any bill or claim approved by the City Council over the disallowance of the City Accountant, as above provided, shall be valid unless the same shall bear the signature of the City Accountant below a statement which he shall cause to be written, printed or typewritten thereon containing the words: "Provision for the payment of this warrant (or order) has been made by an appropriation duly made or a bond or note duly authorized, as required by the Local Government Act."  
Sec. 6.6 - SUPERVISION BY DIRECTOR OF FINANCE OF COLLECTIONS AND PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS. 
The Director of Finance shall have general supervision over the collection of all taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City of Raleigh, but the responsibility for collecting taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City and the responsibility for receiving and accounting for such moneys shall be that of the City Collector of Revenue, as hereinafter provided. The Director of Finance shall also have general supervision over the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles authorized to be purchased by the City Council, as well as all contracts relating to such purchases, but the direct responsibility for such purchases and contracts shall be imposed upon the City purchasing agent, who shall be the head of the Division of Purchases and Contracts, as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 6.7 - DIVISION OF COLLECTION; CITY COLLECTOR OF REVENUE. 
(a)  The City Manager shall appoint a City Collector of Revenue, who shall have all of the powers and duties imposed by the general laws of North Carolina upon municipal tax collectors and who shall have the power and duty of collecting, receiving and properly accounting for all taxes, special assessments, license fees, penalties, interest and other revenues payable to the City of Raleigh. The City Collector of Revenue shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and may be removed from office as provided by law. The City Collector of Revenue shall, before entering upon his duties and annually on or before the first day of the fiscal year of the City of Raleigh, furnish to the City of Raleigh a bond in an amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), as may be prescribed and approved by the City Council, for the faithful performance of his duties and for a proper accounting of all funds coming into his hands by virtue of his office, or coming into his possession in connection therewith, for which he may be responsible, a new bond to be furnished annually, and he shall receive such compensation for his services as is fixed by the City Council. 
(b)  In the event that provision shall be lawfully made for the collection of ad valorem taxes to be collected and received by any collector who collects both City of Raleigh and Wake County taxes, the City Collector of Revenue shall thereupon have no power or duties to collect such taxes, penalties, interest and revenues the responsibility for the collection and receiving of which shall be imposed upon such collector who collects both City and County taxes; in such event, the City Council may prescribe a bond for the City Collector of Revenue which may be less than the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) as hereinabove provided for.  
Sec. 6.8 - POWERS, DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CITY COLLECTOR OF REVENUE; SPECIFIC ENUMERATION. 
The powers, duties and obligations of the City Collector of Revenue shall in addition to powers, duties and obligations prescribed by the general laws or by other laws applicable to the City of Raleigh, be as follows: 
(1)  He shall collect ad valorem taxes on real and personal property, street assessments, benefits assessed in condemnation proceedings, license privilege taxes, poll taxes, auto license taxes, dog licenses, and all other taxes of any nature or kind, privilege or otherwise required to be paid to the City of Raleigh and not herein otherwise specifically required to be collected by some other officer or department of the City of Raleigh. He shall keep a true and accurate account thereof and shall allocate the moneys received by him to the respective accounts designated in the levy of such tax assessments, and each day render a detailed statement of such collection to the Treasurer of the City of Raleigh accompanied by the duplicate bank deposit slip showing the deposit of such funds in a depository, or depositories, designated by the City Council for the deposit of such funds. 
(2)  He shall be the custodian of the tax books and records, together with all tax sale certificates, street assessment books and records, and all moneys coming into his hands, until the same have been duly deposited in the depository, or depositories, named by the City Council. 
(3)  He shall issue under the rules and regulations of the City Council all privilege licenses except those authorized to be issued by other officers or departments of said City upon the payment of the license or privilege fee required by the ordinances of the City of Raleigh. 
(4)  Possession of the tax list or scroll, after having been placed in the hands of the City Collector of Revenue by the City Council, shall have the same force and effect of a duly docketed judgment and of an execution against the real and personal property of the persons charged with taxes on such list, and the collector of revenue is authorized to make seizure under said tax list as fully as if an execution issued from a court of competent jurisdiction, in the same way and manner as the sheriff may levy and execute upon an execution issued to him by a court of competent jurisdiction, and he shall, when necessary, institute in the name of the City, garnishment proceedings for the purpose of collection of taxes.  
Sec. 6.9 - COLLECTION OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES, CONNECTION FEES AND INSPECTION FEES. 
The City Council may impose upon the City Collector of Revenue the duty and responsibility for collecting, receiving and properly accounting for all water and sewer charges, rents and fees for services, all water and sewer connection charges or fees, and all other inspection fees and revenues due to the City in connection with the operation of its Public Utilities Department; provided, however, that the City Council shall have the power to provide for a special collector to collect such fees, charges, rents and other revenues, in which event there shall be no power or duty to collect the same conferred upon or imposed upon the City Collector of Revenue.  
Sec. 6.10 - DIVISION OF PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS. 
There shall be established in the Department of Finance a Division of Purchases and Contracts, the head of which shall be the City purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City purchasing agent, pursuant to the provisions of this act and pursuant to rules and regulations established by ordinance adopted by the City Council, shall contract for, purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any office, department or agency of the City government. The purchasing agent shall also have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials and equipment required by the City government in cooperation with the heads of the various departments and divisions. 
(2)  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment and determine their quality, quantity and conformance with specifications. 
(3)  Have charge of such general storeroofs and warehouses as the City Council may provide by ordinance. 
(4)  Transfer to or between offices, departments or agencies, or sell surplus, obsolete, or unused supplies, materials, or equipment, subject to authorization and the direction of the City Council.  
Sec. 6.11 - PUBLIC CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; PROCEDURE. 
(a)  No construction or repair work or purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment shall be performed by the City of Raleigh unless the applicable provisions of Article 8 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes of North Carolina or any amendment thereof shall have been complied with. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of said Article 8 or any other act in the purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment for the City of Raleigh, any personal property owned by the City of Raleigh may be exchanged or traded in as a condition of such purchase, provided the advertisement for bids shall specify the property to be exchanged or traded. 
(S.L. 1953, Ch. 193, §1; S.L. 1965, Ch. 218, §1) 
Amendment note: Sections 6.11 and 6.12 were revised and amended by S.L. 1965, Ch. 218, §1, to conform to Art. 8 of Ch. 143 of the General Statutes regarding public building contracts. Previous §§72, prohibiting evasion, and 73, referring to G.S. 160-280, were repealed.  
Sec. 6.12 - REPORTS BY DEPARTMENT HEADS OF NEEDED SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT; ESTIMATES AND PURCHASES. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all department heads to furnish to the City purchasing agent, when requested by him, on forms furnished by him, tabulated estimates of all supplies, materials and equipment needed and required by each respective department for such periods in advance as may be designated by the City purchasing agent, or as prescribed by the City Council. 
(b)  The City purchasing agent shall compile and consolidate all such estimates of supplies, materials and equipment needed and required by the various departments to determine the total requirements for a given commodity during a fiscal year. If the total requirements for any given commodity will involve an estimated expenditure equal to or more than the amount which may be purchased on informal bids as provided in Article 8 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes of North Carolina or an amendment thereof, the procedure prescribed by said article shall be followed. 
(c)  All purchases made and contracts executed by the City purchasing agent shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be issued to any vendor unless and until the Director of Finance (City Accountant) certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. 
(S.L. 1965, Ch. 218, §1)  
Sec. 6.13 - CONTRACTS CONTRARY TO PROVISIONS OF ACT MADE VOID. 
If any contract for construction or repair work or for the purchase of any supplies, materials or equipment within the meaning and application of this act, shall be made contrary to the provisions of this act, such contract shall be void and of no effect; and in such event, the officials and employees of the City authorizing or making, or purporting to authorize or to make, any such contract or purchase, shall be personally liable for the costs thereof, and if such work, supplies, materials or equipment are so unlawfully contracted for or purchased and paid for out of City moneys, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the City of Raleigh in an appropriate civil action instituted therefor. 
(S.L. 1965, Ch. 218, §1) 
Amendment note: See amendment note following §6.12.  
Sec. 6.14 - SALES OF PROPERTY OF THE CITY; PERSONAL. 
The City Council shall have power at any time to sell any and all personal property belonging to the City of Raleigh after having authorized the sale thereof by resolution duly adopted and after having advertised the property for sale by publishing a notice at least once in a daily newspaper published in the City of Raleigh and qualified to publish legal advertising, at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the sale, which notice shall contain a brief description of the property to be sold and the date, hour and place of such sale. Such sale shall be by public auction or by sealed bids invited by advertisement which shall be publicly opened, or by a combination of sealed bids and public auction, as set forth in the said resolution and notice of sale or as prescribed by ordinance. The sale shall be subject to confirmation by the City Council, and the City Council shall have the right and power to reject any and all bids, or to authorize a sale to the highest bidder for cash if the Council determines in its discretion that the highest price bid is fair and reasonable. The Mayor, or other official authorized by the City Council, shall have power to make title to the purchaser.  
Sec. 6.15 - REAL. 
The City Council shall have the power at all times to sell at public auction to the highest bidder, for cash, any real property belonging to the City of Raleigh, wheresoever situated, but only after having authorized the sale thereof by resolution, duly adopted, and after having advertised the same for sale at public auction at least once a week for at least two consecutive weeks prior to the sale in at least one daily newspaper published in the City of Raleigh and qualified to publish legal advertising, the first notice advertising the sale to be published at least fifteen days prior to the date of sale, which notice or advertisement shall describe the real estate to be sold and shall specify the date, hour, and place of such sale; provided, however, that before any bid shall be deemed to be accepted or any sale made, or any title passed by virtue of any such sale, the sale shall be confirmed by the City Council, and the City Council may, in its discretion, refuse confirmation; and when a sale has been duly confirmed and authorized by the City Council, a warranty deed for said real estate may be executed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, with the corporate seal of the City attached; provided, that this section shall apply to all sales of all real estate belonging to the City of Raleigh, regardless of how such real estate may have been acquired by the City, whether by foreclosure of tax or assessment liens or otherwise, except, however, that this section shall not apply to the sale of cemetery lots owned by the City, which may be sold at private sale at such prices as the City Council may determine to be fair and reasonable, and deeds thereto executed as in case of other real estate. Incident to the power hereby granted to sell real estate at public auction, the City Council shall have power and authority to employ the services of an experienced real estate broker or agent to secure a responsible highest bidder at any such sale and to pay a reasonable fee or commission for such service in the event any such sale shall be made and confirmed to such bidder.  
Sec. 6.16 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS; CREATED; PERSONNEL; FUNCTION. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Department of Public Works of the City of Raleigh and said department shall consist of a Director of Public Works, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as may be deemed necessary by the City Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(b)  Subject to the control of the City Council, the Director of Public Works, under the direction and supervision of the City Manager, shall have control, management and direction of all public works not herein or otherwise expressly given to some other department of the City; all public grounds, bridges, viaducts, subways and buildings not otherwise assigned herein or by the City Council to some other department; the construction, cleansing, sprinkling, repair and maintenance of the streets and public places of the City; the erection of public buildings for the City; and the making, constructing, supervising and inspecting of all other improvements, paving, curbing, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, and the repair thereof. The Director of Public Works shall have supervision and control and it shall be his duty to keep in good condition the streets, cemeteries and public grounds and parks of the City of Raleigh, subject to the legislative control of the City Council. 
(c)  He shall have supervision of the enforcement of the provisions of law and the ordinances relating to streets, public squares and places and relating to all matters within the jurisdiction and control of his department. The Director of Public Works shall have supervision and direction of the location of railway tracks, telephone and telegraph wires, poles and other things placed by public service corporations in, along, under or over the streets in the City. Except as otherwise provided by ordinances of the City, the collection, removal and disposition of all waste, including but not being limited to garbage, rubbish and ashes, as defined by the City Council, shall be under the jurisdiction, management and direction of the Director of Public Works according to such rules and regulations as may be adopted from time to time by ordinance. 
(d)  The Director of Public Works, through his department, shall have the duty and responsibility of keeping clean all streets, alleys and public places, in accordance with such regulations as may be prescribed from time to time by ordinances adopted by the City Council. The Director of Public Works shall also have supervision and management and control over the lighting system of the City of Raleigh and the management and direction of the lighting of the streets, alleys and other public places and grounds and all other places where City lights are placed. The Director of Public Works and the officials and employees of the Department of Public Works shall do and perform all other duties and services as prescribed from time to time by the City Council, or otherwise provided by law. He shall have charge and supervision of the electrical inspector, plumbing inspector and building inspector, and he shall have supervision and direction over all officers and employees in his department.  
Sec. 6.17 - DIVISIONS. 
(a)  Within the Department of Public Works and subject to the direction, supervision and management of the Director of Public Works, there shall be the following divisions: 
(1)  Division of engineering, the administrative head of which shall be the City Engineer, who shall be a civil engineer graduated from some recognized college or university, and who may be the same person holding the position of Director of Public Works. 
(2)  Division of Streets and Highways. 
(3)  Division of Sanitation. 
(4)  Division of Public Buildings. 
(5)  Division of Shops. 
(6)  Division of Cemeteries. 
(7)  Division of Markets. 
(8)  Division of Street Lighting. 
(9)  Division of Park Maintenance. 
(10)  Inspection Division. 
(11)  Such other divisions as may be from time to time authorized by the City Council. 
(b)  The powers and duties of the divisions with the Department of Public Works and the officials and employees thereof shall be such as from time to time granted, prescribed and defined by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall have the power to eliminate any of the foregoing divisions or to combine any two or more divisions. The powers and duties granted and prescribed for the Department of Public Works and for the various divisions thereof shall be in accordance with the provisions of this act and in accordance with the Constitution and Laws of the State of North Carolina.  
Sec. 6.18 - INSPECTION DIVISION. 
The Inspection Division of the Department of Public Works shall be composed of a Chief Building Inspector, an electrical inspector, a plumbing inspector, and such other inspectors and employees as shall be deemed necessary by the City Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. The inspectors and other employees of the division shall be under the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works. 
(1)  The Chief Building Inspector shall be the administrative head of the division and shall have control of the other inspectors and employees of said division under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed or authorized by the City Council, and all inspectors shall take an oath for the faithful discharge of their respective offices. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the Inspection Division to inspect all buildings which may be in the course of erection, alteration or repair and require inspection according to the building ordinances of the City; to examine and report on the condition of old buildings in said City; to supervise and inspect all electrical works and appliances used or intended for the use in the manufacture or supplying or receiving of electricity within the City, either for light, heat or power; to inspect all plumbing work, water fixtures and sewer connections constructed or being constructed in said City, or outside the City, where same is connected either to the water or sewer system of the City of Raleigh, and to require the same to conform with the ordinances of the City. No building or other structures shall be constructed or repaired within the limits of the City, unless and until a permit therefor has been issued by the Chief Building Inspector; provided, that the City Council may, by ordinance, regulate the requirements for building permits with reference to the construction or repair of buildings or other structures as to cost thereof. The City Council may require the payment of reasonable fees for the issuance and procurement of such permits which shall be payable at the time of the issuance of same. 
(3)  The Chief Building Inspector and his assistants shall perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council, and they shall be vested with all the power now or hereafter granted by the general laws of the State of North Carolina to such municipal inspectors, and they shall see that all ordinances enacted by the City Council are complied with, with respect to this division. 
(4)  Examinations for licensing of plumbers, electricians and other trades connected with the building industry shall be as prescribed by ordinances of the City Council, and the Inspection Division shall collect the application fees and shall deposit such funds according to the rules and regulations as given by the City Manager and City Accountant.  
Sec. 6.19 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY; CREATED; PERSONNEL; FUNCTION. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Department of Public Safety of the City of Raleigh, and said department shall consist of a Director of Public Safety, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as may be deemed necessary by the City Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council, and there shall be such divisions within the department as may be established by this act and by the City Council. 
(b)  Subject to the legislative control of the City Council, the Director of Public Safety, under the supervision and direction of the City Manager, shall have control, management and direction of: the Police Division, which may continue to be known as the Police Department; the Identification Bureau; the Fire Division, which may continue to be known as the Fire Department; and such other divisions as may be established by law or by the City Council. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, and the head of any other division within the Department of Public Safety shall be subject to the immediate direction and supervision of the Director of Public Safety. 
(c)  If the City Council shall so determine by resolution or otherwise, the City Manager may exercise and perform the powers and duties of the Director of Public Safety, and that position shall not otherwise be filled until further authorized by the City Council.  
Sec. 6.20 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY. 
(a)  The Director of Public Safety shall have charge of the police force, subject to the supervision and direction of the City Manager, and shall have power to temporarily supplant the Chief of Police and take charge of the department, and shall at all times have power to give direction to the officers and employees in the Police Department, and his direction shall be binding upon all such officers and employees. 
(b)  He shall have charge of the police stations, jails, and property and apparatus connected therewith, including City ambulance and patrol wagons used in connection with his department. 
(c)  He shall have supervision and control, subject to the supervision and direction of the City Manager, of the Fire Department, of all firemen, officers and employees therein or connected therewith, and of all fire stations, property and apparatus used in connection with the Fire Department; and of the fire alarm system, and all property and apparatus connected therewith. 
(d)  He shall have power to temporarily supersede the Chief of the Fire Department, and his orders to said department and all employees therein shall be binding upon said department. 
(e)  He shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all ordinances and resolutions relating to traffic on the public streets, alleys, and public ways, on and across railway lines, and through and over the cemetery ways, public parks and other public places. 
(f)  He shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all laws, ordinances, and others relating to public health and sanitation, and all health officers and employees of the City shall be under his supervision. It shall be the duty of the City Council to pass such ordinances, rules and regulations, and employ such persons as necessary to preserve and protect public health. He shall be charged, through his department, with the enforcement of all quarantine regulations, and with suppressing and removing conditions on private property within the City that are a menace to health or public safety. He shall coordinate his activities referred to in this paragraph with the Chief Health Officer. 
(g)  He shall be authorized to enter upon private premises for the purpose of discharging the duties imposed upon him, and he shall cause to be abated all nuisances which may endanger or affect the health of the City, and generally do all things, subject to the legislative control of the City Council, that may be necessary and expedient for the promotion of health and the suppression of disease. 
(h)  He shall perform all other services ordered by the City Council, or that may be ordered by the City Council, not herein expressly conferred upon some other department.  
Sec. 6.21 - POLICE DEPARTMENT; CREATED; PERSONNEL. 
There is hereby created, within the Department of Public Safety, a Police Department (or division), which shall be composed of a Chief of Police, under the Director of Public Safety, and such other officers and employees as shall be deemed necessary by the City Council. The salaries of the Chief of Police and of the other officers and employees of the department or division shall be fixed by the City Council. The Chief of Police may or may not be chosen from the officers of the Police Department. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(q))  
Sec. 6.22 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND MEMBERS OF DEPARTMENT. 
(a)  The Chief of Police, acting under the Director of Public Safety, shall have the supervision and control of the police force, and it shall be his duty to report to the Director of Public Safety any failure of duty on the part of any member of the police force. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that all laws and ordinances of the City are enforced and to do all such things as may be required of him by ordinances adopted by the City Council or by the Director of Public Safety. The Chief of Police and each member of the police force shall have the same power and authority as are vested in sheriffs and constables for the preservation of the peace of the City; such power and authority to be exercised by them not only in the corporate limits, but within all territory extending one mile in all directions from and beyond the corporate limits of the City (and on any rights-of-way, easements, or property of the City without the corporate limits). They shall execute all process legally directed to them by any court and in the execution thereof shall have the same powers that sheriffs and constables have in the discharge of like duties. 
(b)  The City Council may make rules and regulations for the government and direction of the police officers of the City or may delegate such power to the Director of Public Safety. The City Council may require the entire police force to wear badges, and to be so armed and uniformed as to be readily recognized by the public as peace officers; provided, that the Director of Public Safety, or the Chief of Police, when either deems it necessary, may authorize any such officer to be on duty in plain clothes. The police of the City shall have power to do whatever may be necessary to preserve the good order and peace of the City and secure the inhabitants from personal violence and their property from loss or injuries. 
(c)  When funds shall have been appropriated for the purpose, and when considered expedient and in the public interest, the Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the City Manager, may employ temporarily, for a period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months, persons to obtain information regarding criminal activity within the City; provided, however, that there shall not be any re-employment of any such person at any time within a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the termination of a previous term of such temporary employment; provided, further, that such persons so employed may, but shall not be required to, take and subscribe the same oath required of regular police officers of the City and if so sworn shall have all of the powers, authority and duties of regular police officers of the City; provided, further, that such persons so employed shall not be subject to the Civil Service Act applicable to policemen and firemen of the City. Such persons so employed shall be subject to the orders and direction of the Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police and the City Manager. 
(d)  The Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, and each member of the police force, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, shall be required to take and subscribe before the Mayor, or some other officers authorized to administer oaths in such cases, the oath prescribed for public officers, and an oath that he will faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office according to law, which said oath shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered in the book with the oaths of the members of the City Council and other officers of the City. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 107, §1; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(r))  
Sec. 6.23 - COMMITMENTS TO COUNTY JAIL. 
The keeper of the common jail of Wake County may receive into the common jail of said County, without a mittimus, any person taken up in the nighttime by the City police force, and to keep such person safely until the following morning, when such offender shall be brought out for trial; and for such services the jailer shall be entitled to have such fees as are allowed him by law in like cases; provided, the City may provide and use a prison for the confinement of prisoners as provided by law.  
Sec. 6.24 - FIRE DEPARTMENT. 
(a)  There is hereby created, within the Department of Public Safety, a Fire Department (or division), which shall be composed of a Chief of the Fire Department (or division), and such other officers and employees as shall be deemed necessary by the City Council, whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(b)  The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the discipline and efficiency of the Fire Department. All orders shall pass through him and he shall see that all orders, rules and regulations applicable to the Fire Department are fully carried out and performed. Subject to the legislative control of the City Council, rules and regulations shall be made by the Chief and approved by the Director of Public Safety and the City Manager and the same shall be published and each member of the department shall familiarize himself with such rules and regulations. 
(c)  The Fire Department shall protect the lives and property of the people. In case of an emergency, the Chief of the Fire Department may cause the blowing up, or pulling down or destroying of any house or houses, and no person shall be held liable civilly or criminally for acting in such cases in obedience to such order. 
(d)  The Chief of the Fire Department and the other officers of the department shall have full police powers during fires, and are authorized to make arrests for interference with their operations. 
(e)  In the event of an alarm of fire, the apparatus of the Fire Department shall have the exclusive right-of-way in and upon the streets, alleys, squares and railroad crossings in going to any fire. 
(f)  The Fire Department shall have the same jurisdiction outside the City limits, as within, upon City owned, leased or controlled property, and as provided by the general laws of North Carolina. 
(g)  The Chief of the Fire Department shall perform all duties under the general laws as the same are now or may hereafter be enacted with respect to the inspection of buildings. 
(h)  The Chief of the Fire Department shall have authority to make promotions and demotions of members in the department subject to the Civil Service Act applicable to the Police and Fire Departments of the City of Raleigh.  
Sec. 6.25 - CIVIL SERVICE ACT NOT REPEALED. 
Nothing in this act shall repeal or amend any of the provisions of Chapter Fifty of the Private Laws of North Carolina 1935, being the Civil Service Act relating to policemen and firemen of the City of Raleigh.  
Sec. 6.26 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES; CREATED; PERSONNEL; FUNCTION. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Department of Public Utilities of the City of Raleigh, which shall consist of a Director of Public Utilities, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as may be deemed necessary by the City Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(b)  The Director of Public Utilities shall have the management, and supervision of, and shall be responsible for the proper operation and control of, the entire waterworks system and sewerage system of the City of Raleigh, and any and all other public utility systems which the City may lawfully acquire, construct, maintain and operate. 
(c)  He shall have charge of the watersheds from which the City takes its supply of water, pumping stations, pipe lines, filtering apparatus, and all other things connected with or incident to the proper supply of water and the disposal of sewage for the City of Raleigh. It shall be his duty to act for the City, subject to the legislative control of the City Council, in securing all lands, streams, and rights-of-way and easements connected with and necessary to the supply of water and to the disposal of sewage for the City. He shall have supervision and control of all buildings, grounds, and apparatus connected therewith and incident to the furnishing of water for the City and the operation of the sewerage system. 
(d)  He shall superintend the erection of water tanks, and laying of water lines and sewer lines and the operation thereof. 
(e)  The Director of Public Utilities and the other officers and employees of the department and of the various divisions thereof shall have such other powers and duties and functions as may be provided and required by the City Council and as may be otherwise provided by law.  
Sec. 6.27 - DIVISIONS. 
(a)  There shall be such divisions within the Department of Public Utilities as may be authorized by the City Council, including but not limited to the following divisions: administrative, engineering, water operations, sewer operations, water and sewer collections, and such other divisions as may be deemed necessary or expedient by the City Council; provided, that any division may be eliminated or may be combined with any one or more of the other divisions by appropriate action by the City Council. 
(b)  In the event the City Council shall provide for a special collector to collect and receive fees, charges, rents and other revenues payable to the City in connection with the operation of the public utilities of the City, as authorized by §68 [6.9] of this Act, then such special collector shall be the administrative head of the Collections Division of the Department of Public Utilities and he and the employees of the division shall be under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public Utilities.  
Sec. 6.28 - CITY-OWNED UTILITIES; ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF WATER, SEWER AND OTHER UTILITY SYSTEMS. 
The City shall have the power to acquire, provide, construct, establish, own, maintain and operate its own light and waterworks system and sewerage system, and to furnish water, light and sewerage service to the citizens and residents of the City; and to furnish such services or any of them to any person, firm or corporation outside the corporate limits, where any such service is available, upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the City Council, in its discretion; and the City Council shall have full and complete control, supervision and management of said public utility systems and each of them. The City is authorized to make special assessments following the procedures provided by the General Statutes against benefited property within its corporate limits for constructing, reconstructing, extending and otherwise building or improving water lines and sanitary sewer lines. The City shall not be under any legal obligation to extend or render any services to anyone outside the corporate limits, except as may be required by contract lawfully made by the City. Upon annexation of any area to its corporate limits, the City is authorized to make special assessments against benefited property for water lines and sanitary sewer lines which were extended to said area at any time prior to its annexation. The City shall not in any case be liable to any person, firm or corporation, resident or nonresident, for damages for a failure to furnish a sufficient supply or particular quality of either water, sewer service, or light for any purpose. The City Council shall have the power to adopt such rules and regulations as may be considered necessary or expedient, in the discretion of the City Council, to provide for the protection, maintenance, management and operation of such systems of the City, and may appoint special officers to enforce the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Raleigh, the laws of the State of North Carolina, and the applicable rules and regulations of the State Board of Health. Such special officers shall be vested with the authority of peace officers within, but only within, the area to which they are assigned. 
(S.L. 1957, Ch. 122, §1; S.L. 1975, Ch. 561, §9)  
Sec. 6.29 - ACQUISITION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND OTHER PROPERTY; CONDEMNATION POWERS. 
The City Council shall have full power to acquire and hold rights-of-way, water rights, sewerage outlets, and other property necessary or proper in connection with the ownership, maintenance or operation of any of the above named utility systems, both within and without the corporate limits. The City shall have power to condemn rights-of-way, easements, water rights, lands, sewerage outlets, and other property within and without the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of obtaining, storing, maintaining and furnishing a pure and adequate water supply, and of furnishing lights for the City and its citizens, and for the purpose of furnishing sewerage disposal service and sewerage treatment services for the City and its citizens. The condemnation proceedings for any such purpose or purposes shall be the same as are provided for the condemnation of land for street purposes by this act or by the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
Annotation: Taylor v. Raleigh, 290 N.C. 608, 626-27, 227 S.E.2d 576 (1976). 
Cross reference: As to condemnation generally, see §6.43.  
Sec. 6.30 - SAMECONNECTIONS WITH SEWERS. 
The City Council may require all owners of improved property which may be located upon or near any line of the sewerage system of the City, within the corporate limits, to connect with such sewerage line or system all water closets, toilets, bathtubs, lavatories, sinks, and drains upon their respective properties or premises, so that their contents may be made to empty into such sewerage system.  
Sec. 6.31 - CHARGES FOR UTILITY SERVICES. 
The City Council is hereby authorized to fix and prescribe such rates of charges for water, light and sewerage service, and for connections with any water or sewer line, forming a part of or connected with the water or sewerage system of the City, and for inspection services, such rates of charges to be prescribed in the discretion of the City Council; provided that the rates may be graduated according to classes of service, quantity of consumption, or otherwise, as determined by the City Council, but the rates within any particular classification shall be uniform and applicable alike to all consumers within any such classification; provided, further, however, that for connections, inspections and/or service supplied to persons, firms and corporations outside the corporate limits of the City, the City Council may fix and prescribe a different and higher rate and charge from that charged within the corporate limits.  
Sec. 6.32 - SUFFICIENCY OF CHARGES; ACCOUNTING PRACTICES. 
(a)  The City Council shall fix and prescribe such rates and charges as will provide annually for the payment of the annual debt service requirements on existing bonded debt for such waterworks system, sewerage system and lighting system, and repairs, maintenance, enlargement, extension, and operation of any such system or systems. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the City Council and the City Accountant, the City Treasurer and other officers and employees handling moneys derived from the operation of the public utilities of the City, to keep a separate statement and account of the moneys received by the City from the waterworks system, sewerage system, and any other utility system operated by the City; and it shall be the duty of the City Council to give preference to the waterworks, sewerage, and other City utility systems over the other departments of the City in such fund; provided, however, that the City Council may take reasonable appropriations annually from the revenues received from the operation of the water, sewer, and other utilities of the City to the General Fund account of the City, based, however, upon services rendered to the Department of Public Utilities by the various officials, employees, and departments whose compensation and operating costs and expenses are payable from General Fund revenues of the City, as determined by the City Council.  
Sec. 6.33 - COLLECTION OF CHARGES. 
(a)  The City Council shall fix the time or times when the water and/or sewer service charges shall become due and payable, and in case any such charge is not paid within ten days after it becomes due, the same shall become a lien upon the property where said water is used and with which said water and/or sewer connections are made; and the same may at any time therefore be collected, either by suit in the name of the City or by the collector of taxes for the City, by the sale of the property upon which said lien attaches, at the courthouse door in the City of Raleigh, after advertising the same thirty days in some newspaper published in the City of Raleigh; and the said sale shall be made under the same rules and regulations, and subject to the same costs and penalties and to the same rights of redemption as are provided for the foreclosure of the lien on real estate for taxes. Upon failure of the owner of the property for which water or sewer is furnished, under the rules and regulations of the City Council, to pay charges when due, then the City Council, or its agent or employees, may cut off the water from the said property; and when so cut off it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, other than the City Council, or its agents or employees, to turn on said water to said property, or to use the same in connection with the said property, without having first paid said charges and obtained permission from the City, through its Department of Public Utilities, to turn on said water; and any person, firm, or corporation convicted of the violation of any one of the provisions contained in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined not exceeding fifty dollars ($50) or imprisoned not exceeding thirty days. 
(b)  Where the water may be cut off under the provisions of this section for the failure of the occupant of the premises to pay the charges for water and/or sewer service, and the occupant is not the owner of the premises but occupies the premises as a tenant, there shall be no lien against the premises, and it shall not be lawful for the City to require payment of such delinquent bill before turning on the water at the instance of a new and different tenant or occupant of said premises, but this provision shall not apply in cases where the premises are occupied by two or more tenants serviced by the same water meter.  
Sec. 6.34 - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Department of Parks and Recreation of the City of Raleigh which shall consist of a Director of Parks and Recreation and other such officers and employees and divisions as may be deemed necessary by the City Council, and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council, such officers and employees may include persons appointed to enforce ordinances of the City of Raleigh and Statutes of the State of North Carolina on those properties under control of the Department of Parks and Recreation; and on said property said employees when duly appointed and sworn shall have the same power and duty as would any peace officer. There may be such divisions as established from time to time by the City Council in its discretion. 
(b)  Subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager, and subject to the legislative control of the City Council, the Director of Parks and Recreation and his said department shall have the following powers and duties: To control, manage, and operate the amusement and recreation parks and playgrounds of the City in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by the City Council; to plan, organize, supervise, and sponsor programs of public recreation for the best interests of the City and its citizens; and to operate swimming pools, baseball grounds, tennis courts, and such other facilities for recreation or play as may be authorized and directed by the City Council; and to have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be authorized and directed by the City Council or as otherwise by law provided. 
(c)  The City Council shall have power to create and appoint members to a parks and recreation advisory commission or committee, which shall have such powers and functions and be constituted as to membership, terms and organization, as may be prescribed by the City Council by ordinance or resolution. 
(S.L. 1971, Ch. 1209, §1(c)) 
Amendment note: 1971 Session Laws, Ch. 1209, §1(c), amended §6.34 by adding to the first sentence the words beginning, "such officers and employees . . . ".  
Sec. 6.35 - HEALTH DEPARTMENT. 
(a)  The City is hereby authorized to create, pursuant to the general laws of North Carolina, a Health Department, which when created shall have as its administrative head a Chief Health Officer, and such other officers and employees as may be deemed necessary by the City Council, and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(b)  The Chief Health Officer shall have in his charge all matters pertaining to the health of the City and shall perform the duties required of him under such general rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council, and he, and any members of his department, shall have full power and authority to enter all premises affecting the health of the citizens of Raleigh, within or without the corporate limits of the City of Raleigh, and he shall be responsible for enforcing the laws and ordinances made for the general public health of the City. 
(c)  The Chief Health Officer, the Chief of Police, or other officer or officers who may be designated for this purpose by the City Council or the City Manager, shall have power summarily to remove, abate, or remedy, or cause to be removed, abated, or remedied, everything within or without the City limits which is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health of the citizens of the City of Raleigh, and the expenses of such action shall be paid by the person in default, and if not paid shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the trouble arose, and shall be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(d)  The Chief Health Officer of the City of Raleigh shall also perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council, and he is hereby vested with the powers and obligations conferred and imposed upon municipal officials by the general laws of the State of North Carolina as the same now are or may be hereafter enacted.  
Sec. 6.36 - HEALTH AND SANITATION; POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL. 
The City Council is hereby given, within the corporate limits of the City of Raleigh (and when exercised so as not to conflict with the rules and regulations of the Wake County Health Department and health officer within one mile in all directions beyond the boundaries of the City), all the power and authority that is now or may hereafter be given by law to the County Board of Health or County Health Officer or physician, and such further powers and authority as will best preserve the health of the citizens. The City Council is hereby given power to make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the State, for the preservation of the health of the inhabitants of the City as to the City may seem right and proper. The City Council may establish and maintain a hospital or hospitals, or pesthouses, slaughterhouses, rendering plants, incinerators and crematories in the City of Raleigh, or within three (3) miles thereof; may stop, detain, examine, or keep in a pesthouse or houses of detention persons having or suspected of having any infectious, contagious, or other communicable disease; may quarantine the City or any part thereof; may cause all persons in the City limits to be vaccinated; may, without incurring liability to the owner, remove, fumigate or destroy furniture, bedding, clothing, or other property which may be found to be tainted or infected with any contagious or infectious disease, and may do all other proper and reasonable things to prevent or stamp out any contagious or infectious disease, and to better preserve the health of the citizens; and all expenses incurred by the City in disinfecting or caring for any person or persons, by authority of this section, may be recovered by it from the person, persons, or property cared for; and when expense is incurred in caring for property, same shall become a lien on said property. Any person who shall attempt by force, or by threat of violence, to prevent his removal, or that of any other person, to the pesthouse, house of detention, or hospital, or who shall in any way interfere with any officer while performing any of the duties allowed by this act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Cross reference: For jurisdiction outside City, see §2.15.  
Sec. 6.37 - ZONING AND PLANNINGDEPARTMENT OF PLANNING. 
(a)  There is hereby created a Department of Planning of the City of Raleigh, and said department shall consist of a director of planning, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as may be deemed necessary by the City Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. The Director of Planningshall be appointed by the City Manager and he shall be a graduate civil and planning engineer. 
(b)  Subject to the legislative control of the City Council and subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager, the Director of Planningshall have the following powers and duties: To make a careful study of the resources, possibilities and needs of the City of Raleigh, particularly with respect to conditions which may be injurious to the public welfare and to make plans for the development of the City; to draft plans, compile population trends; to consult with and cooperate with civic organizations, subdivision developers, industrial organizations and other private business and individual enterprises; to obtain and prepare engineering cost and statistical information necessary or advisable in connection with proposed plans of construction, repair and maintenance; to make surveys and comparisons for the purpose of recommending the needs for and appropriate locations of Fire Department stations, fire hydrants and other fire fighting and prevention services, police headquarters, stations, and services, sewer outfalls and lines, water lines, streets and sidewalks, utility services, to make surveys, studies and recommendations relating to drainage, and any other matters affecting the public interest and public safety, health and welfare, to the end that the activities and projects of all of the agencies of the City may be correlated and carried out under a comprehensive, definite plan and purpose rather than as separate disintegrated and disassociated fragments; and to perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council. 
(c)  The Director of Planningshall have no authority over the operation of any other department of the City, and the several operating departments of the City shall continue to make plans for their respective spheres of activity; but the Department of Planning is created for the purpose of over-all planning designed to assist the several operating departments of the City in formulating a public policy which will treat the problems of the community and of the municipal government as a closely knit whole. The Department of Planning and its director shall have the duty of integrating the plans and projects of the several operating departments of the City government and the projects and plans of private business organizations, individuals and citizens and organizing and directing a systematic program in which the plans of each department of the City and of private enterprise, organizations and citizens may be directed, to the end that the future development and planning of the City will promote the public interest, welfare, health and safety. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the director of planning to study the existing zoning ordinances and regulations; to prepare or to have prepared, a land use plan, and then to make recommendations to the City Council as to any changes, alterations, additions or revisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(e)  The Director of Planningshall consult with and advise and otherwise cooperate with the members of the City Planning Commission. 
(f)  The Director of Planningshall from time to time make surveys and investigations to determine whether the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Raleigh are being violated; and it shall be his duty, when violations are discovered, to take necessary and proper proceedings to enforce or require enforcement of the zoning ordinances. 
(g)  The City Council, by ordinance, may adopt such additional rules and regulations as considered necessary for the control and functioning of the Department of Planning and its director. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(s))  
Sec. 6.38 - SAMEPLANNING COMMISSION. 
(a)  There is hereby created the City Planning Commission of the City of Raleigh, which shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the City Council from among the citizens of the City (none of whom shall hold any other public office or position within the City), whose terms shall be four (4) years. Any vacancy during the unexpired term of any member shall be filled by the City Council for the remainder of the term. The members shall serve without compensation, except that the City Council may prescribe and authorize the payment of a per diem allowance for attendance upon meetings not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per member, per meeting. 
(b)  The City Planning Commission, as soon as practicable after its original appointment, shall meet and organize by electing one of its members as Chairman and one of its members as secretary, each of whom shall serve for a term of one (1) year and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. During the month of July of each year the City Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and secretary, each of whom shall serve for a term of one year and until his successor has been elected and qualified. The City Planning Commission may establish its own rules governing meetings and procedures, subject to the legislative control of the City Council; and the City Planning Commission shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as may be determined by the commission for the transaction of its business and the commission may meet at such other times as its members may determine. 
(c)  The City Planning Commission shall have no power to incur any debt or obligation on behalf of the City of Raleigh nor shall it have any power to make any expenditure of funds of the City of Raleigh unless such funds are specifically provided for in the budget of the City of Raleigh and appropriation made for such purposes by the City Council. 
(d)  The City Planning Commission shall study the resources, possibilities and needs of the City and shall have power to propose and recommend plans and maps for the systematic future development and betterment of the City, and from time to time shall have power to recommend changes in the same when changes are considered advisable; and to this end the City Planning Commission shall have power to recommend that the City be subdivided into districts or zones and shall cause to be prepared maps and plans of same, specifying and regulating the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the per centage of a lot that may be occupied, size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the manner of construction of the buildings thereafter to be erected, altered or reconstructed in such district or zone, the density of population and the location and uses of buildings, structures and lands for trade, industry, business, residence or other purposes, and establishing rules governing building lines, and the City Planning Commission shall submit the same to the City Council for its approval and adoption, either in whole or in part as may be determined by the City Council in its discretion, and with such amendments as the City Council may deem proper. The City Planning Commission is authorized to make a study of the existing parks of the City and to submit plans for the development of same, and locate new areas for park purposes and recommend to the City Council the acquisition of same, and to submit plans for the development of existing playgrounds and to make recommendations for the acquisition and development of new playgrounds. 
(e)  The City Planning Commission may make recommendations for the promotion of the economic and industrial prosperity and the enhancement of the health, comfort and convenience of the citizens of the City of Raleigh. It may study and in its discretion recommend ways and means which will tend to prevent or relieve congestion, either of population or traffic, to control the fire hazard, to preserve the natural and historic features of the City, and to beautify the same. The commission may investigate, prepare surveys of and make recommendations on any matter which will, in its opinion, make the community a better place in which to live or work. Plans may be recommended by the commission for new streets, roads, boulevards, alleyways, viaducts, bridges, subways, parks, playgrounds, aviation fields, rail and bus terminals, tunnels, markets, public utilities, public buildings or any public improvements. Wherever any of the foregoing shall exist, then the City Planning Commission may make recommendations as to their respective removal, relocation, widening or extension, as occasion may suggest or necessity require. 
(f)  The City Council shall have power at any time to request the City Planning Commission to give an opinion and make recommendations upon any matter pertaining to the powers and duties of the City Planning Commission. 
(g)  Before any new street is opened, or any existing street is extended, or before any new subdivision for residence, business or industrial uses is made, the person or persons opening such street or proposing such new subdivision for residence, business, industrial or other purposes shall submit a detailed plan with blue prints and other necessary data to such City Planning Commission. It shall be the duty of said commission to carefully examine the plans for such subdivisions as regards their nature and purpose, the number, width, character, and location of streets and alleys, and the size, material, and manner of laying of water mains and sewer lines; and transmit such application, with all data, to the governing body, with its recommendations in writing. The jurisdiction of such commission concerning the regulation of subdivisions shall extend one mile beyond the corporate limits of the City. The commission shall have the right to make recommendations for the correction, widening, or relocating of any interior street to the governing body. 
(h)  The City Council is hereby authorized and empowered, but shall not be required, to make provision in the City budget and to make appropriations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(i)  The City Council, in its discretion, is hereby authorized and empowered in the exercise of the police powers of the City, to pass and adopt and to amend and/or repeal all ordinances and resolutions, and to do all things necessary, to carry out the recommendations that may be made by the City Planning Commission, under the provisions and powers of this section, where not contrary to law. 
(S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(t))  
Sec. 6.39 - ZONING REGULATIONS. 
(a)  For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the City, the City Council is hereby authorized and empowered by ordinance to regulate and restrict the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the per centage of a lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, business, residence or other purposes, including off-street parking of vehicles. Such ordinances may provide that the board of adjustment may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate principles, standards, rules, conditions and safeguards set forth in the ordinance, make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent. Such ordinances may provide that the board of adjustment may authorize variances from the strict application of the regulations in such situations and subject to such limitations as may be set forth in the ordinance. 
(b)  For any and all said purposes and under a comprehensive plan, the City Council may divide the municipality into districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purpose of this section; and within such districts the City Council may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair and use of buildings, structures, and land. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts; however, the City Council may provide for the creation of conditional use zoning districts, and overlay zoning districts and transitional zoning regulations, in addition to general use districts. 
It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit the City to create, through the legislative process, general use districts, in which a variety of uses are permitted; conditional use districts, in which limited uses are permitted only upon approval by the City; and overlay zoning districts, which are applied coincidental with a general or conditional use district. Said overlay zoning districts may impose additional regulations on some property within the underlying general or conditional use district and not on all properties within those districts. 
A person petitioning for rezoning of a tract of land where conditional use districts or overlay districts are authorized by ordinance, may elect to request a general use district, a conditional use district, or an overlay district for the tract. 
If the petitioner elects to petition for the general use or overlay district zoning, and if the petition is approved, the rezoned property may be used for any of the uses permitted in the applicable general use or overlay district. If the petitioner elects to petition for conditional use district zoning, the petition must specify the actual use or uses, and all other development regulations authorized by State law, which are intended for the property specified in the petition. The intended use or uses and development regulations must be permitted in the corresponding general use district. If the petition is for conditional use district zoning, the City Council is to approve or disapprove the petition on the basis of the specific use or uses and development regulations requested. 
(c)  Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout such municipality. 
(d)  The City Council shall by ordinance provide for the manner in which such regulations and restrictions and the boundaries of such districts shall be determined, established and enforced, and from time to time amended, supplemented or changed. No such regulation, restriction or boundary or any amendment, supplement or change therein shall become effective until the same shall have been submitted to the City Planning Commission for its recommendations and until such recommendations have been made to the City Council, and until after a public hearing in relation thereto shall be held by and before the City Council at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A notice of such public hearing shall be published once a week for two (2) successive calendar weeks, immediately preceding the date of such hearing, in a newspaper published in the City and qualified to publish legal advertising, said notice to be published the first time not less than fifteen days prior to the date fixed for said hearing. 
(e)  Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. In case, however, of a protest against such change filed at or before the public hearing by the governing body of the municipality, required to be held by G.S. 160-175 (G.S. 160A-381385), and signed by the owners of twenty per cent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent thereto, either in the rear, in the front, or on either side thereof extending one hundred feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto across a street therefrom, extending one hundred feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the City Council. The provisions of this section relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments. 
(f)  The City Planning Commission shall have power to make recommendations concerning the boundaries of the various districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein. The City Planning Commission shall hold public hearings on proposed regulations, restrictions and boundaries, and proposed amendments, changes and modifications therein before submitting its final report thereon to the City Council, and the City Council shall not take action until it has received the final report of the City Planning Commission. 
(S.L. 1953, Ch. 194, §1; S.L. 1959, Ch. 812, §1; S.L. 1985, Ch. 49, §1) 
Amendment note: 1985 Session Laws, Ch. 49, §1, amended §100(h) of Ch. 1184 Session Laws 1949, subsection (b) of this section, by replacing the period after the last sentence with a semicolon and adding the remaining language in that paragraph and adding the next three paragraphs in that subsection.  
Sec. 6.40 - SAMEBOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. 
The City Council shall have the power to create and appoint the members of a board of adjustment for the City of Raleigh pursuant to the provisions of G.S. 160-178, as amended from time to time.  
Sec. 6.41 - CARE FUND FOR CEMETERIES. 
The City Council is authorized to create a fund to be known as the perpetual care fund for the cemetery or cemeteries, for the purpose of perpetually caring for and beautifying the cemetery or cemeteries, and said fund shall be kept by the City as is provided for bequests and gifts for cemetery purposes; and the City Council may make contracts with plat or space owners in the cemetery or cemeteries, obligating the City to keep up and maintain said lots or spaces, in perpetuity, upon payment of such sum or sums as may be fixed by the City Council; and the City Council is further authorized and empowered to accept gifts and bequests for such purposes, or upon such other trusts as the donors may prescribe; and the City Council is authorized to set aside for said perpetual care fund an amount not exceeding twenty-five (25) per cent of the proceeds of sale of cemetery lots. The principal of said funds so appropriated by the City Council for the caring for the cemetery or cemeteries shall be held by the City Council for caring for and beautifying the cemetery or cemeteries, and improving the same. The income from the said fund heretofore or hereafter made shall be used for such purpose of carrying out contracts with the individual plat or space owners for perpetual care of individual plats and spaces. Any gift heretofore or hereafter made to and received by the City, or any of its officers, shall be held and used as a sacred trust fund for the purpose and upon the conditions named in such gifts or bequests, and any and all such funds shall be kept or invested separate and shall not be used for any other purpose, or by the City in its other affairs. The City Treasurer shall keep a separate account of the cemetery funds, and a still further separate account of all special gifts or bequests made by persons for and in connection with the cemetery or cemeteries, and particular lots therein. The City Council shall have the power to make rules and regulations and adopt ordinances for the carrying out of the duties imposed by this section.  
Sec. 6.42 - TAXATION. 
(a)  It shall be the power of the City of Raleigh and the duty of the City Council of the City of Raleigh, annually, to levy taxes that will raise sufficient funds for the operation and management of the affairs of the City, and shall levy and collect the same in accordance with the provisions as now or may hereafter exist under the general laws of the State of North Carolina; and said City shall have the further power to levy and collect such further taxes as may be approved by a vote of the electorate, and in accordance with such authority with respect thereto as may now or hereafter be granted to said City; provided, all polls and property taxable within the City of Raleigh shall be listed and valued and all property assessed as provided for in the listing, valuation and assessing of the same under the laws which may now or hereafter be applicable to Wake County and/or the City of Raleigh, and said City may levy and collect such license and privilege taxes as may be provided by law and ordinances of the City Council. 
(b)  The ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Raleigh shall constitute a lien upon personal and real property, as provided by the general laws of the State of North Carolina, as the same may now or hereafter be enacted, and the City of Raleigh shall enforce and perfect the same upon personal and real property under the provisions and procedure which may now or hereafter be outlined and provided for in the general laws of the State of North Carolina; provided, further, that in the event that the City of Raleigh shall become the purchaser and owner of any real property in the enforcement of such tax liens, said real property so acquired may be sold at public sale at any time thereafter by the City of Raleigh.  
Sec. 6.43 - CONDEMNATION POWERS AND PROCEDURES. 
(a)  In addition to the foregoing powers and as alternative powers and methods of procedure for the exercise of the power of eminent domain, the City of Raleigh is hereby authorized to use, in the exercise of the power of eminent domain for any lawful purpose, the procedure and authority prescribed in Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as now or hereafter amended; provided, that whenever therein the words "commission" or "highway commission" or "state highway commission" appear, they shall be deemed to include the "City of Raleigh," and whenever therein the words "director," "Chairman," or "Director of Highways" or "Director of the Highway Commission" or "Chairman of the Highway Commission" appear, they shall be deemed to include the "City Manager." 
(b)  The exercise of eminent domain power under this section shall not apply to property of public utilities. 
(S.L. 1955, Ch. 145, §1; S.L. 1973, Ch. 319, §1(u)) 
Editor's note: 1981 Session Laws, Ch. 919, repealed the grant of condemnation authority set out above and instituted uniform eminent domain procedures for all municipalities, codified as Chapter 40A of the General Statutes. 1991 Session Laws, Ch. 312, §1, which amends §2.14(32), restored the right of the City to use G.S. Ch. 136 condemnation procedures.  
Sec. 6.44 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, ETC. 
(a)  Petition Unnecessary. 
In addition as now or may hereafter be granted to the City for making street or sidewalk improvements, the City Council is hereby authorized to order such improvements and to assess the total cost thereof against abutting properties without the necessity of a petition of property owners. 
(b)  Sidewalk Repairs. 
The Council is further authorized to order or to make sidewalk repairs and driveway repairs across sidewalks according to standards and specifications of the City, and to assess the total cost thereof against abutting properties without the necessity of a petition of property owners. 
(c)  Sidewalk on One Side of Street. 
If a sidewalk is constructed on only one side of the street, the cost thereof may be assessed against the property abutting on both sides of the street, unless there already exists a sidewalk on the other side of the street, the total cost of which was assessed against the abutting property. 
(d)  Notice to Property Owners. 
Before the City Council shall order improvements to be made pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section it shall hold a public hearing thereon, and shall give the owners of the property to be assessed, written notice of such public hearing and the proposed action. 
(e)  Assessment Procedure and Effect. 
In ordering street or sidewalk improvements or sidewalk repairs and assessing the cost thereof, the Council shall follow the procedures provided by the General Statutes for street and sidewalk improvements, except those provisions relating to the petition of property owners and the sufficiency thereof. The effect of levying assessments pursuant to this act shall for all purposes be the same as if they were levied under authority of the General Statutes. 
(f)  Duty of Maintenance for Driveways and Sidewalks. 
It is the duty of every property owner to maintain the sidewalks and driveways abutting his property in good repair and safe condition. 
(g)  Payment of Assessments. 
Any special assessment of the City for any purpose amounting to less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid in cash within ninety (90) days of confirmation rather than in annual installments, and shall bear interest as taxes. 
(h)  Assessment Where Street Is City Limit Line. 
In those instances where the City limit line runs along a street or road the City Council may order the improvements and assess the cost thereof against property abutting on both sides of the street as if all the abutting property were within the corporate limits. Regardless of whether the improvement is ordered pursuant to this section or other general law. 
(i)  Assessments Against Cemeteries. 
Assessments shall not be made against property owned or held for the sole purpose of burial of the dead unless the City of Raleigh assumes and pays for such assessment. 
(j)  Supplementary Authorization. 
The procedure herein outlined shall be supplementary in addition to all other procedure authorized by law relating to improvements or special assessments. 
(S.L. 1953, Ch. 96, §1; S.L. 1953, Ch. 747, §1; S.L. 1955, Ch. 672, §1; S.L. 1955, Ch. 863, §1; S.L. 1957, Ch. 489, §1; S.L. 1963, Ch. 15, §1; S.L. 1965, Ch. 221; S.L. 1965, Ch. 434, §1; S.L. 1965, Ch. 612, §1; S.L. 1971, Ch. 1209, §1(d); S.L. 1975, Ch. 561, §10; S.L. 1969, Ch. 974, §1) 
Annotation: R.R. Co. v. City of Raleigh, 277 N.C. 709, 178 S.E. 2nd 422 (1971). Exemptions from public assessments contained in the General Statutes control over local charter and local acts. 
Editor's note: 1971 Session Laws, Ch. 1209, §1(d), repealed former §6.44 entitled, "Local improvements" and enacted in lieu thereof §6.44 as herein set out.  
Sec. 6.45 - BUDGET; APPROPRIATIONS; BONDS AND NOTES; AND OTHER FINANCIAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONS. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Raleigh, the City Manager, the City Accountant, the City Clerk and the City Treasurer, are respectively vested with all of the powers and authority, and are respectively charged with the functions and duties, and are subject to the restrictions and limitations of the following general laws of the State of North Carolina, as amended: 
(b)  The Municipal Finance Act, the Fiscal Control Act, the Local Government Act, the Revenue Bond Act, the Municipal Capital Reserve Act, and all other general laws of the State applicable to the financial powers, duties and functions of municipalities and municipal financial and accounting officers. 
(c)  It shall be the ultimate responsibility of the City Manager to prepare and submit to the City Council the budget estimate as required by the Fiscal Control Act.  
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7.1 - CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST CITY; NOTICE TO CITY COUNCIL BEFORE BRINGING SUIT. 
(a)  No action shall be instituted or maintained against the City of Raleigh upon any claim or demand whatsoever, of any kind or character, until the claimant shall have first presented his or her claim or demand in writing to the City Council, who shall have declined to pay or settle the same as presented or for ten days after such presentation neglected to enter or cause to be entered upon its minutes its determination in regard thereto; but nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any statute of limitation from commencing to run at the time such claim accrued or demand arose, or in any manner interfere with its running. 
(b)  No action for damages against the City of any character whatever, to either person or property, real or personal, including damages for the taking and/or appropriation of private property of any kind, shall be instituted against the City of Raleigh, unless within ninety days after the happening, or the infliction of injury or damage to person or property, or the taking or appropriation of property, or other act of the City complained of, the complainant, his executors or administrators, shall have given notice in writing to the City Council of the City of Raleigh of such injury, damage, taking, appropriation, or other act complained of, stating in such notice the date and place of such injury or damage, the taking and appropriation of property, the manner of such infliction or other action complained of, the character of the injury or damage, and the amount of damages claimed therefor; but this shall not prevent any time of limitation prescribed by law from commencing to run at the date of the happening of such injury or damage, taking or appropriation of property, or other act complained of, or in any manner interfere with its running.  
Sec. 7.2 - COMPUTATION OF TIME. 
In all provisions of this charter and the ordinances that are now or to be hereafter enforced in the City of Raleigh, that fix any time for doing or performing any act, the time shall be eastern standard time, and all persons, firms and corporations who are granted license by the City, shall be held to have accepted the same on the conditions that the same time shall govern; provided, that in the event what is commonly known as daylight saving time shall be adopted by the City Council or otherwise by law, then in such event such time shall be considered to be in force and effect with respect to the provisions of this section in lieu of eastern standard time.  
Sec. 7.3 - CONSOLIDATION OF DEPARTMENTS. 
The City Council of the City of Raleigh is hereby authorized and empowered, in its discretion, to combine and consolidate, any two or more departments, or to discontinue any department, herewith provided for when deemed wise or expedient for saving or efficiency.  
Sec. 7.4 - PARTIAL INVALIDITY SECTION. 
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section or any part of this act shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this act, but shall be confined in its operation to the part thereof directly involved in said judgment. If any part of clause of this act shall be declared unconstitutional, and if such part so declared unconstitutional embraces subject matter controlled and provided for by any law, public or private, in effect at the time of the adoption of this act, such pre-existing laws shall continue and remain in effect, notwithstanding any repealing clause contained herein.  
Sec. 7.5 - CONFLICTING LAWS REPEALED. 
Except as specifically incorporated into the provisions of this act, the following laws are hereby repealed; Chapter 59 of the Private Laws of North Carolina 1913; Chapter 60 of the Private Laws of North Carolina 1913; Chapter 63 of the Private Laws of North Carolina 1923; Chapter 207 of the Private Laws of North Carolina, 1927; Chapter 11 of the Private Laws of North Carolina 1933; Chapter 112, Private Laws 1935; Chapter 552 of the Session Laws of North Carolina 1945; and all other laws and clauses of laws in conflict with provisions of this act are hereby repealed; provided that nothing in this act shall authorize or empower the City to fix, supervise or control the rates and services of any public utility which are now, or may hereafter be subject to jurisdiction of the North Carolina Utilities Commission, and provided that nothing in this act shall have the effect of authorizing or empowering the City to assess, levy or collect any franchise, license or privilege tax which the City is now, or may hereafter be, prohibited from assessing, levying or collecting under and by virtue of the provisions of the North Carolina Revenue Act or other public laws; provided, further, that the provisions of Chapter 246 of the Public-Local Laws of North Carolina, Extra Session 1921, insofar as applicable to the City of Raleigh, are hereby repealed; provided, however, that all powers, duties, functions and authority vested by any statute not hereby repealed, in the Board of Commissioners of the City of Raleigh, howsoever designated, or in the several commissioners of the City of Raleigh, howsoever designated, shall be vested in the City Council of the City of Raleigh and shall be performed, exercised and administered by the City Council or the City Manager of the City of Raleigh in accordance with the terms and provisions of this act.  
Sec. 7.6 - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
This act shall be in full force and effect from and after its ratification. 
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 23rd day of April 1949.  
The Charter - TABLE OF RELATED LOCAL LAWS 
Date 	Type Law 	Chapter 	Subject 	Disposition 
1840 	Priv. L. 	6 	Rex Hospital Trustees nomination 	
1887 	Pub. L. 	380 	Pollution of Walnut Creek 	
1891 	Priv. L. 	243 	Charter amendment 	
1895 	Priv. L. 	263 	Charter amendment 	
1899 	Priv. L. 	153 	Charter amendment 	
1899 	Pub. L. 	538 	Mills removed from Walnut Creek 	
1899 	Pub. L. 	704 	Sewerage system connection by NCSU 	
1905 	Priv. L. 	36 	Charter amendment 	
1907 	Priv. L. 	1 	Charter amendment 	
1913 	Priv. L. 	59 	Charter amendment 	
1927 	Priv. L. 	156 	Thoroughfare plan 	
1937 	Pub.-Local L. 	535 	Wake-Raleigh Bureau of Identification 	
1937 	Pub.-Local L. 	598 	Council appointments to County Board of Welfare 	
1939 	Pub.-Local L. 	98 	Nomination of Rex trustees 	
1939 	Pub.-Local L. 	168 	Airport authority 	
1941 	Pub. L. 	270 	Council appointments to County Board of Welfare 	
1941 	Pub.-Local L. 	292 	Condemnation of cemeteries 	
1945 	Sess. L. 	79 	Representation on RDU 	
1947 	Sess. L. 	258 	Police Chief return to ranks 	
1947 	Sess. L. 	418 	Delinquent tax adjustments 	
1947 	Sess. L. 	858 	Public property acquired by dedication 	
1949 	Sess. L. 	380 	Tax collection consolidation 	
1949 	Sess. L. 	539 	Electrical and plumbing installation inspection 	
1949 	Sess. L. 	1184 	New Charter 	1.17.6 
1951 	Sess. L. 	1132 	State-City cooperation in Long-range planning 	
1951 	Sess. L. 	1220 	Confederate Soldier's Home conveyed to City for park 	
1953 	Sess. L. 	96 	Streets classified for assessments 	6.44 
1953 	Sess. L. 	193 	Charter amendment, public contracts and purchases; procedure 	6.11 
1953 	Sess. L. 	194 	Charter amendment, zoning regulations 	6.39 
1953 	Sess. L. 	347 	Charter amendment, recall of officials 	4.2 
1953 	Sess. L. 	747 	Limited force paving 	6.44 
1953 	Sess. L. 	1130 	ABC store locations 	
1955 	Sess. L. 	145 	Charter amendment, condemnation powers and procedures 	6.43 
1955 	Sess. L. 	180 	Capital reserve fund 	
1955 	Sess. L. 	222 	Sale of City Hall property 	
1955 	Sess. L. 	627 	Charter amendment, corporate limits 	1.3 
1955 	Sess. L. 	672 	Charter amendment, forced paving 	6.44 
1955 	Sess. L. 	863 	Charter amendment, forced paving 	6.44 
1955 	Sess. L. 	921 	Subdivision regulations 	
1955 	Sess. L. 	1096 	RDU enabling act amended 	
1955 	Sess. L. 	1183 	Boxing commission 	
1955 	Sess. L. 	1184 	Volunteer police and firemen 	
1957 (extra sess. 1956) 	Sess. L. 	4 	Social security 	
1957 	Sess. L. 	107 	Charter amendment, Chief and Department of Police 	6.22 
1957 	Sess. L. 	121 	Charter amendment, appointment and removal of officers 	3.3 
1957 	Sess. L. 	122 	Charter amendment, City-owned utilities 	6.28 
1957 	Sess. L. 	341 	Charter amendment, compensation; Mayor and Council 	2.12 
1957 	Sess. L. 	455 	RDU amendment 	
1957 	Sess. L. 	489 	Forced paving 	6.44 
1957 	Sess. L. 	970 	Charter amendment, City Council, initiative and referendum 	2.4, 2.8, 2.16 
1959 	Sess. L. 	258 	Civil service 	
1959 	Sess. L. 	259 	Charter amendment, effective date of ordinances 	2.8 
1959 	Sess. L. 	642 	Research Triangle Regional Planning Commission 	
1959 	Sess. L. 	755 	RDU amendment 	
1959 	Sess. L. 	812 	Charter amendment, zoning regulations 	6.39 
1959 	Sess. L. 	813 	Charter amendment, express powers of City; employee insurance 	2.14 
1961 	Sess. L. 	220 	Charter amendment, express powers of City; advertising advantages of City to industry 	2.14 
1961 	Sess. L. 	800 	Charter amendment, power and organization of City Council; first meeting of newly elected Council 	2.3 
1961 	Sess. L. 	860 	Wake-Raleigh Bureau of Identification 	
1961 	Sess. L. 	895 	Sewerage extension assessments 	
1963 	Sess. L. 	15 	Forced paving 	6.44 
1963 	Sess. L. 	87 	Charter amendment, express powers of City; franchise license or privilege license tax 	2.14 
1963 	Sess. L. 	143 	Late tax penalties exemption 	
1963 	Sess. L. 	315 	Sewerage extension assessments 	
1963 	Sess. L. 	714 	Insurance for employees 	2.14(31) 
1963 	Sess. L. 	907 	Water contract with Brookhaven, Incorporated 	
1965 	Sess. L. 	218 	Charter amendment, public contracts and purchases, procedure 	6.116.13 
1965 	Sess. L. 	221 	Charter amendment, paving petitions 	6.44 
1965 	Sess. L. 	277 	Collection of special assessments 	
1965 	Sess. L. 	434 	Charter amendment, forced paving 	6.44 
1965 	Sess. L. 	612 	Charter amendment, sidewalk assessments 	6.44 
1965 	Sess. L. 	1002 	Council appointee on Capitol Planning Commission 	
1965 	Sess. L. 	1056 	Sewerage extension assessments 	
1967 	Sess. L. 	26 	Charter amendment, general rights and powers 	1.5 
1967 	Sess. L. 	71 	Charter amendment, express powers of City 	2.14 
1967 	Sess. L. 	741 	Charter amendment, ordinances; vote for final passage 	2.7 
1967 	Sess. L. 	781 	RDU property conveyance to state 	
1967 	Sess. L. 	915 	Charter amendment, granting of franchises 	2.11 
1967 	Sess. L. 	989 	Satellite annexation 	
1969 	Sess. L. 	58 	Voting by annexed residents 	
1969 	Sess. L. 	383 	Charter amendment, power and organization of City Council, express powers of City 	2.3, 2.14 
1969 	Sess. L. 	421 	Firemen's retirement 	
1969 	Sess. L. 	974 	Paving petitions 	
1971 	Sess. L. 	992 	Civic Center Authority 	
1971 	Sess. L. 	1154 	Joint Civil Service Act 	
1971 	Sess. L. 	1209 	Charter amendment, express powers; Department of Parks and Recreation; streets and sidewalks 	2.14, 6.34, 6.44 
1971 	Sess. L. 	1210 	Soil erosion 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	102 	Board of Education 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	174 	Annexation 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	319 	Charter amendment, various subjects 	2.2, 2.14, 3.5, 4.14.4, 5.6, 6.37, 6.38, 6.43 
1973 	Sess. L. 	221 	Airport Authority 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	334 	Board of Education 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	361 	Rex Hospital trustee 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	476 	Historic Sites Commission abolished 	
1973 	Sess. L. 	619 	Charter amendment, corporate limits 	1.3 
1973 	Sess. L. 	730 	Bingo and skilo 	
1973 (2d sess. 1974) 	Sess. L. 	850 	Charter amendment, Civic Center 	2.14 
1973 (2d sess. 1974) 	Sess. L. 	1056 	Board of Education 	
1973 (2d sess. 1974) 	Sess. L. 	1268 	Rex Hospital bonds 	
1973 (2d sess. 1974) 	Sess. L. 	1269 	Bingo and skilo 	
1973 (2d sess. 1974) 	Sess. L. 	1382 	Deer hunting with dogs 	
1975 	Sess. L. 	347 	School raffles 	
1975 	Sess. L. 	504 	Firemen's retirement 	
1975 	Sess. L. 	505 	Wake-Raleigh Bureau of Identification 	
1975 	Sess. L. 	537 	Charter amendment, community development 	2.14(77) 
1975 	Sess. L. 	561 	Charter amendments, various subjects 	2.14, 4.1, 5.3, 6.44 
1975 	Sess. L. 	595 	Ambulance service lines 	
1975 	Sess. L. 	717 	County-City school merger 	
1975 	Sess. L. 	904 	Capitol Mall 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	76 	Redevelopment Commission 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	135 	Medical Center parking deck 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	321 	Board of Education 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	350 	Wake-Raleigh Bureau of Identification 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	351 	Annexations 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	724 	Rex Hospital financing 	
1977 	Sess. L. 	1022 	Mall appropriation 	
July 5, 1978 		Ord. No. 1978-837 	Charter amendment, election methods 	2.2 
1979 	Sess. L. 	275 	Fayetteville St. Mall lease exception 	
1979 	Sess. L. 	277 	Charter amendment, parking violations 	2.14(37) 
1979 	Sess. L. 	328 	Firemen's supplemental retirement fund 	
1979 	Sess. L. 	664 	Charter amendment, campaign filing requirements 	2.8, 4.1(a) 
1979 (2d sess. 1980) 	Sess. L. 	1169 	Historic Property Commission subcommittee permits 	
1979 (2d sess. 1980) 	Sess. L. 	1275 	De-annexation of property 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	241 	Civil Service Act 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	255 	Revolvers purchased by police officers 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	556 	Wake election appeals 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	696 	Towing of vehicles from State-owned property 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	711 	Rex Hospital trustees 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	742 	Manner of election of County Board of Education 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	813 	Permits professional boxing in County 	
1981 	Sess. L. 	992 	Charter amendment, economic development projects land acquisition and disposal 	2.14(76) 
1981 	Sess. L. 	1021 	Methodist Home property appropriation 	
1981 (1982 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	1166 	Charter amendment, economic development projects land acquisition and disposal time extension 	2.14(76) 
1981 (1982 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	1192 	Raleigh/Durham Airport Authority Condemnation 	
1981 (1982 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	1250 	Auto tax increase 	
1983 	Sess. L. 	75 	Auto tax to $5 	
1983 	Sess. L. 	159 	Charter amendment, economic development projects land acquisition and disposal time extension 	2.14(76) 
1983 	Sess. L. 	211 	Utility assessments formula 	
1983 	Sess. L. 	272 	Charter amendment, public improvements site reservations/street construction outside corporate limits 	2.14(78), (79) 
1985 	Sess. L. 	35 	Charter amendment, economic development projects land acquisition and disposal time extension 	2.14(76) 
1985 	Sess. L. 	49 	Charter amendment, zoning 	6.39(b) 
1985 	Sess. L. 	281 	Authorizes flexible procedures for disposition of redevelopment property 	
1985 	Sess. L. 	498 	Charter amendment, site plans, subdivisions 	2.14(63), (80)(84) 
1985 	Sess. L. 	556 	Eminent domain powers for open space 	
1986 	Sess. L. 	850 	Authorizes levy of occupancy taxes 	
1987 	Sess. L. 	91 	Removal of certain property from city limits 	
1987 	Sess. L. 	365 	Charter amendment, economic development projects land acquisition and disposal time extension 	2.14(76) 
1987 	Sess. L. 	514 	Charter amendment, facility fee enabling legislation 	2.14(80), (81)(c)(4), (82)(a)(2), (c)(4), (84), (86) 
1987 	Sess. L. 	653 	Housing programs and activities for low- and moderate-income persons 	
1988 	Sess. L. 	914 	Wake-Raleigh Bureau of Identification 	
1988 	Sess. L. 	998 	Levy of $10.00 motor vehicle tax 	
1988 	Sess. L. 	1085 	Housing option appropriation 	
1988 	Sess. L. 	1100 	Murphy School lease 	
1989 	Sess. L. 	279 	Procedure for permanently closing streets and alleys 	
1989 	Sess. L. 	511 	Naming and renaming streets 	
1989 (1990 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	816 	Charter amendment, adds age and handicap to authorized purposes of fair housing laws 	2.14(72) 
1989 (1990 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	817 	Civil Service Act amendment 	
1989 (1990 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	917 	Firemen's retirement 	
1989 (1990 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	1043 	Regulation of stormwater 	
1991 	Sess. L. 	229 	Levy of $15.00 motor vehicle tax 	
1991 	Sess. L. 	312 	Charter amendment, condemnation of property, building inspections 	2.14(32), (46), 3.9 
1991 	Sess. L. 	594 	Authorizes County to levy room occupancy and prepared food and beverage tax 	
1991 (1992 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	843 	Charter amendment, allows for contracts with federal agencies to assist other governments 	2.14(85) 
1991 (1992 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	856 	Amend civil service act—political activity 	
1993 	Sess. L. 	168 	Historic District Commission subcommittee permits 	
1994 (1993 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	649 	Charter amendment City employee purchase and lease of real property 	3.9, 33(b) 
1995 	Sess. L. 	323 	Regulate begging on state highway system streets; Charter amendment City employee purchase of mulch and sewer fertilizer 	3.9 
1995 	Sess. L. 	381 	Use of wheel locks on illegally parked vehicles 	
1995 	Sess. L. 	458 	Centennial auth.; food and beverage tax amendment 	
1996 (1995 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	640 	Garner deannexation 	
1997 	Sess. L. 	39 	Police may donate unclaimed bicycles to charity 	
1997 	Sess. L. 	316 	Sprinkler systems in fraternity and sorority houses 	
1997 	Sess. L. 	460 	Supplementary retirement benefits for firemen 	
1998 (1997 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	200(1) 	Satellite annexations 	
1998 (1997 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	200(2) 	Self-funded risk program in lieu of insurance 	
1998 (1997 reg. session) 	Sess. L. 	192 	Swift County Management Plan 	
  
PART 1 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT  
CHAPTER 1. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL  
ARTICLE A. - THE MAYOR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference: Election, term, qualifications, compensation, powers and duties, §§2.2, 2.3, 5.1. 
Cross references: Mayor's power during state of emergency, §1-1051; Mayor's power to make committee appointments, §1-1035. 
State law references: Duties of Mayor, G.S. 160A-67; compensation, G.S. 160A-67; compensation, G.S. 160A-69. 
 
Secs. 1-1001 — 1-1010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - THE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter references: Governing body, §2.1; composition, §2.2; power and organization, §2.3; meetings, §2.4; quorum requirements, procedures, §2.5; compensation, §2.12. 
State law reference: Government of the City vested in City Council, G.S. 160A-67. 
 
Sec. 1-1011. - COUNCIL ELECTORAL DISTRICTS. 
(a)  The corporate limits of the City and the limits of the five (5) electoral districts of the City , designated as districts A, B, C, D, and E are and shall be those shown on a map, the preparation of which was authorized by the City Council at its regular meeting held on May 7, 1973. The precise metes and bounds descriptions of the elements of the corporate limits shall be those prescribed by the annexation ordinances relating to those elements, respectively. The specific metes and bounds descriptions of the districts' boundaries shall be those prescribed in official actions of the County Board of Elections establishing the boundary lines of precincts upon which the district boundaries are superimposed and with which they are coincident. Such map shall be labeled and referred to as follows: "Corporate Limits and Electoral District Limits—Number 1—May 7, 1973." 
(b)  The map of the corporate limits and electoral districts of the City shall be the official map of such and shall so continue until officially revised by the Planning Director and Chief Engineer pursuant to appropriate action of the Council . The map and all revisions thereof shall be kept on file by the City Clerk for public inspection. 
( Code 1959 , §1-6) 
Charter references: Mode of election of Council , §2.2; elections generally, Art. IV. 
State law reference: Electoral districts, map requirements, G.S. 160A-23.  
Secs. 1-1012 — 1-1020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - COUNCIL MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 1-1021. - REGULAR MEETINGS, TIME. 
The Council (unless otherwise determined by the Council ) shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesdays of each month ; and the Council shall further hold meetings (unless otherwise determined by the Council ) during the months of January, March, May, July, September, and November for the purpose of amending Part 10 of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan of the City , and the official zoning map. 
( Code 1959 , §2-1(a); Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §1, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95) 
Charter reference: Meetings of the Council , §2.4.  
Sec. 1-1022. - SPECIAL MEETINGS, CALLING, NOTICE, PUBLICIZING. 
Special meetings of the Council may be called at any time by the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem, or by any two (2) members of the Council , by causing a written notice, setting the time, place and purpose of holding such meeting and signed by the person or persons calling the meeting, to be served as provided in §2.4 of the Charter. The City Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared written notices of all special meetings of the Council , upon appropriate request; and at the time of making delivery of such notices to the members of the Council , a copy of such notice of special meetings shall be delivered to representatives of the news media in order that the citizens of the City may be advised of all such special meetings. 
( Code 1959 , §2-2) 
Charter reference: Meetings of the Council , §2.4. 
State law reference: Procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings, G.S. 160A-71.  
Sec. 1-1023. - PRESIDING OFFICER. 
The Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the City Clerk, or an assistant, shall call the Council to order, whereupon a temporary Chairman shall be elected by the members of the Council present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the temporary Chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §2-3)  
Sec. 1-1024. - COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCES OF THE MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council members shall receive compensation for services in such sums as may be just and reasonable. The Council may fix compensation for Council members and for the Mayor as a part of the annual budget adoption with changes to be effective on the date specified. If no date is provided, changes shall be effective on July 1. After budget adoption, compensation for the Mayor and Council members may not be reduced except in accordance with law. Increases in compensation proposed in the budget should follow the average merit increase recommended for the broadband pay system. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be paid an additional sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month , and said sum shall be an allowance for in- City expenses. All Council members shall be paid an additional sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month , and said sum shall be an allowance for auto travel. Actual travel expenses will be paid through voucher request. Council members are eligible to participate in the City's health, dental and voluntary enrollment insurance programs and may choose to have a cell phone allowance of up to forty-two dollars ($42.00) per month . 
( Code 1959 , §2-3.1; Ord. No. 1987-576A, §§1—3, 6-18-87; Ord. No. 1990-468, §§1—3, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 2012-69, §1, 6-18-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-208, §§1—3, 6-18-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2013-221, §1, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2014-319, §§1—3, 6-9-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-454, §§1—3, 6-15-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-604, §§1—3, 6-20-16, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2018-850, §1, 6-11-18, eff. 10-1-18 ) 
State law references: Authority of Mayor and Council to establish levels of compensation, G.S. 160-64.  
Sec. 1-1025. - AGENDA. 
A written agenda with all necessary supporting materials shall be prepared under the direction of the City Manager and delivered to each Council member prior to each meeting of the Council .  
Sec. 1-1026. - ORDER OF BUSINESS. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, all meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the Council , the City Manager, the City Clerk and the City Attorney shall take their regular stations in the Council chamber; and the business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
(1)  Consent agenda. 
(2)  Planning Commission report. 
(3)  Special items. 
(4)  Report and recommendation of the City Manager. 
(5)  Citizen committee reports. 
(6)  Requests and petitions of citizens. 
(7)  Public hearings. 
(8)  Council committee reports. 
(9)  Report of Mayor and Council Members. 
(10)  Appointments. 
(11)  Report and recommendation of City Attorney. 
(12)  Report and recommendation of City Clerk. 
(b)  The order of business may not be departed from except by consent of a majority of the Council present. 
(Ord. No. 1993-224, §1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 1998-454, §1, 11-4-98) 
Charter references: Quorum and conduct of business, §2.5; adoption of rules of procedure, §2.6. 
State law reference: Meetings of public deliberative bodies, G.S. 143-318.1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-1027. - MINUTES—KEEPING, RECORDING, PRESENTING FOR APPROVAL, CORRECTION. 
Minutes of all Council meetings shall be kept and recorded by the City Clerk in a permanent minute book. They shall be presented to the Council for approval. Correction of minutes of preceding meetings may be made only by a majority vote of the members of the Council present. 
( Code 1959 , §2-7)  
Sec. 1-1028. - SAME—APPROVAL WITHOUT READING. 
Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a member of the Council , such minutes may be approved without reading if the City Clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
( Code 1959 , §2-8)  
Sec. 1-1029. - RULES OF DEBATE. 
(a)  Presiding officer may debate and vote, etc. 
The Mayor or such other member of the Council who may be presiding may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any rights and privileges of a Council member by reason of his acting as the presiding officer . 
(b)  Getting the floor; improper references to be avoided. 
Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer , shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(c)  Interruptions. 
A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it be to call the member to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, the member shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and if in order, the member shall be permitted to proceed. 
(d)  Privilege of closing debate. 
The Council member moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate. 
(e)  Motion to reconsider. 
A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing side but may be seconded by any member and may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor; it shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the Council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the Council . 
(f)  Remarks of council member, when entered in minutes. 
A Council member may request, through the presiding officer , the privilege of having an abstract of the member's statement on any subject under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. 
( Code 1959 , §2-9)  
Sec. 1-1030. - ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL—TIME ALLOWED. 
Any person desiring to address the Council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do. In controversial matters, proponents of a proposal shall first be heard; then opponents; and proponents shall then close the debate. No further argument will be permitted except by consent of the Council . An equal amount of time shall be allotted to proponents and opponents. Unless a request for additional time is made and allowed prior to the hearing, each person shall be confined to five (5) minutes. Unless a request for additional time is made in advance, presentation of matters which are not controversial shall be confined to three (3) minutes.  
Sec. 1-1031. - SAME—MANNER. 
Each person addressing the Council shall give the person's name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person other than the Council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, directly or through a member of the Council , without the permission of the presiding officer . No question shall be asked a Council member except through the presiding officer . 
( Code 1959 , §2-1D)  
Sec. 1-1032. - SILENCE CONSTITUTES AFFIRMATIVE VOTE. 
Unless a member of the Council is excused from voting in accordance with State law, the member's silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
Charter reference: Ordinance requirements, effective date, §§2.7, 2.8. 
State law reference: Voting, G.S. 160A-75.  
Sec. 1-1033. - DECORUM; REQUIRED. 
(a)  By Council Members: 
While the Council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum; and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Council or its presiding officer , except as otherwise herein provided. 
(b)  By Other Persons: 
Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer , barred from further audience before the Council , unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §2-13)  
Sec. 1-1034. - ENFORCEMENT OF DECORUM REQUIREMENTS. 
Any person who violates the order and decorum of a Council meeting shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. When directed by the Council , the Chief of Police or such member or members of the Police Department as the Chief may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms of the Council meetings. The Chief or member of the Police Department, shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer , it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms, or any of them present, to place any person , other than the Mayor or a Council member, who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him to be prosecuted. The Mayor or a Council member may only be placed under arrest for breach of decorum by a vote of the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §2-14; Ord. No. 1978-748, §1, 3-14-78)  
Sec. 1-1035. - COUNCIL COMMITTEES; APPOINTING AUTHORITY. 
All committees shall be appointed by the presiding officer , unless otherwise directed by the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §2-15)  
Sec. 1-1036. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2016-532, §1, adopted Jan. 5, 2016 , repealed §1-1036, which pertained to standing committees; membership; designation and derived from Code 1959 , §2-16; Ord. No. 1987-92, §1, adopted Dec. 1, 1987; Ord. No. 1993-290, §1, Dec. 7, 1993; Ord. No. 1998-454, §2, adopted Nov. 4, 1998.  
Sec. 1-1037. - MATTERS REFERRED TO COMMITTEE. 
When matters are placed before the City Council , the Mayor or, in his absence, such other presiding officer shall have the power to refer them to an appropriate committee. If two (2) or more members of the Council object to any referral, the Mayor or other presiding officer shall place the question to a vote. The issue for decision will be: " Shall the matter be referred to the indicated committee?" If the issue passes with five (5) votes, the matter shall be thus referred. If the issue fails to receive (5) votes, the matter shall remain before the Council . The matter shall remain before the Council until, by five (5) votes of the Council , the matter is referred or otherwise disposed of. 
( Code 1959 , §2-23.1)  
Sec. 1-1038. - COMMITTEE REPORTS. 
Each committee shall make its reports in writing and shall return all petitions, resolutions, accounts or other papers submitted for consideration. 
( Code 1959 , §2-17)  
Sec. 1-1039. - COMMITTEES; RULES OF PROCEDURE APPLICABLE. 
The rules contained in this article, so far as they are applicable, shall be followed at meetings of the Council committees. 
( Code 1959 , §2-18)  
Sec. 1-1040. - PROTESTING COUNCIL ACTION BY MEMBER. 
Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for the member's dissent from, or protest against, any action of the Council entered on the minutes. 
( Code 1959 , §2-19)  
Sec. 1-1041. - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND CONTRACTS. 
(a)  Preparation of Ordinances: 
All ordinances, except ordinances of a routine nature which are prepared by the City Clerk on forms which have been approved by the Council , shall be prepared by or have the approval as to form and legality of the City Attorney. 
(b)  Prior Approval by Administrative Staff: 
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall be prepared or approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have been reviewed by the City Manager or his authorized representative, where there are substantive matters of administration involved. 
(c)  Introducing for Passage or Approval: 
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the Council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council . 
Charter reference: Initiative and referendum by petition of citizens, §2.16.  
Sec. 1-1042. - NO DEBATE ON MOTION TO ADJOURN. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
( Code 1959 , §2-22)  
Sec. 1-1043. - ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER, WHEN APPLICABLE. 
Procedural matters not covered by the rules contained in this article shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
( Code 1959 , §2-23) 
Charter reference: Organization, officers , rules, meetings, §2.3 et seq.  
Secs. 1-1044 — 1-1050. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE D. - EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1051. - STATE OF EMERGENCY; CURFEW AUTHORIZED; MAYOR'S POWER; RESTRICTIONS DURING EMERGENCY. 
(a)  Definition: 
A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety or property . 
(b)  Proclamation: 
In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the City , or threatening danger to or destruction of property , the Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the City , to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized. 
(c)  Mayor's Powers: 
The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the City and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law enforcement officers , Fire Department officers and other public employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military personnel, whether state or Federal; on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the City . 
(d)  End of State of Emergency: 
The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Council . 
(e)  Restrictions During Emergency: 
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions: 
(1)  Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof. 
(2)  Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off one's own premises. 
(3)  Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or participation therein when taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public property . 
(4)  Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any other explosive or flammable fluids or substances. 
(5)  Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street , alley or roadway or upon any other public property and to except those in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof. 
(6)  Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business, places of entertainment, and any other public assembly of any nature whatsoever. 
(f)  Subsequent Proclamation: 
Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation. 
(g)  Unlawful Acts: 
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this section. 
(h)  List of Council Members To Act in Mayor's Stead: 
Each January after the biannual elections for City Council members, the City Council shall establish a list of Council members designated to act in the Mayor's stead during emergency situations when the Mayor is unavailable. The list shall be by priority with the person available and nearest the top of the list designated to act for the Mayor. If the Mayor becomes available during the pendency of an emergency situation, the person acting in his stead shall relinquish the authority granted by §1-1051 to the Mayor. 
( Code 1959 , §2-65; Ord. No. 1982-860, §2, 3-9-82; Ord. No. 1986-736, §2, 2-18-86; Ord. No. 2016-532, §2, 1-5-16 ) 
State law reference: Authority of the Mayor to impose restrictions during states of emergency, G.S. 14-288.12.  
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter references: Appointment and removal of officers and employees; interest of officials in contracts, Art. III. 
 
ARTICLE A. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference: Appointment, powers and duties, etc., §§3.1—3.4. 
State law reference: Powers, duties, etc., G.S. 160A-147 et seq. 
 
Secs. 1-2001 — 1-2010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 1-2011. - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prosecute and to defend all suits-at-law or in equity in which the City may become the plaintiff or defendant in any such suit; to render advisory opinions to the Mayor, the Council , the City Manager, and the heads of the various departments of the City ; and it shall be the City Attorney's duty, when required to do so, to attend the meetings of the Council and to prepare such deeds, contracts, bonds and other legal papers as may be required for the City's business, and to perform such other services of a legal nature as required by the Council . It shall be the duty of the City Attorney and the Associate City Attorneys to institute and litigate all civil actions and proceedings required for the foreclosure of liens against real estate on account of delinquent taxes and/or assessments for special improvements, when requested to take such action by the Director of Finance or by the Council . The Council shall have power and authority to employ additional counsel in special cases when considered expedient by a majority of the Council . 
Charter reference: Appointment and duties, §§5.2, 5.6. 
State law reference: Duties of City Attorney, G.S. 160A-173.  
Sec. 1-2012. - PAYMENT OF CLAIMS. 
No account or demand against the City , except those arising under valid contracts or under the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act or a City ordinance, shall be paid until payment has been approved by the Council . Small tort claims against the City which do not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be acted upon by the City Attorney without being reported in advance to the Council , and if approved, shall be paid from a fund appropriated by the Council for that purpose; but the City Attorney shall report his action on all such claims to the City Council not less often than every three (3) months . 
( Code 1959 , §2-20) 
Cross reference: Tort claims by the City , Part 14, Ch. 2.  
Secs. 1-2013 — 1-2020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 1-2021. - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
The City Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council , and it shall be the Clerk's duty to: 
(a)  Attend each meeting of the Council and to keep the minutes and records of all the proceedings of the Council in well-bound books provided for that purpose. 
(b)  Preserve all books, papers and writings of all kinds submitted to the Clerk. 
(c)  Maintain custody of all signed petitions with reference to public improvements, and all contracts made and entered into by the City and of all notices and affidavits of publishers with reference to publication of ordinances, budgets or other legal advertisements required to be made by the City . 
(d)  Maintain custody of the official corporate seal of the City and attest and affix the official seal to all documents or instruments of the City required to be so attested and sealed. 
(e)  Maintain custody of all deeds or conveyances of all types made to the City , and it shall be the Clerk's duty to file with the Register of Deeds of the County for the purpose of being recorded in the registry of the County . 
(f)  Account and pay over all moneys which may come into the Clerk's hands by virtue of the Clerk's office. 
(g)  The City Clerk is granted full discretion to advertise public hearings electronically in any manner and for any subject allowed by Chapter 161 of the Session Laws of 2003. 
(h)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law or by the Council . 
(Ord. No. 2003-516, §1, 9-16-03) 
Charter reference: Appointment, duties, §§5.2, 5.3. 
State law references: Duties of the City Clerk, G.S. 160A-71; deputy Clerks, G.S. 160A-172.  
CHAPTER 3. - DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2014-289, §1, adopted April 15, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§1-3001—1-3003. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1983-249-TC-206, §§1, 2, adopted Dec. 20, 1983; Ord. No. 1984-445, §1, adopted Dec. 4, 1984; Ord. No. 1990-469, §1, adopted Jan. 2, 1990; Ord. No. 1998-454, §§3, 4, adopted Nov. 4, 1998; Ord. No. 2011-823, §§1, 2, adopted Jan. 4, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-958, §§1, 2, adopted Nov. 1, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-967, §§1, 2, adopted Nov. 15, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-31, §3, adopted April 3, 2012. 
 
Sec. 1-3001. - ORGANIZATION OF CITY GOVERNMENT. 
The City Manager will from time to time prepare an organization chart establishing the various departments and offices necessary to efficiently operate City government. No such plan will be effective until approved by the City Council in a regular meeting. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City Council from modifying any approved organizational structure at any time the Council feels that the improvement would lead to greater governmental efficiency. The functions and duties of City departments and offices shall be as specified in this Code or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-289, §3, 4-15-14)  
CHAPTER 4. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-4001. - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term board or commission shall mean any committee, subcommittee, commission , board or authority, or other similar agency or group whether advisory, managerial or quasi-judicial, which is appointed or elected to serve the government of the City . 
(b)  As used in this article, the term member shall mean any person appointed, reappointed or confirmed as a member of a board . 
(Res. 1976-18, §1; Ord. No. 1981-617, §§1, 2, 3-17-81)  
Sec. 1-4002. - APPOINTMENTS. 
(a)  All appointments made by the City Council to any commission shall be upon the basis of recommendations made by the Mayor or a member of the Council , and final appointments in all cases shall be made by the Council . 
(b)  Nominations for appointment of a citizen other than a member of the Council to any committee, commission or board shall be made openly at a regular Council meeting, and no such appointment shall be made except at a regular Council meeting held subsequent to the meeting at which nominations were received. If nominations to fill a vacancy are made at more than one (1) Council meeting, the appointment shall be made at a regular meeting subsequent to the last meeting at which nominations were made. All persons selected for membership on any committee, commission or board shall be residents of the City unless otherwise specified by the ordinance or resolution establishing the body. In cases where City residency is a requirement for membership, the member shall forfeit his seat upon removing his residence from the City . 
(c)  By majority vote of the members of the Council , the Council may declare nominations for an appointment to be closed at any regular meeting. 
(d)  If, by reason of the nature or number of vacancies on a committee, commission or board , an immediate appointment or appointments are required, the Council in its discretion may waive the requirements of this section by a majority vote of the members of the Council . Once a person has served six (6) years on any board or commission , they are not eligible for reappointment to that board or commission for a two- year period. 
(e)  The City Clerk shall inform the Council at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of a term on any committee, commission or board , and any member of a committee, commission or board resigning prior to the expiration of his term shall give written notice thereof to the Council through the Mayor or the City Clerk. 
(f)  A member of a committee, commission or board shall continue to serve upon expiration of his term until his successor is duly named and qualified, or unless he resigns. 
(g)  All appointments to every commission of the City shall be on the basis of a two- year term, except for the incumbent appointees whose reappointment for two (2) years would cause the six- year limitation set out in subsection (a) to be exceeded. Any such incumbents reappointed shall be reappointed for a period which, added to their previous service, shall constitute six (6) years . Appointments shall be staggered to the end that there shall always be one (1) or more incumbents upon any commission . 
(h)  Any City board or commission which desires to have bylaws shall first have the content of such bylaws approved by the City Council . Any amendments to previously approved bylaws shall also require City Council approval. The City Council shall not approve any bylaws which are in conflict with this article or any other section of this Code. Any bylaws in use on November 21, 1989, shall be submitted to the City Council for approval and shall become null and void if not approved by the City Council within ninety (90) days from November 21, 1989. 
( Code 1959 , §2-18.1; Res. 1974-160A, §2; Ord. No. 1979-76, 5-1-79; Ord. No. 1981-617, §3, 3-17-81; Ord. No. 1984-392, §1, 8-7-84; Ord. No. 1986-761, §1, 4-1-86; Ord. No. 1989-462, §1, 11-21-89; Ord. No. 1993-161, §1, 4-6-93)  
Sec. 1-4003. - LIMITATION OF TERMS. 
(a)  An appointee may serve on any one (1) commission no more than three (3) two- year terms in succession. 
(b)  No person shall serve on more than two (2) commissions at any one (1) time. 
(c)  The Council hereby establishes a policy of attempting to include on each commission a member less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Res. 1974-160A, §§3—5; Ord. No. 1981-699, §1, 7-7-81; Ord. No. 1986-761, §2, 4-1-86)  
Sec. 1-4004. - REMOVALS. 
Any member of any board who is absent without being excused from three (3) consecutive meetings of such board may , upon recommendation of the chairperson or otherwise designated officer of such board , be removed or replaced by the Council . 
(Res. 1976-18, §3)  
Secs. 1-4005—1-4010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 1-4011. - BOARD CREATED. 
There is hereby established an Environmental Advisory Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board ) for the purpose of advising the City Council on matters related to the environment on which the Council deems it appropriate or necessary to receive advice. The Board will conduct only activities specifically referred to it by City Council . 
(Ord. No. 2006-56, §1, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 1-4012. - MEMBERSHIP. 
The Board created herein shall consist of nine (9) persons to be appointed by the City Council for a period of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2006-56, §1, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 2008-358, §1, 3-4-08)  
Sec. 1-4013. - ORGANIZATION. 
The Board shall organize and adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purposes, and elect from its members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. 
All regular and special meetings of the Board shall be open to the public as governed by North Carolina General Statute Section 143-318(1), Meetings of Governmental Bodies. Any person shall be entitled and encouraged to appear and be heard on any matter pertaining to environmental management issues referred by the Council to the Board . 
Regular Board meetings shall be held quarterly. The chairperson or, in his/her absence, the vice-chairperson may call a special meeting of the Board at any time giving oral or written notice, in compliance with North Carolina General Statutes governing meetings, to all members. Special meetings shall be scheduled upon request of four (4) or more Board members. Notice of special meetings shall comply with open meeting laws. 
(Ord. No. 2006-56, §1, 6-20-06)  
Sec. 1-4014. - PURPOSE. 
(1)  Advise the Council regarding comments to other governmental units and agencies on the position of the City of Raleigh with regard to environmental matters. 
(2)  Advise the City Council on matters relating to fuel efficiency. 
(3)  Advise the City Council on matters relating to environmental education and awareness. 
(4)  Advise the City Council on matters relating to environmental awards and recognition programs. 
(5)  Advise the City Council on policies that the City of Raleigh should implement or amend as requested by Council. 
(6)  Advise the City Council on such other matters related to environmental quality and safety as the Council shall refer to said Board . 
(Ord. No. 2006-56, §1, 6-20-06)  
PART 2 - FINANCE  
CHAPTER 1. - THE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
 
Sec. 2-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Department of Finance shall consist of a Finance Director, who is its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries and compensation shall be fixed by the Council . 
Charter reference: Appointment and duties of Finance Director, §§6.3, 6.4. 
State law references: Finance Officer, G.S. 159-24; fiscal control generally, G.S. 159-24 et seq.  
Sec. 2-1002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department include: 
(a)  Administration, supervision and management of the City's financial affairs, including management of debts, investments, fiscal control of the City budget, cash disbursements, financial reporting, accounting, payroll preparation and reporting. 
(b)  Collection of all monies due the City , including utility payments; provision of a bookkeeping accountability of all receipts; and administration of the receiving and distribution of all incoming and outgoing mail, including postage allocation to outgoing mail. 
(c)  Administration of consumer service/utility billing activities, including the furnishing of the necessary information to the Information Infrastructure Division to prepare billings for water and sewer customers, reading of water meters, collecting delinquent accounts and answering customers' complaints, and initiate and terminate services. 
(d)  Administration of all purchasing and contracting activities with regard to the purchase of equipment, materials and supplies, including the establishment and enforcement of specifications therefor, supervising the inspection of deliveries of equipment, materials and supplies and administration of interdepartmental transfers of surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials and equipment. 
(e)  Supervision of the processing of data from the various departments, divisions and agencies of the City and production of meaningful and timely reports, statistics, bills and checks. 
(f)  Administration of the processing and control of all citations issued in the enforcement of City ordinances and regulations. 
(g)  Maintenance of an adequate internal audit system that will assure the legality and validity of all financial transactions, maintenance of portfolios and grant-in-aid projects, and the reporting of data required by grants-in-aid. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §5, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 2-1003. - ANNUAL INDEPENDENT AUDIT. 
The Finance Director shall be charged with the responsibility of naming on an annual basis, with the approval of the Council , a firm to perform the annual independent audit of the books and accounts of the City , as required by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act. 
State law reference: Annual audit required, G.S. 159-34.  
CHAPTER 2. - REVENUE AND TAXATION  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2-2001. - COLLECTION OF PROCESSING FEE FOR RETURNED CHECKS PRESENTED TO THE REVENUE COLLECTOR. 
The Revenue Collector shall charge a processing fee in the maximum amount allowed under applicable state law for any check made in payment to the City which is returned because of insufficient funds or because the drawer did not have an account at the bank upon which such check was drawn; however, notice of the City's policy regarding the returned check charge must first be provided in accordance with applicable state statutes. The Revenue Collector shall not waive the processing fee. 
( Code 1959 , §2-26.1; Ord. No. 1979-45, 3-20-79; Ord. No. 1991-709, §1, 1-2-91) 
State law reference: Collection of processing fee for returned checks and procedural requirements, G.S. 25-3-512.  
Secs. 2-2002 — 2-2010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference: Authority to levy privilege license taxes, §2.14(7). 
State law references: General authority to levy privilege license taxes, G.S. 160A-211; see also Schedule "B" of the Revenue Act of 1939, as amended ( G.S. 105, Article 2) which specifies the amount of tax a City may levy on businesses expressly enumerated. 
 
Sec. 2-2011. - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words, whenever they are used in this article, shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
(a)  Business. 
The term business means any trade, occupation, profession, business, franchise, or calling of any kind, subject by the provisions of this article to a license tax. 
(b)  Engaged (or engaging) in business within the City. 
A person is engaged in business within the City when he engages in business activity of any type, either as owner or operator of such business, (i) by maintaining a business location within the City ; (ii) by soliciting business within the City ; or (iii) by picking up or delivering merchandise or performing services within the City . 
(c)  Person. 
The term person includes any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, association, partnership, company, firm, or other legal entity or agent thereof. 
(d)  Seasonal in nature. 
A business is seasonal in nature when it is taxed by this article on an annual basis, but is operated within the City for less than six (6) months of the year .  
Sec. 2-2012. - CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLE. 
This article is enacted primarily for revenue purposes. Therefore, it should be construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its terms. In addition, issuance of a license pursuant to this article does not excuse a licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute. This article does not prevent the City from imposing license taxes on additional businesses , from increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax, or from regulating any business taxes.  
Sec. 2-2013. - LICENSE TAX LEVIED. 
A license tax is hereby levied on the privilege of engaging in every business within the City which is listed in the schedule of taxes on file in the Department of Finance, Collections Division, hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. Any person so engaged in business shall be responsible for making certain that the applicable license tax is paid.  
Sec. 2-2014. - REVENUE COLLECTOR; DUTIES. 
(a)  The Revenue Collector is hereby designated as the proper City official to collect license taxes and to issue privilege licenses. 
(b)  The Revenue Collector shall make any investigation necessary to determine the tax liability of persons engaged in business within the City . If necessary, the Revenue Collector is authorized to enter upon the premises of any such business during normal business hours for the purpose of determining whether this article has been complied with.  
Sec. 2-2015. - LICENSE; DUE DATE. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in the schedule of taxes provided for in §2-2013, each privilege license issued shall cover the twelve- month period beginning June 1 of each calendar year and ending May 31 of the subsequent calendar year . 
(b)  The privilege license tax is due on June 1 of each year . If, however, a person begins a business after June 1, the tax for that year must be paid before the business is begun. 
(c)  The Revenue Collector shall not issue a license until the tax levied under §2-2013 has been paid.  
Sec. 2-2016. - APPLICATION; FALSE STATEMENT THEREON. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain a license for the privilege of engaging in a business within the City shall make application therefor in writing to the Revenue Collector. The application, to be made on a form provided by the Revenue Collector, shall contain the following information: (i) name and nature of the business for which the license is sought; (ii) the address where the business is conducted, and a mailing address for the business , if different; (iii) the name and address of the person filling out the application, and his relationship to the business ; (iv) the gross receipts of the business for the most recently completed tax year , if applicable; and (v) any other information which the Revenue Collector determines to be necessary. 
(b)  Any person who willfully makes a false statement on a license application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined or imprisoned in the discretion of the court and any fine shall be in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(c)  The following types of businesses shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) to offset the cost of investigations required. Upon approval these businesses shall also pay the applicable privilege license tax as specified: 
(1)  Class one—Entertainment centers. 
(2)  Class two—Entertainment centers. 
(3)  Dance halls. 
(4)  Private clubs. 
(5)  Public clubs. 
(6)  Establishments with live entertainment, but without alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1985-677, §1, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 2001-935, §4, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 2-2017. - COMPUTATION OF TAX BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS. 
(a)  Whenever this article levies a privilege license tax computed on the basis of gross receipts, "gross receipts" means the amount reported as gross receipts on a business's state income tax return, or on the Federal income tax return filed with the State income tax return if the State return does not separately state gross receipts, for the most recently completed tax year . 
(b)  If a business has not been in operation long enough for the information required in subsection (a) of this section to be available, the Revenue Collector shall estimate gross receipts for the business , based on gross receipts of comparable businesses or any other information that the Revenue Collector considers useful. 
(c)  On or before the June 30 immediately after each license year , each licensee for whom the tax paid in the license year just concluded was based on estimated gross receipts shall submit to the Revenue Collector a sworn final report showing the amount of gross receipts for the license year . If the amount shown is more than estimated gross receipts, the licensee shall pay the amount of additional tax that would have been due had the estimate been accurate. If the amount shown is less than estimated gross receipts, the City shall refund to the licensee the difference between the actual tax paid and the amount of tax that would have been due had the estimate been accurate.  
Sec. 2-2018. - PRORATION OF TAX; SEASONAL BUSINESSES. 
(a)  Except when a tax is based on gross receipts, if a business is begun after January 1, but before May 31, the tax shall be one-half of the amount otherwise due. 
(b)  Except when a tax is based on gross receipts, a person engaged in a business which is seasonal in nature is liable for one-half of the amount of tax otherwise due.  
Sec. 2-2019. - BUSINESSES WITHIN ANNEXED AREA. 
In the event the City limits shall be extended to include any business , trade or profession that was outside the City limits on May 1 or June 1 of any license tax year , such business , trade or profession shall become liable for the payment of privilege license taxes upon the date of its annexation into the corporate limits. Such newly annexed business , trade or profession shall pay a proportionate part of the privilege license that it would have been required to pay, had it been located within the corporate limits for the entire license tax year . 
( Code 1959 , §14-12(d))  
Sec. 2-2020. - MULTIPLE BUSINESSES. 
If a person is engaged in more than one business made subject to a license tax under this article, such person shall pay the license tax prescribed in the tax schedule provided for in §2-2013 of this article for each such business , even if the businesses are conducted at the same business location.  
Sec. 2-2021. - SEPARATE PLACES OF BUSINESS. 
Unless otherwise provided by State law or by the tax schedule provided for in §2-2013 of this article, if a person engages in a business in two (2) or more separate places, a separate license tax shall be required for each such place of business . For purpose of this section, if a person engages in the same business at two (2) or more locations within the City , which locations (i) are contiguous, (ii) communicate with and open directly into each other, and (iii) are operated as a unit, the person is liable for only one license tax.  
Sec. 2-2022. - FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE. 
A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where the business is conducted (if it is to be conducted at one (1) place), the nature of business licensed, the period for which the license is issued, and the amount of tax paid. In addition, if a machine is licensed, the license shall show the serial number of the machine. The Revenue Collector shall keep a copy of each license issued.  
Sec. 2-2023. - DISPLAY OF LICENSE. 
Each person issued a license under this article shall post the license in a conspicuous place in his regular place of business. If there is no regular place of business, the business license shall be kept where it may be inspected while the person is engaged in business within the city by the Chief Financial Officer or his designee or a member of the Raleigh Police Department. If a machine or other item of personal property is licensed the license shall be affixed to the personal property. A business license must be presented to the Chief Financial Officer or a member of the Raleigh Police Department upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2011-942, §1, 9-6-11)  
Sec. 2-2024. - ASSIGNMENTS. 
A license may be assigned if (i) a business licensed under this article and carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person , and (ii) the purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change shall be reported to the Revenue Collector pursuant to §2-2013 of this article. Otherwise, each license issued under this article is a personal privilege and is not assignable; provided, any license issued under this article to bondsmen engaged in the business of writing appearance, compliance or bail bonds required in connection with criminal proceedings in any courts; collection agencies , contractors and construction companies, companies engaged in the business of selling or installing automatic sprinkler systems, gypsies, lightning rod agents, and peddlers, constitutes a personal privilege to conduct the business named in the license and shall not be transferred or assigned to any other person .  
Sec. 2-2025. - CHANGE IN PLACE OF BUSINESS. 
If a person who has obtained a license for a business taxed under this article desires to move from one business location to another within the City , the license which has been issued shall be valid for the remainder of the license year at this new location and no additional tax need be paid. Within a reasonable time after the change in location; however, such person shall inform the Revenue Collector of the change in address.  
Sec. 2-2026. - NO ABATEMENT OF TAX. 
If a licensee discontinues a business before the end of the period for which the license was issued, the license tax shall not be abated nor shall a refund of any part of the license tax be made; provided a tax refund may be granted by the Council when the applicant for the license never commenced the business .  
Sec. 2-2027. - EFFECT OF LICENSE. 
The issuance of a license under this article does not authorize the carrying on of a business for which additional licenses or qualifications are required by state or local law, nor does the issuance of a license prevent the City from enacting additional regulations applicable to the licensee.  
Sec. 2-2028. - EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  Any person who engages in business within this City for religious, nonprofit educational or charitable purposes shall be exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this article. 
(b)  All persons engaged in the business of renting commercial or residential real property are exempt from paying any privilege license tax, except parking lots and storage units or buildings shall pay any privilege license tax levied by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1991-883, §1, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 1992-908, §1, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 2011-931, §1, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 2-2029. - UNLAWFUL TO CONDUCT BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a business within this City upon which a privilege license tax is imposed by this article, without having paid the license tax specified in the schedule of license taxes, hereby incorporated herein and on file in the Department of Finance, Revenue Collections Division. Violators shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined, or imprisoned in the discretion of the court; but the fine shall not be less than twenty (20) per cent of the tax in addition to the tax and the cost. Each day that a person engages in business in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The City may seek an injunction against any person engaging in business in violation of this section. 
(c)  A conviction under this section does not relieve a person of his liability for the license tax or taxes imposed by this article.  
Sec. 2-2030. - COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAX. 
(a)  All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid to the Revenue Collector and shall be due and payable on May 1 and delinquent and subject to penalty after June 1. 
(b)  If a person begins or continues to engage in a business taxed under this article without payment of the required privilege license tax, the Revenue Collector may use either of the following methods to collect the unpaid tax: (i) the remedy of levy and sale or attachment and garnishment, in accordance with G.S. 160A-207; or (ii) the remedy of levy and sale of real and personal property of the taxpayer in accordance with G.S. 105-109(d). 
(c)  Any person who begins or continues to engage in a business taxed under this article without payment of such tax is liable for an additional tax of two and one-half (½) per cent of the original tax due for each thirty (30) days or portion thereof that the tax is delinquent, provided the additional tax shall be limited to fifty (50) per cent of the tax originally levied but in no event less than ten dollars ($10.00).  
Sec. 2-2031. - SCHEDULE OF LICENSE TAXES. 
A current schedule of license taxes shall be maintained on file in the offices of the Department of Finance, Revenue Collections Division.  
Sec. 2-2032. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1987-79, §1, adopted Nov. 19, 1987, repealed §2-2032, which pertained to requirement for Council approval in certain cases and derived from §2-2032 of the City's 1959 Code as amended by Ord. No. 1980-287, §1, adopted Jan. 8, 1980; Ord. No. 1980-425, §1, adopted July 15, 1980; and Ord. No. 1982-914, §§1, 2, adopted May 18, 1982.  
Sec. 2-2033. - REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES. 
Any license issued under this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension for a definite or indefinite time by the City Council , without refund of any part of the tax paid if the licensee or Manager or person in charge of the business or employee shall violate any article or law relative to such business , or be convicted of crime, or if, in the judgment of the Council , the licensed permit does, by reason of its nature or the manner or place in which it is conducted, constitute a nuisance, or is a menace to good order, or to public health, safety, or morals. Upon the revocation or suspension of any such license it shall be unlawful for the person to whom such license was granted to continue to conduct such business ; upon the violation of this provision, the offender shall upon conviction be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisoned thirty (30) days. Each day such business is conducted after revocation or suspension of license shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Code 1959 , §14-19)  
Secs. 2-2034 — 2-2040. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - BEER AND WINE 
 
Sec. 2-2041. - LICENSE; REQUIRED. 
Every person desiring to sell at retail or wholesale within the City any of the beverages defined and enumerated in G.S. 18B-101, as amended, shall first obtain a license from the Revenue Collector. No such license shall be issued by the Revenue Collector until the applicant has obtained the appropriate permit from the State Board of Alcoholic Control as provided by G.S. Chapter 18B. 
( Code 1959 , §6-1; Ord. No. 1987-21, §1, 7-21-87) 
State law references: State ABC permits, G.S. 18B-900 et seq. ; taxes, G.S. Ch. 105-113.68 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2042. - APPLICATION PROCEDURE; ISSUANCE. 
(a)  Application for a license shall be made upon forms provided by the Revenue Collector and shall be verified by the affidavit of the applicant made before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths . The application shall contain the information required under G.S. 105-113.70, and shall require the applicant to state whether he has, during the preceding license year , committed any act or permitted any condition for which his license was, or might have been, revoked or suspended. 
(b)  If from the statements and information provided in the application the applicant appears to possess all requisite qualifications under law, including a statement that he has not during the preceding license year , committed any act or permitted any condition for which his license was, or could have been revoked or suspended, thereby making issuance of the license mandatory pursuant to G.S. 105-113.70, the Revenue Collector shall issue the applicant a license. 
( Code 1959 , §6-2; Ord. No. 1987-21, §§2—4, 7-21-87) 
State law reference: Issuance of licenses, G.S. 105-113.70, 105-113.71.  
Sec. 2-2043. - TYPES OF LICENSES. 
(a)  Licenses issued by the City under the authority of G.S. 105-113.77, as amended, shall be restricted to on-premises and off-premises. An off-premises license authorizes the licensee to sell at retail state permitted alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises designated in the license and to sell at retail state permitted alcoholic beverages in the manufacturer's original container for consumption off the premises designated on the license. 
( Code 1959 , §6-3; Ord. No. 1987-21, §5, 9-21-87) 
State law reference: Retail activity, G.S. 18B-1000 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2044. - RETAIL TAX. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of selling malt beverages, as defined in G.S. 18B-101(9), as amended, shall pay an annual license tax as follows: 
(1) 	For "on-premises" malt beverages 	$15.00 
 
(2) 	For "off-premises" malt beverages 	5.00 
 
(b)  Every person engaged in the business of selling fortified wine, as defined by G.S. 18B-101(7), as amended, and or selling unfortified wine, as defined by G.S. 18B-101(15), as amended, shall pay an annual license tax as follows: 
(1) 	For "on-premises" unfortified wine, "on premise" fortified wine, or both 	$15.00 
 
(2) 	For "off-premises" unfortified wine, "off-premises" fortified wine, or both 	10.00 
 
(c)  The tax levied in this section is the tax for the first license issued to a person . The tax for each additional license of the same type issued to that person for the same year is one hundred ten (110) per cent of the base license tax, such increase to apply progressively for each additional license. There shall be no proration of license taxes. 
( Code 1959 , §6-4; Ord. No. 1987-21, §5, 7-21-87) 
State law reference: Related provisions, G.S. 105-113.77.  
Sec. 2-2045. - WHOLESALE TAX. 
Every person selling at wholesale in barrels, bottles, or other containers, in quantities of not less than one case or container to a customer within the City , any of the beverages named below, and either having his principal place of business within the City or maintaining one or more places of business or storage houses within the City , shall first procure from the Revenue Collector a license to engage in such business, and shall pay therefor an annual tax as follows: 
(1) 	Where such wholesaler sells at wholesale only malt beverages or wine as defined in G.S. 18B-101, as amended, the tax shall be, per annum 	$37.50 
 
(2) 	Where such wholesaler sells at wholesale both malt beverages and wines as defined in G.S. 18B-101, the tax shall be, per annum 	$62.50 
 
(3)  If any wholesaler maintains more than one place of business or storage warehouse from which orders are received or beverages are distributed, a separate license tax shall be paid for each separate place of business or warehouse. 
(4)  The owner or operator of every distributing warehouse selling, distributing or supplying to retail stores beverages enumerated in this section shall be deemed wholesale distributors within the meaning of this section and shall be liable for the tax imposed hereby. 
( Code 1959 , §6-5; Ord. No. 1987-21, §§6, 7, 7-21-87) 
State law reference: Related provisions, G.S. 105-113.79.  
Sec. 2-2046. - DURATION. 
Every license issued under this article shall expire on the thirtieth day of April of each year . 
( Code 1959 , §6-6)  
Secs. 2-2047 — 2-2048. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1987-21, §9, adopted July 21, 1987, repealed §§2-2047 and 2-2048, relative to limitations on licenses and sale of fortified wine, as derived from Code 1959 , §§6-7 and 6-8.  
Secs. 2-2049 — 2-2060. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE D. - VIOLATIONS DIVISION 
 
Sec. 2-2061. - CREATION; CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS. 
(a)  There is hereby established, under the supervision and control of the Finance Director, a division to be known and designated as the violations division. The violations division shall be conveniently located in the municipal building and the persons in charge thereof shall be designated or appointed by the Finance Director with the approval of the City Manager. 
(b)  The violations bureau shall be responsible for the imposition of criminal and civil penalties for violations of the parking and traffic ordinances of the City , as provided by and according to the procedures set out in §§ 11-2024 and 11-2025.  
Sec. 2-2062. - ANIMAL CONTROL; FINES AND SUMMONSES. 
The violations division shall be responsible for the administration and collection of fines and issuance of any applicable summonses under the City's animal control ordinances. 
Cross reference: Animals, Part 12, Ch. 3, Arts. A, B.  
Secs. 2-2063—2-2070. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE E. - MOTOR VEHICLES REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: Article E to Ch. 2 of Pt. 2, which formerly pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§2-2071—2-2075, and derived from the 1959 Code, §14-37(a)—(c); Ord. No. 1982-28, §1, adopted Dec. 7, 1982; Ord. No. 1982-993, §1, adopted Oct. 5, 1982; and Ord. No. 1985-504, §1, adopted Mar. 5, 1985, was repealed by §1 of Ord. No. 1988-240, adopted Sept. 6, 1988, which ordinance further set out new §§2-2071—2074 to read as herein set out. 
Section 5 of Ord. No. 1988-240 specified an effective date of Jan. 2, 1989. 
Annotation: For automobile license tax provisions for the period January 1, 1989, through June 30, 1989, see uncodified ordinance 1988-241. 
Also, see S.L. 1988, Ch. 998. 
 
Sec. 2-2071. - MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED. 
Every self-propelled motor vehicle sited for ad valorem tax purposes in the City of Raleigh shall pay an annual fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) to the City of Raleigh for the privilege of operating said vehicle on the public ways. The annual payment shall be collected by the Wake County Tax Collector and the tax shall authorize the use of the vehicle for one (1) year from the date of the payment due date of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1988-240, §2, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 1991-806, §1, 6-28-91; Ord. No. 1993-291, §1, 12-7-93; Ord. No. 2006-81, §1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2007-281, §1, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2010-752, §1, 6-28-10; Ord. No. 2010-774, §1, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 2-2072. - EXEMPTIONS. 
The motor vehicle license required by this article shall not apply to motor vehicles belonging to members of the armed forces of the United States on duty within the City and exempted by Title 50, United States Code, §574, nor shall the license be required of motor vehicles held for sale as a part of the stock and trade of any motor vehicle dealer licensed under this chapter and bearing a state license issued pursuant to the General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1988-240, §2, 9-6-88)  
Sec. 2-2073. - PUBLIC UTILITIES. 
Any business entity regulated by the State and exempt from listing ad valorem property tax property with the County Tax Office shall still be liable for the tax imposed by this article. Any such business shall notify the Revenue Collector of the City of its exempt status and shall make its license payments directly to the Revenue Collector. 
(Ord. No. 1988-240, §2, 9-6-88)  
Sec. 2-2074. - TAXICABS. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs and required to be licensed under part 12 of this Code shall pay an annual license fee for each vehicle so operated in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) in addition to the sum required by §2-2071. No license shall be issued under this section until an application for an owner's permit has been made pursuant to part 12 of this Code and until such permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1988-240, §2, 9-6-88) 
Cross reference: Regulations applicable to vehicles for hire, §12-2021 et seq.  
Secs. 2-2075—2-2079. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE F. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX; CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU  
DIVISION 1. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 2-2080. - IMPOSITION AND LEVY OF TAX. 
The City hereby imposes and levies a tax of three (3) per cent of the gross receipts of any person , firm, corporation, or association subject to the three (3) per cent sales tax levied by the State derived from the rental of any sleeping room or lodging furnished in any hotel, motel, or inn located in the City . The tax shall not apply, however, to any room or rooms, lodging or accommodations supplied to the same person for a period of ninety (90) continuous days or more. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2081. - PAYMENT OF TAX. 
Every person , liable for the tax imposed by this division shall , on or before the fifteenth day of each month after the effective date of this division [September 1, 1986], prepare and render a return based upon the previous month 's collections, on a form prescribed by and available from the City Revenue Collector the amount of the tax then due. 
An operator of a business who collects the occupancy tax may deduct from the amount remitted to the City a discount of one (1) per cent of the total amount collected pursuant to this division as reimbursement for the expenses incurred in collecting the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2082. - DEDUCTIONS AND REFUNDS. 
During any month following a month in which a hotel, motel, or inn has supplied a room to the same person for the ninetieth consecutive day, the hotel, motel or inn can apply to the City Revenue Collector, on a form available from that office for that purpose, for a deduction from transient occupancy taxes due that month in an amount equal to the tax previously paid on the receipts from the rental of the room supplied for the period of ninety (90) continuous days or more. A refund shall be issued by the Revenue Collector if no transient occupancy taxes are then due from which a deduction could be taken. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2083. - PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO FILE RETURN. 
Any person , firm, corporation, or association which fails or refuses to file the return required by this division shall pay a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day's omission. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2084. - ADDITIONAL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY. 
In case of failure or refusal to file the return or pay the tax for a period of thirty (30) days after the time required for filing such return or for paying such tax, there shall be an additional tax, as a penalty, of five (5) per cent of the tax due, in addition to the penalty prescribed in §2-2083, with an additional tax of five (5) per cent for each additional month or fraction thereof until the transient occupancy tax is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2085. - MISDEMEANOR FOR WILLFUL VIOLATION. 
Any person , firm, corporation, or association which willfully attempts in any manner to evade the occupancy tax or to make a return, and who willfully fails to pay such tax or make and file such return, shall , in addition to the penalties prescribed in §§ 2-2083 and 2-2084 of this division, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2086. - RETENTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND COLLECTION EXPENSES. 
The City of Raleigh shall retain three (3) per cent of the gross proceeds of the tax collected to pay its costs for administrative and collection expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Sec. 2-2087. - ALLOCATION OF NET PROCEEDS COLLECTED. 
The City Manager shall allocate and distribute the net proceeds collected by the tax as mandated by Chapter 850 of the Session Laws of 1985 and as provided in the budget approved by the City Council . 
(Ord. No. 1986-825A, §1, 7-15-86)  
Secs. 2-2088—2-2089. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 2. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1992-904, adopted and effective Jan. 7, 1992, repealed §§2-2090—2-2095, derived from Ord. No. 1986-825B, §1, adopted July 15, 1986; and §§2—6 added new §§2-2090—2-2094. 
 
Sec. 2-2090. - CREATED. 
There is hereby created the Greater Raleigh Convention and Visitors Bureau; of such composition and having such powers and duties herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1992-904, §2, 1-7-92)  
Sec. 2-2091. - MEMBERSHIP. 
The Bureau shall be governed by a Board of Directors consisting of twelve (12) members. The Bureau shall be a continuation of the Bureau established by Ordinance No. 1986-825B pursuant to Chapter 850 of the Session Laws of 1985. The members shall be appointed as follows: 
(a)  Five (5) owners or operators of hotels, motels, or other taxable establishments, three (3) of whom shall be elected by the City Council and two (2) of whom shall be elected by the County Board of Commissioners from a list of at least ten (10) nominees furnished by the Raleigh Hotel and Motel Association. The list of nominees shall include the names of at least three (3) restaurant owners or operators. 
(b)  Two (2) representatives of tourist or convention related businesses, one (1) appointed by the City Council and one (1) by the County Board of Commissioners. 
(c)  One (1) member nominated by the Greater Raleigh Chamber of Commerce and appointed by the County Board of Commissioners. 
(d)  Four (4) at-large members, two (2) appointed by the City and two (2) appointed by the County . 
Members shall serve according to the ordinances and regulations of the City concerning service on City boards and commissions, except that members appointed by the County shall serve according to the ordinances and regulations of the County concerning service on County boards and commissions. 
At least three (3) of the County's appointees shall reside in Raleigh, and at least one (1) of the County's appointees shall reside in Cary. 
(Ord. No. 1992-904, §3, 1-7-92)  
Sec. 2-2092. - FUNDING. 
The Bureau shall be funded at least at the minimum level required by Chapter 594 of the Session Laws of 1991. The Bureau shall prepare an annual budget based on anticipated revenues and shall submit the budget to the City Manager and County Manager for processing and approval through the regular budget procedures of the City and the County . The Bureau shall make quarterly reports to the City Council and the County Board of Commissioners detailing its revenues, expenditures, and activities. The City or the County may audit the Bureau's financial records upon reasonable notice to the Bureau. At the end of each fiscal year , any funds of the Bureau not expended, or obligated or reserved as approved by the City Council and the County Board of Commissioners, shall be remitted equally to the City and the County for use in accordance with §10 of this act. 
(Ord. No. 1992-904, §4, 1-7-92) 
Editor's note: The reference to "§10 of this act" is presumably to §10 of Ch. 594 of the 1991 Session Laws since Ord. No. 1992-904 has no §10.  
Sec. 2-2093. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The Bureau is to promote travel to and tourism in the City and County . To fulfill its duties, the Bureau may contract with any person , to advise and assist it in the promotion of travel, tourism and conventions. The Bureau may only spend funds for visitor promotion and convention promotion. 
(Ord. No. 1992-904, §5, 1-7-92)  
Sec. 2-2094. - STAFF. 
The Bureau shall employ such staff as it deems necessary to carry out its duties and responsibilities and in accord with its approved budget. Employees of the Bureau shall not be considered as employees of the City for any purposes whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1992-904, §6, 1-7-92)  
CHAPTER 3. - CONSUMER SERVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross references: Public utilities, Pt. 8; water and sewer service, §8-2001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-3001. - RATE SCHEDULES FOR UTILITY SERVICES. 
(a)  Established. 
The schedule of rates, charges, deposits and rents for water and sewer service, repairs, maintenance, operations and debt service requirements, stormwater management services and solid waste management services shall be as fixed and established from time to time by the City Council and maintained on file in the office of the Finance Director. Such rents, charges and rates shall be collected from the users of the service and shall be due and payable monthly in accordance with law within twenty (20) days from the date such rents, charges and rates are billed to the respective users. 
(b)  Water. 
(1)  Water bills will be charged according to meter sizes (service charge) and water consumption as indicated in the established schedule. 
(2)  Except as provided in intermunicipal contracts, water rates supplied outside the corporate limits shall be double the rate for water supplied inside the corporate limits. 
(3)  The basic rate charged herein for the initial quantity of water per one hundred (100) cubic feet, the charge for sewer provided for in subsection (c), shall be charged for all water measured by a separate meter. 
(4)  Water administrative fees shall not be pro-rated for days of service. 
(c)  Sewer. 
(1)  Sewer bills will be charged according to account service and sewer consumption as indicated in the established schedule; such sewer charges shall be billed and collected in the same manner and at the same time that water service charges are billed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided in intermunicipal contracts, rates for providing sewer outside the corporate limits shall be double the sewer related debt service plus the sewer rates charged inside the corporate limits exclusive of debt service. 
(3)  Rates for other sewer service. 
a.  Where City water is not available or a property owner uses his own source of water supply, there shall be a service charge per annum inside and outside the City as fixed from time to time by the City Council, a schedule of which shall be on file in the office of the Finance Director, billed and payable on a monthly basis, for each sewer service line of a single-family dwelling unit connected to any sewer outfall, sewer main, or other sewer pipe (or manhole) which is a part of the sewer system of the City. The annual charge shall provide payment through June 30 of each year. Partial annual charges shall be prorated. If a sewer connection shall be made with the City's sewer system for other than residential use, the owner's water consumption shall be metered. The metering device shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the Public Utilities Department. The water meter shall be provided and installed by the owner at his expense in accordance with the approved plan and shall be maintained in continuous and satisfactory operation by the owner at his expense. The owner shall be charged based on the amount of water used from his private supply as though such private supply came from the City's water system. The charge referred to above shall be in addition to the initial sewer connection charge provided by ordinance. 
b.  Residential developments which are served by a sewer service line six (6) inches or greater in size, which also have a single entity that pays all sewer bills, and which are located on a single lot, such as group housing developments and manufactured home parks, shall pay the nonresidential charges for sewer service. 
(4)  Sewer administrative fees shall not be pro-rated for days of service. 
( Code 1959 , §23-26; Ord. No. 1981-604, §3, 3-17-82; Ord. No. 1981-688, §§1, 2, 6-16-81; Ord. No. 1982-6, §1, 10-19-82; Ord. No. 1989-392A, §1, 6-26-89; Ord. No. 1991-809, §2, 6-28-91; Ord. No. 1994-402, §4, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 2000-734-TC-189, TC-2-00, §1, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 2009-608, §§1—3, 6-16-09, eff. 12-1-09; Ord. No. 2009-665, §2, 10-20-09, eff. 12-1-09)  
Sec. 2-3002. - EACH METER THE BASIS FOR CHARGES AND RATES, ETC. 
When two (2) or more meters are used to measure the consumption of water by the occupants of property belonging to a public or private owner , the water consumed as measured by each meter shall be the basis upon which charges and rates are determined, and the owner of such property shall not be permitted to pay for such water consumed upon the basis of the aggregate of water passing through all of such meters; each meter is billed separately. 
( Code 1959 , §23-27; Ord. No. 1981-604, §4, 3-17-81)  
Sec. 2-3003. - UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSIT. 
(a)  Deposits Required. 
Utility service deposits shall be required for initiation of services or from users who have their water and/or sewer service disconnected for nonpayment. The deposit amount is based upon a deposit schedule approved by the City Council and maintained and available for inspection in the Office of the Chief Financial Officer. This schedule incorporates fixed deposit amounts payable on specified disconnection events at the location and incorporates current credit administration policies of the Finance Department. Such policies incorporate procedures for refunding deposits without interest after fixed periods of good payment history, requirements for transfers of deposits for customers moving to new locations within the City , and other credit history factors to be considered. The current amount on deposit may be used to satisfy part of the cumulative deposit required or to pay delinquent charges. Deposits will not accrue interest to the benefit of the customer. 
(b)  Reactivation of Service. 
Service will not be restored until the required deposit, service charges, penalties, and delinquent bill amounts are paid. Service reconnected upon execution of an agreement to make deposit installment payments, shall be terminated immediately if a payment is missed. All amounts due and owing shall be paid prior to reconnection. 
( Code 1959 , §23-29; Ord. No. 1981-604, §5, 3-17-81; Ord. No. 1991-817, §1, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 1994-402, §§1, 2, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 1997-81, §1, 4-1-97; Ord. No. 2009-608, §4, 6-16-09, eff. 12-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-685, §§1, 2, 1-19-10)  
Sec. 2-3004. - DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION FEES. 
If a charge for water service becomes delinquent and a trip is made for the purpose of discontinuing the service, during regular working hours, after regular working hours or on a holiday, the meter is removed or the water service is disconnected at the main, charges in addition to those provided in §2-3003, if applicable, shall be assessed for such trips, meter removal or service disconnection as fixed from time to time by the City Council , a schedule of which shall be on file in the office of the Finance Director and these fees shall be collected under and by virtue of and in accordance with the laws of the State , the Charter of the City and the ordinances of the City applicable thereto and the resolutions and other actions of the Council . If a charge for sewer-only service becomes delinquent and a trip is made for the purpose of collecting such charge, during regular working hours, after regular working hours or on a holiday or if such service is disconnected, fees in addition to the deposit set out in §2-3003, if applicable, shall be assessed for such trips or disconnection as fixed from time to time by the City Council , a schedule of which shall be on file in the office of the Finance Director and these fees shall be collected under and by virtue of and in accordance with the laws of the State , the Charter of the City and the ordinances of the City applicable thereto and the resolutions and other actions of the Council . In the event such delinquent charges and fees and required deposits are not paid in full when due and payable, thereafter the City , its agents or employees may discontinue or cause to remain discontinued such water or sewer service to the property for which payment has not been made in accordance with the law. Subject to review by the Council in unusual and exceptional situations involving health and medical causes, the discontinued services shall not be reinstated until payment of the water or sewer account in full is made including any disconnection, reconnection, meter removal or main disconnection charges. 
( Code 1959 , §23-30; Ord. No. 1984-453, §1, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 1994-402, §3 5-17-94)  
Sec. 2-3005. - PAYMENT GUARANTEE AGREEMENTS WITH SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCIES. 
The City Council hereby authorizes the City Manager or his designee to enter into and execute on behalf of the City contracts with appropriate social service agencies , which contracts provide for guaranteeing the payment of water and sewer bills by customers who are social services recipients. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above relating to (1) the requirement for maintaining a security deposit as a precondition to connecting utility services, and (2) disconnections for nonpayment of charges, the City Manager or his designee is authorized to connect utility services without the posting of a security deposit, or to refrain from disconnecting services on a delinquent account, with respect to those customers for whom payment guarantee agreements are in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1984-384, §1, 8-7-84)  
Sec. 2-3006. - WATER METER TEST FEES. 
If a customer disputes the accuracy of any charge for service and requests that the meter be removed for flow testing and such meter tests within the industry tolerance ranges as valid, there shall be assessed a fee for such tests as fixed from time to time by the City Council , a schedule of which shall be on file in the office of the Finance Director. Such fee shall become due and payable upon meter reinstallation and shall be collected under and by virtue of and in accordance with the laws of the State , the Charter of the City and the ordinances of the City applicable thereto and the resolutions and other actions of the Council . In the event such charges are not paid in full when due and payable, thereafter the City , its agents or employees may discontinue or cause to remain discontinued such water service to the property for which payment has not been made in accordance with the law. Subject to review by the Council in unusual and exceptional situations involving health and medical causes, the discontinued services shall not be reinstated until payment of the water or sewer account in full is made including the meter flow test charge. 
(Ord. No. 1984-453, §2, 12-4-84)  
CHAPTER 4. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING 
 
Sec. 2-4001. - REQUISITION. 
All departments shall prepare a purchase requisition in accordance with purchasing procedure approved by the City Manager. 
Editor's note: Standard procedure number 501-2, §3.1, effective January 1, 1971, of the Raleigh Procedures Manual prescribes requisitioning procedures. 
State law reference: Public purchasing and contracts generally, G.S. 143-129 et seq.  
Sec. 2-4002. - PURCHASE ORDERS. 
Purchase orders shall be prepared and issued in accordance with purchasing procedures approved by the City Manager. 
Editor's note: Standard procedure number 501-2, §§ 3.2 and 3.3, effective January 1, 1971, of the Raleigh Procedures Manual prescribes purchasing procedures. 
State law reference: Pre-audit of disbursements, G.S. 159-28.  
Sec. 2-4003. - CONSTRUCT AND REPAIR CONTRACTS; AUTHORIZATION TO CONTRACT. 
City contracts for construction or repair work not subject to formal bidding requirements under G.S. 143-128 et seq. and service contracts in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less may be awarded by the City Manager, and the City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager such authority to contract on behalf of the City . 
(Ord. No. 1986-740, §1, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 1990-616, §1, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 1993-281, §1, 11-3-93)  
Sec. 2-4004. - EXECUTION OF CITY CONTRACTS. 
All contracts entered into by the City may be signed by the Mayor; in his absence, the Mayor pro tem; and, in addition, by the City Manager or his written designee, who is hereby delegated such authority to execute contracts on behalf of the City , unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1986-740, §2, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 2001-88, §1, 8-7-01)  
CHAPTER 5. - AUDITING AND ACCOUNTING[5] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference: Annual independent audit, §2-1003. 
 
PART 3 - PERSONNEL  
CHAPTER 1. - PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 3-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Human Resources Department shall consist of a director who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council . 
(Ord. No. 2012-31, §1, 4-3-12; eff. 4-8-12) 
Charter references: Firemen's and police relief fund, §2.14(31); credit for sick leave, §2.14(74); employee bonds, §3.8; conflicts of interest, §3.9. 
State law reference: Personnel, G.S. 160A-162 et seq.  
Sec. 3-1002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the Human Resources Department include: 
(a)  Assisting all departments in meeting their human resource needs through the development and administration of a comprehensive personnel management program, including the development and administration of personnel programs and policies as adopted by management and Council , and the implementation of procedures consistent with Federal, state and local laws governing personnel practices, and the application of sound and current personnel management techniques in administering a personnel program for the City . 
(b)  Recruiting or assisting in the recruiting of qualified applicants for all job vacancies that will provide for selectivity; providing input or identifying those best qualified on the basis of education, experience, and other merit factors; providing these selectivity factors to appointing authorities, and effecting employment of those selected. 
(c)  Assisting in the fair and expeditious resolution of grievances. 
(d)  Identifying training needs and developing programs to meet those needs in order to improve the level of services. 
(e)  Administering a sound and equitable classification and compensation plan. 
(f)  Maintaining custody of centralized personnel files of all employees. 
(g)  Administering benefit programs provided by the City to its employees. 
(Ord. No. 2012-31, §2, 4-3-12; eff. 4-8-12) 
Editor's note: Personnel policies and procedures are set out in Standard Operating Procedures. No. 300 et seq. , Raleigh Procedures Manual. 
State law reference: Civil service commission established, Session Laws 1977, Chapter 1154.  
CHAPTER 2. - CLASSIFICATION AND PAY 
 
Sec. 3-2001. - CLASSIFICATION AND SALARY SCHEDULE. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the City of Raleigh Classification and Salary Schedule, be and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this chapter.  
Sec. 3-2002. - ADOPTION TO BE CERTIFIED. 
Each copy of the classification and salary schedule of positions and the classifications thereof shall be duly certified and authenticated by the Clerk as having been adopted by the City Council.  
Sec. 3-2003. - COPY TO BE DEEMED ORIGINAL. 
When the classification and salary schedule has been adopted and approved in the manner herein provided, each copy of such schedule shall for all purposes be deemed to be an original. 
Editor's note: Revisions to the classification and/or pay plan may be made with Council approval and incorporated into the plan.  
CHAPTER 3. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  
ARTICLE A. - SOCIAL SECURITY[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State law reference: Participation in Social Security Act, G.S. 160A-166. 
 
ARTICLE B. - RETIREMENT[2] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State law reference: Council authorized to enroll employees in the local Governmental Employees' Retirement System, G.S. 160A-163. 
 
PART 4 - COMMUNITY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: The title of Pt. 4 was changed from "Human Resources" by §6 of Ord. No. 1998-454, adopted Nov. 4, 1998. Section 6 of the same ordinance changed all references to the "Department of Human Resources" to the "Department of Community Services" throughout the Code. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 4-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Department of Community Services shall consist of a director, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council . 
Charter reference: Departments enumerated, §6.1 et seq.  
Sec. 4-1002. - DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION. 
The Department of Community Services consists of: 
(a)  Neighborhood Services Division. 
(b)  Volunteer/Human Services Division. 
(c)  Satellite Services Division. 
(d)  Homeless Services Division. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §7, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 4-1003. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department include: 
(a)  Documenting the needs of the citizens of Raleigh in terms of human services. 
(b)  Documenting the services and opportunities that are presently available. 
(c)  Determining what additional services and opportunities are needed and to propose appropriate and feasible new programs for meeting these needs. 
(d)  Identifying those individuals within the community who are most likely going to benefit from the services and opportunities that are needed. 
(e)  Providing a means for making all persons aware of the services and opportunities that are available. 
(f)  Identifying and recommending responsible agents, including the State , County , private agencies , the City Community Services Department, and others to implement and coordinate the programs for the provision of services. 
(g)  Administering human service programs as designated by Council including the delivery and evaluation of services based on assessed needs and provisions for citizen participation in planning and delivery of services. 
(h)  Performing other functions and duties as prescribed by the City Manager. 
Charter reference: Authority to engage in socio-economic programs, §2.14(70). 
State law reference: Human relations programs, community action and manpower development, G.S. 160A-492.  
Sec. 4-1004. - POLICY OF NONDISCRIMINATION. 
(a)  The policy of the City of Raleigh is, and shall be, to oppose any discrimination based on actual or perceived age, mental or physical disability, sex, religion, race, color, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial or marital status, economic status, veteran status or national origin in any aspect of modern life. 
(b)  The administration, committees, commissions, and boards of the City are hereby directed to use their full power and resources, as by law duly given, to prohibit and discourage discrimination as hereinabove mentioned. 
(c)  The City Manager and the City Attorney are directed to include within the terms of all contracts of and grants from the City a nondiscrimination provision which will carry out the effect of this section; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to encroach upon the powers or immunities of the State or Federal governments. 
(d)  The City Manager is directed to establish such policies as will insure that there is no discrimination in any function or area of City government. 
(e)  All citizens of the City , individual and corporate, are hereby requested and urged to use their power and influence to the end that this City shall be one of equal opportunity for all citizens. 
(Ord. No. 1969-889, 11-17-69; Ord. No. 1971-63, 3-4-71; Ord. No. 1973-425, §1, 5-21-73; Ord. No. 1985-594, §1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 1988-106, §1, 1-5-88; Ord. No. 2014-360, §1, 10-21-14 ) 
Editor's note: Ordinance No. 1973-425, §1, adopted May 21, 1973, amending §4-1004(a), has been included herein with the publication of Supplement No. 24 at the direction of the City .  
Secs. 4-1005 — 4-1010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - CIVIL RIGHTS UNIT 
 
Sec. 4-1011. - PURPOSE. 
The unit of civil rights is charged with assisting the City in developing a community with unity and harmony based on justice; a community free of discriminatory practices based on race, color, creed, age, sex, national origin, and thus enabling the City to benefit from the fullest realization of its human resource. 
(Ord. No. 1977-473, 3-15-77, §2)  
Sec. 4-1012. - STAFF. 
(a)  The staff shall be a unit in the Community Services Department. 
(b)  The staff shall coordinate their activities consistent with the policies and practices of the City . 
(c)  The Office of Civil Rights is responsible to the director of Community Services Department. 
(Ord. No. 1977-473, 3-1-577, §3)  
Sec. 4-1013. - DUTIES, POWERS, AND FUNCTIONS. 
(a)  It is the intent of the Council that the unit of civil rights in its work will adopt the role of advocate rather than that of adversary. 
(b)  The duties, powers and functions of the unit of civil rights shall be: 
(1)  To hear, investigate, conciliate and if necessary refer to appropriate enforcement agencies complaints of discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin or age. 
(2)  To recommend to the department such ordinances, resolutions and statements as will aid in carrying out the purposes of this unit. 
(3)  To assist the Council and City Manager in implementing City Ordinance No. (1969) - 889 as amended titled "An Ordinance Authorizing and Directing That All Resources of the City of Raleigh Be Utilized To Eradicate and [Prevent] Racial Discrimination." 
(4)  To inquire into the manner and extent of the observance of the non-discriminatory contract clause of Ordinance No. (1969)-889 as amended. 
(5)  To be responsible for such other appropriate duties, responsibilities and powers as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager or Council . 
(6)  To seek to discourage, prevent and stop discriminatory practices against any individual or group because of race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin or age and to seek fair and just solutions to other controversies involving human relations. 
(7)  To define, plan and implement community educational programs in the field of human relations and human rights with the intent of fostering mutual understanding and respect, acceptance, and equality of opportunity and treatment among various economic, social, age, religious, ethnic and racial groups within the City toward the end of preventing intergroup conflict, discrimination, alienation or unjust practices. 
(Ord. No. 1977-473, 3/15/77, Sec. 4)  
CHAPTER 2. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 4-2001. - TITLE. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Raleigh "Fair Housing Ordinance." 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-1) 
Editor's note: Fair Housing, Title 8, Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 U.S. Code, Sec. 3601 et seq. ; Recognition of substantially equivalent laws, 24 C.F.R. Pt. 115. 
Cross reference: Authority to adopt ordinances promoting equal housing, City charter, §2.14(72).  
Sec. 4-2002. - DEFINITIONS. 
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Hearing Board . 
That body of citizens duly appointed by the Council to hear, make determinations and issue findings in all cases of discriminatory practices in housing resulting from conciliation failure. 
Conciliation Agreement . 
A written agreement or statement setting forth the terms of the agreement mutually signed and subscribed to by both complainant(s) and respondent(s) and witnessed by a duly authorized enforcing agent. 
Conciliation Failure . 
Any failure to obtain a conciliation agreement between the parties to the discrimination charge or a breach thereof. 
Discrimination . 
Any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion, distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or any other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex, or the aiding, abetting, inciting, coercing or compelling thereof. 
Real Property . 
Buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest in the above. 
Housing Accommodations . 
Improved and unimproved property and means a building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home or residence of one (1) or more individuals. 
Real Estate Operator . 
Any individual or combination of individuals, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bank-mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustee in bankruptcy, receivers or other legal or commercial entity, the City or County or any of its agencies or any owner of real property that is engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, renting or leasing real estate, or the improvements thereof, including options, or that derives income, in whole or in part, from the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
Real Estate Broker, Real Estate Salesman . 
An individual, whether licensed or not, who, on behalf of others, for a fee, commission, salary or other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others such an activity; or who advertises or holds themselves out as engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others a loan secured by mortgage or other encumbrances upon a transfer of real estate, or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose, or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-2)  
Sec. 4-2003. - PURPOSES OF LAW, CONSTRUCTION; EFFECT. 
(a)  The general purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To provide for execution within the City of Raleigh of the policies embodied in Title VIII of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended; 
(2)  To safeguard all individuals within the City from discrimination in housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin, or sex; thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation; to secure the City against domestic strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to preserve the public health and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights and privileges of individuals within the City . 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal any other law of this City relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-3; Ord. No. 2002-234, §1, 6-18-02)  
Sec. 4-2004. - UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES. 
It is an unlawful practice for a real estate owner or operator or for a real estate broker, real estate salesman , or any individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these: 
(a)  To refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex. 
(b)  To discriminate against an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property or in the furnishings of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(c)  To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent or lease real property from an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex. 
(d)  To refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of real property to an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex. 
(e)  To represent to an individual that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit an individual to inspect real property because of his or her race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex. 
(f)  To print, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be printed, circulated, posted or mailed, an advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property , or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property , which indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or discrimination . 
(g)  To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property for sale, rental or lease with the understanding that an individual may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex. 
(h)  To otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual because of race, color, religion, familial status, disability, national origin or sex. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-4; Ord. No. 2002-234, §1, 6-18-02)  
Sec. 4-2005. - BLOCKBUSTING. 
It is an unlawful practice for a real estate owner or operator , a real estate broker, a real estate salesman , a financial institution, an employee of any of these, or any other person , for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which he may benefit financially: 
(a)  To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to race, color, familial status, disability, sex, religion or national origin of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located; or 
(b)  To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-5; Ord. No. 2002-234, §2, 6-18-02)  
Sec. 4-2006. - EXEMPTIONS FROM HOUSING PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Nothing in §4-2004 shall apply: 
(1)  To the rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner or a member of his family resides in one (1) of the housing accommodations ; 
(2)  To the rental of one (1) room or one (1) rooming unit in a housing accommodation by an individual if he or a member of his family resides therein; 
(3)  To a landlord who refuses to rent to an unmarried male-female couple. 
(b)  Nothing in §4-2004 shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons , unless membership in such a religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex or national origin. 
(c)  Single sex dormitory rental property shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter which relate to discrimination based on sex. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-6)  
Sec. 4-2007. - PROVISIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the amount of $200 to be recovered in a civil action, provided that in the case of a continuing violation, the total penalty shall not exceed $1,000. 
(b)  The City may sue in a civil act through the General Court of Justice for appropriate remedies to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including temporary restraining orders and mandatory and prohibitory injunctions. 
(c)  In addition to appropriate civil and/or equitable remedies for enforcement of this chapter, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-7)  
Sec. 4-2008. - AGENCY NO DEFENSE IN PROCEEDING AGAINST REAL ESTATE DEALER. 
It shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter by a real estate owner or operator, real estate broker, real estate salesman , a financial institution, or other person subject to the provisions of this chapter, that the violation was requested, sought or otherwise procured by a person not subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-8)  
Sec. 4-2009. - ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES FOR CONCILIATION. 
(a)  The City shall designate an agent(s) to investigate, make determinations of probable cause, and seek to conciliate apparent violations of this chapter. Conciliation efforts may be initiated by any person(s) said to be subject to discrimination as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  The Council shall establish a hearing board which in turn shall adopt formal rules and procedures to hear complaints and make appropriate findings. Such procedures shall be made known to all parties of a given charge of discrimination . Hearings by the board shall commence whenever the agent(s) acting on behalf of the City decides a conciliation failure has occurred and the respondent agrees to participate in the hearing board proceedings. Hearings open to the public may be initiated by the responding party at any time during the conciliation process. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-9)  
Sec. 4-2010. - FINDINGS OF HEARING BOARD; NATURE OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION. 
(a)  If the hearing board determines that the respondent has not engaged in an unlawful practice, the board shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue an order dismissing the complaint. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the complainant, the respondent, the City Attorney and such other public officers and persons as the board deems proper. 
(b)  If the hearing board determines that the respondent has engaged in an unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall negotiate such affirmative action as in its judgment will carry out the purposes of this chapter. A copy of the findings shall be delivered to the respondent, the complainant, the City Attorney and such other public officials, officers and persons as the board deems proper. 
(c)  Affirmative action negotiated under this section may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment of the advantages, facilities, privileges and services of the respondent; 
(2)  Reporting as to the manner of compliance; 
(3)  Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's place of business in a form prescribed by the hearing board . 
(4)  Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment or sublease of real property to an individual; 
(5)  Payment to the complainant of damages for injury caused by an unlawful practice including compensation for humiliation and embarrassment, and expenses incurred by the complainant in obtaining alternative housing accommodations and for other costs actually incurred by the complainant as a direct result of such unlawful practice. 
(d)  The provisions for conciliation and affirmative action shall not preclude or in any way impair the enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-10)  
Sec. 4-2011. - INVESTIGATIONS, POWERS, RECORDS. 
(a)  In connection with an investigation of a complaint filed under this chapter, the enforcing agent(s) at any reasonable time may request voluntary access to premises, records and documents relevant to the complaint and may request the right to examine, photograph and copy evidence. 
(b)  Every person subject to this chapter shall make, keep and preserve records relevant to the determination of whether unlawful practices have been or are being committed, such records being maintained and preserved in a manner and to the extent required under the Civil Rights Act of 1968 and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(c)  A person who believes that the application to him of a regulation or order issued under this section would result in undue hardship may apply to the hearing board for an exemption from the application of the regulation or order. If the board finds that the application of a regulation or order to the person in question would impose an undue hardship, it may grant appropriate relief. 
( Code 1959 , Sec. 26-11)  
Sec. 4-2012. - CONSPIRACY TO VIOLATE THIS CHAPTER UNLAWFUL. 
It shall be an unlawful practice for a person , or for two (2) or more persons to conspire to do any of the following : 
(a)  To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he or she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this chapter, or because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter. 
(b)  To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of the acts or practices declared unlawful by this chapter. 
(c)  To obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this chapter or any order issued thereunder. 
(d)  To resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the enforcing agent(s), hearing board or any of its members or representatives, in the lawful performance of duty under this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §26-12)  
CHAPTER 3. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2004-591, adopted April 6, 2004, changed the subject of ch. 3 from the Human Resources and Relations Advisory Commission to the Human Relations Commission. 
 
Sec. 4-3001. - ESTABLISHMENT. 
The Human Relations Commission is established. 
(Ord. No. 1977-474, §1, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 1988-169, §1, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 2004-591, §1, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 4-3002. - DEFINITIONS. 
Human relations. Human relations shall mean those activities which promote human dignity, equal opportunity and harmony among the many different citizens who make up the population of the City . This definition shall include those activities and programs classified as promoting the general well being of citizens without regard to race, color, creed, gender, age, sexual orientation, or national origin in their daily activities. 
(Ord. No. 1977-474, §2, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 2004-591, §2, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 4-3003. - COMPOSITION OF COMMISSION. 
The Human Relations Commission shall consist of fourteen (14) members, one who shall be less than twenty-one (21) years of age, all of whom shall be appointed because of their interest in human relations. The members shall be appointed for two- year terms according to the rules and procedures for appoints to City boards and commissions. 
(Ord. No. 1977-474, §5, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 1984-260, §1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 1988-110, §1, 1-5-88; Ord. No. 1988-169, §1, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 1993-131, §1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 2004-591, §3, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 2007-279, §1, 8-7-07)  
Sec. 4-3004. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES. 
The Human Relations Commission shall serve as an advisor to the Council with respect to human services and human rights. Specifically, the Human Relations Commission may : 
(a)  Evaluate socio-economic human services needs; 
(b)  Review and comment on plans and analyses developed by the Community Services Department for human service needs; 
(c)  Advise the Council on the establishment of human resources goals, objectives, policies and standards; 
(d)  Monitor the trends and activities in human relations in the City ; 
(e)  Advise the Council with respect to assistance to be provided established organizations in the area of human relations ; 
(f)  Advise the Council with respect to the establishment of human relations goals and policies; 
(g)  Receive, investigate and attempt to conciliate and otherwise process complaints and inquiries concerning human resources, human relations and human rights that are made to the staff assigned under §4-3004 of this chapter or in any other manner referred to the Community Services Department; 
(h)  Establish a subcommittee which shall have the authority to attempt conciliation or mediation or both as to any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 1977-474, §7, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 1988-169, §1, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 2004-591, §4, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 4-3005. - PROHIBITION ON COMMISSION ACTIVITIES. 
The Human Relations Commission shall not function in those areas in which the Council has expressly legislated, and the Human Relations Commission is in no way empowered to hear, investigate, initiate or otherwise process any matter pertaining to open housing; such items shall be referred to the Fair Housing Hearing Board. 
(Ord. No. 1977-474, §8, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 1988-169, §1, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 2004-591, §5, 4-6-04)  
PART 5 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
CHAPTER 1. - POLICE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 5-1001. - POLICE CHIEF, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council .  
Sec. 5-1002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department within its jurisdiction shall include: 
(a)  Enforcement of all laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Prevention of crime. 
(c)  Preservation of peace. 
(d)  Protection of persons and property within the City . 
(e)  Performance of any other duties and responsibilities as may be necessary for protection of the health, safety and welfare. 
Charter reference: Police Department, §§6.21, 6.22. 
Cross reference: Duties of Chief of Police at fires, §5-2005. 
State law references: Powers and duties of policemen, G.S. 160A-285; extraterritorial jurisdiction of one mile, G.S. 160A-286; territorial jurisdiction of officers to make arrest, G.S. 15A-402.  
Sec. 5-1003. - POLICE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS. 
All members of the Police Department, with the exception of clerical support personnel, must live within sixty (60) miles' driving distance of the Raleigh Municipal Building. All employees of the Police Department are required to have at their residences an operational telephone. In those cases in which a telephone call from the employee's residence to the Raleigh Municipal Building is long distance, the employee must agree to accept the charges for person -to- person calls to him concerning City business or public safety emergencies. All employees of the Police Department must provide to the department their current residence address and telephone number, and promptly advise the department of all changes. 
( Code 1959 , §2-31.1; Ord. No. 1985-488, §1, 2-5-85; Ord. No. 1992-86, §1, 11-4-92; Ord. No. 2003-435, §1, 5-6-03)  
Sec. 5-1004. - COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS. 
The Chief of Police is authorized to enter into agreements with other law enforcement agencies as permitted by law for the purposes of enforcement of laws and for the preservation of peace and order. 
State law references: Cooperation between law enforcement agencies , G.S. 90-95.2; between political jurisdictions, G.S. 160A-288.  
Sec. 5-1005. - PRIVATE DETECTIVES. 
The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the City Manager, may employ temporarily, for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months , persons trained and experienced as detectives who need not be legal residents of the County for the purpose of detecting violators of the laws and ordinances effective within the City . Such temporary employees may take the oath of office applicable to full-time regular police officers of the City and shall , if sworn, possess all the powers, duties and authority of such regular police officers , but shall not be subject to the Raleigh Civil Service Act. Such persons so employed shall be subject to the orders and directives of the Chief of Police and the City Manager.  
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION  
ARTICLE A. - THE FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 5-2001. - FIRE CHIEF, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council .  
Sec. 5-2002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department shall include: 
(a)  Inspection of fire safety devices and equipment, constructions and obstructions; 
(b)  Enforcement of fire prevention codes; instruction in the correction of violations and when necessary the correction of violations through the courts as a final action; 
(c)  Responding to all calls, fire or rescue and the suppression of all fires as found; 
(d)  Training the City's firefighting force in fire suppression, rescues and in equipment apparatus and operations; and 
(e)  Supervising the upkeep of all fire stations, engine companies, truck companies, and auxiliary vehicles, including the testing and maintenance of fire hydrants. 
Charter reference: Fire Department, §6.24. 
State law reference: Fire protection, G.S. 160A, Article 14.  
Sec. 5-2003. - COMPOSITION OF COMPANIES; RESIDENCE OF MEMBERS. 
The number of members allowed to each company shall be fixed by the Chief. The number of companies shall not be increased without the approval of the Council . All members of the Fire Department, with the exception of clerical support personnel, must live within fifty (50) miles' driving distance of the Raleigh Municipal Building. All employees of the Fire Department are required to have at their residences an operational telephone. In those cases in which a telephone call from the employee's residence to the Raleigh Municipal Building is long distance, the employee must agree to accept the charges for person -to- person calls to him concerning City business or public safety emergencies. All employees of the Fire Department must provide to the department their current residence address and telephone number, and promptly advise the department of all changes. 
(Ord. No. 1985-488, §2, 2-5-85; Ord. No. 1992-86, §2, 11-4-92)  
Sec. 5-2004. - COMMAND AT FIRES; DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF. 
(a)  The captain of the company arriving first at the fire shall command the Fire Department until the arrival of the Chief or Assistant Chief, who shall immediately take control, and their orders shall be obeyed promptly. 
(b)  The Chief shall have control of all property of the Fire Department; and shall inspect it once in every week and see that everything is kept in a condition for efficient service. 
(c)  The Chief shall have power to make all rules and regulations subject to the legislative control of the Council and approval by the City Manager. 
(d)  The Chief shall make monthly and annual inspection of the apparatus of the whole department, and make a report of same and of all fires to the City Manager. 
(e)  During fires and inspections the Chief shall control all fireplugs, maintain order among the firefighters, and do all things proper for the efficient operation of the department. 
(f)  The Chief shall examine all fire alarm boxes as often as necessary, shall have all repairs immediately attended to and shall examine all fire hydrants at least once in six (6) months , and shall make a report thereof to the City Manager. 
(g)  Whenever any examination or inspection of Fire Department equipment or property , fire hydrants, fire alarm boxes, or other fixtures or equipment shall be required by this article or by any other ordinance to be made by the Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief is hereby authorized to delegate these such duties to such employees of the City as he may designate and to require reports with respect thereto as he may deem proper; but it shall remain the responsibility of the Chief to enforce such delegated duties and to require the employees so designated by him to carry out these duties in a timely, efficient and proper manner. If the inspections are not paid within forty-five (45) days from the date of the inspection a fifty dollar ($50.00) late fee will be assessed in addition to the inspection fee. 
( Code 1959 , §10-3; Ord. No. 2002-346, §1, 12-18-02)  
Sec. 5-2005. - DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE AT FIRES. 
In case of fire the Police Department upon request of the Chief of the Fire Department shall furnish such help as is necessary. In case of the removal or exposure of property , he shall detail a sufficient number of citizens, or police officers , whose duty it shall be, under the direction of the Chief of Police, to guard all exposed property and detain all suspicious and disorderly persons , and to do whatever may be lawfully done to protect the rights of the citizens and preserve the public peace. 
( Code 1959 , §10-4)  
Sec. 5-2006. - DRIVING VEHICLE IN STREETS WHERE DEPARTMENT ASSEMBLED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or operate a vehicle through the streets or public vehicular areas in which the Fire Department is assembled for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. 
State law reference: Approach of emergency vehicles, G.S. 20-157.  
Sec. 5-2007. - CONGREGATING IN STREETS NEAR FIRE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to congregate in the streets in or around the same in the vicinity of a fire so as to interfere with the department.  
Sec. 5-2008. - DUTIES OF PERSONS OR CORPORATIONS ERECTING OR MAINTAINING TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH, OR ELECTRIC WIRES. 
No person shall be allowed to erect, maintain, or operate telegraph, telephone, or electric wires or other wires or cables in the City in such manner as to interfere with the wires of the fire-police emergency boxes. When any person who shall erect, maintain, or operate any telegraph, telephone, or electric wires in the City is notified to cut off the current from such wires during the existence of any fire he shall immediately cut off the current and shall not again turn on the same until proper notice is given by the proper officer of the Fire Department.  
Sec. 5-2009. - FIRE APPARATUS LEAVING CITY. 
No engine, fire truck, or other apparatus of the Fire Department shall leave the City except with the consent of the City Manager or Chief of the Fire Department, or in the absence of the Chief, the Assistant or Division Chief, upon urgent call in cases of fire in neighboring towns or cities . 
( Code 1959 , §10-8; Ord. No. 2004-559, §1, 1-20-04)  
Sec. 5-2010. - FIRE APPARATUS TO HAVE RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
In the event of an alarm of fire, the apparatus of the Fire Department shall have the right-of-way in and upon the streets , or railroad crossings in going to any fire, or being upon such streets , or railroad crossings. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or willfully fail or refuse to make way for any of such apparatus. 
( Code 1959 , §10-9) 
State law reference: Exceptions to right-of-way rules for emergency vehicles, G.S. 20-156.  
Sec. 5-2011. - INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTER; GETTING ON OR OFF APPARATUS; LOITERING; MEDDLING WITH APPARATUS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a firefighter in the discharge of his duty, or to get on or off of the apparatus going to or from a fire without authority from the Chief or Assistant Chief, or to loiter about the engine houses, or for any person to meddle with the engine, hose, or apparatus. 
( Code 1959 , §10-10)  
Sec. 5-2012. - INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the fire alarm telegraph or the poles, wires, fire-police emergency boxes, or other apparatus. 
( Code 1959 , §10-11) 
State law reference: Molesting fire alarm systems, G.S. 14-286.  
Sec. 5-2013. - FALSE FIRE ALARMS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or aid or abet in turning in any false fire alarm in the City . 
( Code 1959 , §10-12) 
State law reference: Giving false fire alarms, G.S. 14-286.  
Secs. 5-2014 — 5-2030. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, adopted May 3, 2011, effective June 4, 2011, amended Pt. 5, Ch. 2, Art. B in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. B, §§ 5-2031—5-2045, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1991-841-TC-372, §1, adopted Sept. 3, 1991, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 5-2031. - TITLE AND INTENT. 
These regulations in Article B shall be known as the "Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance of City of Raleigh, North Carolina," and may be cited as such and referenced to herein as the Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance. References to the Fire Prevention Code herein shall mean the North Carolina State Fire Code as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council. 
It is the intent of the Fire Prevention Code and this Code to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion within the jurisdiction of the City of Raleigh. The Fire Prevention Code and this Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance shall not be construed to hold the City responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or re-inspection authorized herein, failure to inspect or re-inspect or the permits issued or denied as herein provided, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein. In the event of conflict, the more restrictive provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall prevail over the provisions of the Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11)  
Sec. 5-2032. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED. 
(a)  Adoption. 
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, explosion, or exposure to hazardous materials, the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code (latest edition) along with the North Carolina Amendments of said Code is hereby adopted by reference and is set forth herein as the Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance for the City. Any amendments to the Fire Prevention Code which are adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council, shall be effective in the jurisdiction of the City at the time such amendments are declared in effect by the North Carolina State Building Code Council. 
A copy of the fire prevention and protection ordinance, and all technical codes and standards adopted by reference shall be available for public inspection at the Office of the Fire Marshal and or the City Clerk's office. 
(b)  Applicability. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all buildings and occupancies in the North Carolina Building Code, General Construction and the Fire Prevention Code (latest edition adopted by the N.C. Building Code Council) and any other building referenced by this ordinance. The provisions of this Code shall apply equally to existing as well as new buildings. All construction, alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, and maintenance hereinafter made or installed to any building or structure, other than the exceptions to applicability listed in 102.10 of the Fire Prevention Code , shall conform to the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code . 
Where the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code or its references are inapplicable to a specific occupancy of process, the appropriate NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) or other nationally recognized standard shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11) 
State law references: Adoption of technical codes by reference, General Statute 160A-76(b); State Building Code, General Statute 143-138 et seq.  
Sec. 5-2033. - JURISDICTION. 
In accordance with Chapter 160A Article 19 of the North Carolina General Statutes, the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code are applicable and shall be enforced within the corporate limits, and also within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City . 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11)  
Sec. 5-2034. - RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT; OFFICE OF FIRE MARSHAL. 
(a)  The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Office of Fire Marshal within the Fire Department of the City , which shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief. 
(b)  The Chief in charge of the Office of Fire Marshal, also known as the Fire Marshal, shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis of the merit principle, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Fire Chief. 
(c)  The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of Fire Department as fire prevention inspectors as he may determine necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-253, §1, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 5-2035. - PRIMARY AND SECONDARY FIRE DISTRICTS. 
(a)  The Primary Fire District . 
The primary fire district of the City is described as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the center of South Dawson Street and West Morgan Street; thence east to the center of the intersection of West Morgan Street and South McDowell Street; thence south to the intersection of South McDowell Street and West Hargett Street; thence west along the center of West Hargett Street, to the point and place of beginning. 
(b)  The Secondary Fire District . 
(1)  The secondary fire district of the City is described as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the center of the intersection of South Blount Street and East Morgan Street; thence south to the intersection of South Blount Street and East Cabarrus Street; thence west to the center of the intersection of East Cabarrus Street and South Wilmington Street; thence south to the center of the intersection of South Wilmington Street and East South Street; thence west to the center of South Dawson Street and the east right-of-way of the southern railroad; thence northwest along the east right-of-way of the southern railroad to the center of South Dawson Street; thence north to the center of the intersection of South Dawson Street and West Hargett Street; thence west to the center of the intersection of West Hargett Street and South Harrington Street; thence north to the center of the intersection of Hillsborough Street and South Harrington Street; thence east along the center of Hillsborough Street to the intersection of Hillsborough Street and North Salisbury Street, thence east to the point and place of beginning, excluding that area described as the Primary Fire District in §5-2035. 
(2)  Within the secondary fire district new wood frame structures shall be permitted to be constructed or enlarged when complying with all the following : 
a.  Constructed in compliance with the N.C. Building Code, and 
b.  Building shall be fully sprinkled in compliance with standards set forth in the North Carolina Building Code, and 
c.  That exterior cladding and exterior components (stairs, balconies excluding trim) when intended shall be constructed of non-combustible materials. 
(3)  Within the secondary fire district all structures existing on the date of the adoption of Ordinance No. 2003-477 (July 15, 2003), may be repaired or altered, provided that when any proposed repair or alteration exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the value of the structure, as determined by the Inspections Director, or when the occupancy use of the building is changed to a higher hazard group, the building shall be required to have either of the following : 
a.  A fire alarm system, or 
b.  A fully sprinkled building, or 
c.  All structural components provide a one-hour fire protected construction. Exception: Type IV (Heavy Timber) construction, parking structures and those surrounded on all sides by a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11) 
State law reference: G.S. 160A-435 through 437.  
Sec. 5-2036. - ELECTRIC SERVICE ENTRANCES IN FIRE DISTRICTS. 
All electric service entrance conductors within the primary and secondary fire districts as described in §5-2035 shall be placed underground in conduit. The conductors and conduit must be of approved materials as determined by the City Inspections Department. This provision shall apply to all newly constructed buildings, to enlarged electrical services in existing buildings, and to existing buildings undergoing major renovations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11)  
Sec. 5-2037. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS STORAGE; RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION. 
(a)  Storage of Flammable Liquids in Outside, Aboveground Tanks. 
The limits on location referenced in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited, are established as follows: all residential zoning districts of the City and the primary and secondary fire districts as described in §5-2035. 
(b)  New Bulk Plants for Flammable Liquids. 
The limits on location referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: all areas zoned for any use other than industrial. 
(c)  Bulk Storage of Liquid Petroleum Gas. 
The limits on location referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of liquid petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established as follows: all areas of the City zoned for any use other than industrial. 
(d)  Self-service Stations. 
Following the issuance of a permit, unattended self-service stations shall be permitted solely for the dispensing of motor vehicle fuels into commercial or fleet vehicles. The dispensing of motor vehicle fuels shall comply with all of the provisions of North Carolina State Building Code, Fire Prevention Code and National Fire Protection Association Standard 30A for unattended self-service station vendors. Prior to commencing operations, the self-service station vendor shall make application at the Office of the Fire Marshal and shall obtain a permit to operate an unattended self-service station. So long as the conditions and limitations of the permit and the Fire Prevention Code are observed, such permit shall be valid for a time period of twelve (12) months , and it shall be renewable on a recurring basis. Failure by the self-service station vendor or operator to comply with the provisions of this section shall be cause for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11)  
Sec. 5-2038. - REGULATION OF LIQUID PROPANE GAS TANKS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  L.P. (liquefied petroleum) gas shall mean and include any materials having a vapor pressure not exceeding that allowed for commercial propane composed predominantly of the following hydrocarbons, either by themselves or as mixtures: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylene (including isomers). 
(2)  L.P. tank shall mean container; any tank or container ranging from forty (40) pounds normal L.P. gas capacity to two thousand (2,000) gallons used for the storage or handling of L.P. gas . 
(3)  Permit shall mean a fire prevention permit issued by the Office of Fire Marshal. 
(4)  N.F.P.A. 58 shall mean the current edition of Pamphlet No. 58 as written by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(5)  Standard or Code shall mean the current edition of N.F.P.A. No. 58 "Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases". 
(b)  Adoption by Reference. 
The following are adopted by reference as standards and codes for the storage, handling and installation of L.P. gas . 
(1)  N.C. Administration Code, Title 2, Chapter 38, Section .0700, paragraph or rule .0701(1) as it pertains to installation and maintenance of L.P. gas containers from one (1) pound nominal L.P. gas capacity to two thousand (2,000) gallons L.P. gas capacity. 
(2)  National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet No. 58, current edition of "Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases," with the following exceptions: 
a.  When two (2) or more containers are manifold to a single service, each container shall be considered independent of the other and all rules and regulations relating to a single container shall apply. 
b.  All cutoff valves and regulating equipment exposed to rain, sleet, or snow shall be protected against such elements either by design or by a hood. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-253, §1, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 5-2039. - ISSUANCE OF BLASTING PERMITS; REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  The responsibility for issuance of permits to be used or blasting agents within the City and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided under applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall be with the Chief of the Office of Fire Marshal. For each instance of blasting within the City and the extraterritorial area, the person or entity securing a permit shall post with the City a bond or liability insurance policy of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury or death, one (1) person , each accident; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury or death, more than one (1) person , each accident; and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage, each accident, and maintain such insurance continuously during the effective period of the permit. A blasting permit fee shall be imposed in an amount established periodically by action of the City Council . 
(b)  The blasting permit referenced herein shall remain in effect for a period not to exceed three (3) months . It shall be unlawful to engage or permit the further use of explosives or blasting agents on a project for which an expired permit was issued, without securing a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-253, §1, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 5-2040. - KEY BOX SYSTEM. 
(a)  Requirements. 
All commercial enterprises or industries in the City of Raleigh which use, store or manufacture on-site toxic or hazardous materials that must be reported with regulated materials under Title III of the Federal Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA), 42 USC 11001 et seq. , Clean Air Act Amendment 112, Chapter 95 Article 18 of the North Carolina General Statutes and the regulations promulgated there under, must have an approved on-site hazardous materials data storage/key box system at each facility where hazardous materials may be found. This requirement shall ensure consistency at all facilities storing hazardous materials so that responders can quickly locate, access, and utilize information located in the data storage/key box system. 
All facilities having a system that transmits an off-site alarm for fire detection and/or fire suppression systems shall have an approved on-site key box system (consisting of a data storage box and when required a Hazardous Material Data Storage Cabinet) which contains keys to provide fire department access in an emergency or alarm activation. 
(b)  Contents, Types and Location. 
(1)  The data storage box shall contain keys providing access to all secured areas of the facility and may also serve as the required facility key box required by state and local fire codes. The data storage box shall contain current, specific information needed to assist fire departments and hazardous materials teams responding to emergencies at the facility. This information includes but is not limited to, facility maps or plans showing the type, name and location of hazardous materials, SARA Tier II forms, lists of chemicals, with Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers that are required to be reported on SARA Tier II forms, 24 hour emergency telephone numbers for essential facility employees and other persons to be contacted in case of emergencies. 
(2)  The data storage box shall contain the Site Specific Hazardous Chemical Plan/Hazardous Materials Management Plan, specifically in the Wake County and City of Raleigh format. This form shall be updated annually, or more often as necessary, to ensure accuracy. 
(3)  The data storage box itself shall be of the type designated and approved by an Office of the Fire Marshal staff member and the Wake County Local Emergency Planning Committee and shall be located at the primary vehicular entrance, outside any security fence that may be surrounding the facility and visible and accessible to emergency responders. If the facility staffs a security control checkpoint, the data storage box may be located at the security checkpoint, but located outside any surrounding security fence, and shall be visible and accessible to all emergency responders. The data storage box may be mounted to a post or other stand alone structure, so long as the above criteria are met. The data storage box may be mounted to a structure that is located outside the secured perimeter, but shall not be mounted to the exterior wall of the facility or inside the facility housing the hazardous materials. 
(4)  Facilities may apply for a site specific variance for the location of the Hazardous Materials Data Storage Cabinet to Wake County Emergency Management, Hazardous Material Planner. It is at the discretion of Wake County Emergency Management whether to approve or deny the request. If an alternated location is approved, the Wake County Emergency Management, Hazardous Material Planner will notify the Fire Marshal as to its location. 
(5)  The type and model key box system required shall be The Knox Company and based on the criteria listed below: 
a.  Buildings with less than five stories: Model 3200. 
b.  Hazardous Materials Facility with site specific plans per Wake County LEPC: Data Storage Cabinet. 
c.  Buildings of five or more stories: Data Storage Cabinet. 
The Fire Marshal may approve other data storage boxes and Hazardous Material Data Cabinets which are equivalent to those listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11) 
State law references: Identification of Toxic or Hazardous Substances, Chapter 95 Article 18 of the North Carolina General Statutes; Fire Prevention Code ; Civil preparedness functions under State Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, G.S. §143B-475; Continuity of local government in emergency, G.S. Chapter 162B; Emergency management, G.S. Chapter 166A.  
Sec. 5-2041. - INSPECTIONS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS. 
(a)  Frequency of Inspections for Existing Buildings. 
In order to preserve and to protect health and safety, and to satisfy the requirements of General Statute 160A-424, political subdivisions assuming inspection duties, as set out in General Statute 160A-411, shall have a periodic inspection schedule for the purpose of identifying activities and conditions in buildings, structures and premises that pose dangers of fire, explosion or related hazards. Inspection schedules of existing buildings shall be conducted no less frequently than described in the schedule below: 
Occupancy Classification 	Inspection 
Frequency 
Hazardous 	Every Year 
Institutional 	Every Year 
High Rise 	Every Year 
Assembly (>100 Occupant Load) 	Every Year 
Residential 	Every Year 
Group Home 1 	Every Year 
Licensed Day Care 1 	Every Year 
Industrial 	Every Two Years 
Educational (Except Public Schools 1 ) 	Every Two Years 
Business 	Every Three Years 
Mercantile 	Every Three Years 
Storage 	Every Three Years 
Churches and Synagogues 	Every Three Years 
Assembly Occupancies with occupant load less than 100 	Every Three Years 
 
  1  Frequency rates for inspections of an occupancy mandated by the N.C. General Statutes shall supersede this schedule. 
(b)  Building Inspection Fees of Existing Buildings. 
Fees for fire prevention inspections and permits are hereby established in accordance with the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . An official schedule of such fees shall be maintained in the Budget and Management Services Department and the City Clerk's Office. 
Following the completion of the initial inspection, the fee for an inspection of an existing building shall be assessed and an invoice will be supplied to the owner, occupant, or designee. Subjects will have thirty (30) days to remit payment. After thirty (30) days, the bill will be placed in a past due status and a second invoice will be sent to the subject. After a period of sixty (60) days of non-payment, the account will be subject to a ten (10) per cent late fee and the account will be placed on hold and no additional inspections or permits will be issued, civil action will be taken through the court system after a period of ninety (90) days. 
(c)  Re-inspection Fees. 
When it has been determined that fire hazards or violations of the Fire Prevention Code exists in or upon any property, structure, vehicle, system or process, and written notice of violation and a time period to correct has been given and the period of time given to correct the fire hazard or violation has expired, the Fire Marshal or authorized representative may conduct a re-inspection. A re-inspection fee in the amount set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule may be charged for all visits after sixty (60) days. 
Payment of fees or fines assessed under the City Code does not permit or excuse the continuation of a violation or the fire hazard. 
(d)  Indexing of Fees. 
All fees will be adjusted annually on July 4 based on the average annual prior calendar year United States Department of Labor Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-918, §1, 6-21-11, eff. 7-4-11; Ord. No. 2012-65, §1, 6-18-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-184, §1, 5-7-13, eff. 7-4-13; Ord. No. 2014-303, §1, 5-20-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-414, §2, 4-2-15, eff. 7-4-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-435-TC-368, §1, TC-5-15, 5-5-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 5-2042. - OPERATIONAL PERMITS AND FEES. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Operational Permit is an official document issued by the Office of the Fire Marshal authorizing performance of a specified activity, use, or operation as required in Section 105 of the Fire Prevention Code . 
(b)  Required Operational Permits. 
Prior to commencing any of the regulated operations of this Code section, a permit shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal's Office pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 1, Section 105 of the Fire Prevention Code , along with the North Carolina Amendments to the State Building Code and this ordinance. Permits shall be obtained to conduct those activities or operations as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . Permits will not be issued if violations of the fire code exist for the specific permit operation; once corrected, those permit(s) will be issued. If violations exist as part of an operational permit, the operation or function shall not continue until the violation is corrected and a re-inspection has occurred. An existing building may be issued an operational permit for the permits listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule ; the permit will be included in the fee for the inspection of an existing building in accordance with §5-2041 above 
All permits and fees will be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule , with fees to be effective the first day of the fiscal year, July 1. Except as otherwise provided within the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule , fee increases shall be based on the average annual prior calendar year United States Department of Labor Consumer Price Index - All Urban consumers. 
(c)  Operational Permit Renewal. 
Operational permits will be valid for a period of one, two or three years and will be renewable upon completion of a fire inspection in accordance with §5-2041(a). Operational permits are valid until renewed or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-918, §1, 6-21-11, eff. 7-4-11; Ord. No. 2012-65, §1, 6-18-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-184, §1, 5-7-13, eff. 7-4-13; Ord. No. 2014-303, §1, 5-20-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-414, §2, 4-2-15, eff. 7-4-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-435-TC-368, §2, TC-5-15, 5-5-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §§1(Att.), 2, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 5-2043. - NEW CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION, PERMITS AND FEES. 
These construction permits will only be issued for a new construction project. The permit will be valid for the periods provided in G.S. §160A-418. In the event additional fees are required to be assessed during a construction project, any and all fees must be paid in full prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(a)  Construction Permits. 
In addition to any other fees and permits required by the City Code, a construction permit must be obtained from the City of Raleigh Inspections Department through the Fire Protection Division of the Office of the Fire Marshal and paid for in accordance with the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
All new construction fees will be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule , with fees to be effective the first day of the fiscal year, July 1. Except as otherwise provided within the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule , fee increases shall be based on the average annual prior calendar year United States Department of Labor Consumer Price Index - All Urban consumers. 
(b)  Applications. 
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Office of the Fire Marshal on a form furnished for that purpose, provided by the City and shall include the applicant's answers in full to inquiries set forth in such forms. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by appropriate fees and such data as may be required by the Office of the Fire Marshal and/or Development Services Team. The Office of the Fire Marshal may require details, computations, stress diagrams, professional certification and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation of a system or process. 
(c)  Contractor's License Required. 
When the North Carolina General Statutes requires that general construction, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire protection, or gas work be performed by the appropriately licensed individual(s), no permit for such type work shall be issued to an unlicensed person or firm. 
(d)  Plan Review. 
No construction permit required in this section shall be issued until a review of the plans is first conducted to determine compliance with both the North Carolina Building Code, - including the Fire Prevention Code - and the City Code , including all permits required by the City Code . No permit will be issued until all omitted required permits are acquired and all corrections are made. The charge for plan review shall be in accordance with the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-918, §1, 6-21-11, eff. 7-4-11; Ord. No. 2012-65, §1, 6-18-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-184, §1, 5-7-13, eff. 7-4-13; Ord. No. 2014-303, §1, 5-20-14, eff. 7-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-414, §2, 4-2-15, eff. 7-4-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-435-TC-368, §3, TC-5-15, 5-5-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §§1(Att.), 3, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 5-2044. - FIRE FINAL INSPECTIONS. 
Any occupancy hereafter requested, as evidenced by application to the Building Official for a Certificate of Occupancy, shall receive an initial fire code compliance inspection(s), for the establishment of an inspection file and issue any required operational permits. This fire inspection fee will be in accordance with the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . Occupying a building that has not been issued a Certificate of Occupancy will constitute a civil penalty for each days continued offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 5-2045. - SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED. 
(a)  Smoke Detectors Required. 
Every owner of a rental residential dwelling unit lawfully constructed without smoke detectors shall install a smoke detector mounted on the ceiling or wall on every level, at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to each group of rooms used for sleeping purposes and in common stairwells in each dwelling unit. Installation must be complete and smoke detectors fully operable within one hundred eighty (180) days after the application of this section. 
(b)  Requirements for Smoke Detectors. 
All smoke detectors required by this section shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Be listed by an agency approved by the N.C. State Building Code Council; and 
(2)  Be powered by batteries or by a non-switchable AC source (attached to the building's electrical current and not contain a switch outside the main panel box); and 
(3)  Be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions; and 
(4)  Be activated and provide an audible alarm. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
The owner of every rental residential unit where a smoke detector is installed pursuant to this section shall maintain and ensure that the smoke detector is kept in good working order at all times. If a battery-operated smoke detector is used, the batteries shall be replaced at least once per year . 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11) 
State law reference: 1991 Session Laws Chapter 312 §2.  
Sec. 5-2046. - NEW MATERIALS; TESTING AND APPROVAL. 
In addition to and not inconsistent with applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code , the Fire Chief and the Chief of the Office of Fire Marshal shall , on request, evaluate any new materials, processes, or occupancies requiring fire prevention permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code . Any determinations regarding new materials, processes, or occupancies requiring fire prevention permits shall be made a matter of record, shall be open for public inspection, and copies of such determinations shall be available to interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-253, §1, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 5-2047. - THIRD-PARTY INSPECTIONS AND REPORTING SYSTEM. 
(a)  Inspections and Maintenance Required. 
The owner of the property where any device, equipment, alarm, system and any other feature is required for compliance of the provisions of this Article or is otherwise installed on the property shall cause maintenance, testing and inspections of all such devices, equipment, alarms, systems and features in accordance with this Code and applicable referenced standards and specified intervals. If following inspection and testing, any device, equipment, alarm, system and any other feature does not meet manufacture's specifications or fails to perform as intended, then it shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with subsection (e) below. 
Maintenance, testing and inspections shall include, without limitation, the following: 
FIRE PROTECTION MEASURE 	FIRE CODE Ref. 	NFPA Ref. 
1. Automatic Fire Sprinkler System 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 	25 
2. Commercial Hood Cleaning 	906.3 	96 
3. Commercial Kitchen Hood System 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 
904.11.6.2 	17A 
4. Emergency Generator 	604.4 	110 & 111 
5. Fire Alarm System 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 	72 
6. Fire Doors 	703.4 	80 
7. Fire Escape 	1030.2 	
8. Fire Pumps 	913.5 	25 
9. Foam System (including 5 yr test) 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 	25 
10. Private Hydrant System 	507.5.2 & 507.5.3 	25 
11. Smoke Control System 	909.20 	90 & 92B 
12. Special Suppression System 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 	12 & 12A 
750 & 2001 
13. Spray Booth 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 	33 
14. Standpipe (including 5 yr hydrostatic test) 	901.6.1 & 901.6.2 	25 
 
Testing of all backflow prevention assemblies installed and maintained per NFPA-25 are regulated by the Department of Public Utilities pursuant to §8-2154. 
(b)  Qualifications of Inspectors. 
Only qualified personnel shall make inspections or perform testing required by the current editions of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and the adopted provisions of technical codes. Qualified personnel shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Personnel who are factory-trained and certified for the type and brand of device, equipment, alarm, system, or feature being inspected or tested. 
(2)  Personnel who are certified by a nationally recognized certification organization approved by the City . 
(3)  Personnel who are registered, licensed or certified by North Carolina or the City of Raleigh to perform the required inspections and testing. 
(4)  Personnel of the Fire Department. 
(c)  Reporting of Inspections and Tests. 
Records of all installations, inspections, tests and maintenance required by §5-2047 shall be provided electronically to the City's designated electronic reporting system. Completed records shall be submitted no later than fifteen (15) days following the applicable installation, inspection, test and maintenance. The submitted report shall contain all information required by the City's designated electronic reporting system. The fee for any report filed using the electronic reporting system shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(d)  Retention of Records. 
Records of all any device, equipment, alarm and system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the current editions of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and the adopted provisions of technical codes shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3) years following the date of any inspection, test and maintenance and shall be copied to the fire department and its contractors pursuant to either the provisions of the City Code or upon the request of the fire control official. 
(e)  Repairs. 
If any device, equipment, alarm, system and any other feature fails its inspection or operational test, within thirty (30) days of such inspection or test or the property owner shall make all necessary repairs to make the item fully operational. Defective parts must be replaced with manufacturer approved parts. If repair is not possible, the item must be replaced with devices, equipment, alarms, systems and features in accordance with this Code and applicable referenced standards. Completed records shall be submitted no later than fifteen (15) days following the applicable maintenance, repair or replacement. The submitted report shall contain all information required by the City's designated electronic reporting system. The fee for any report filed using the electronic reporting system shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
Additional inspections and testing may be required of the repaired or replaced device, equipment, alarm, system or other feature upon the request of the fire code official. 
( Ord. No. 2015-492, §2, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
Sec. 5-2048. - OVERSIGHT NOT TO LEGALIZE VIOLATION. 
No oversight or dereliction of duty or issuance of a permit on the part of any inspector or other official or employee of the Office of the Fire Marshal shall be deemed to legalize or waive the violation of any provisions of the Code of the City of Raleigh or the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2015-492, §1, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
Sec. 5-2049. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE. 
(a)  Compliance; Responsibility for Enforcement. 
Compliance with the provisions of this article, including all requirements of the Fire Prevention Code adopted hereunder, shall be enforced by the inspectors of the Office of Fire Marshal of the Fire Department. In exercising its enforcement responsibilities, the goal of the Office of Fire Marshal shall be to employ the enforcement alternatives calculated most effectively to secure compliance with the Fire Prevention Code and other fire prevention standards and requirements of the City . 
(b)  Violations. 
Any person , who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, including the Fire Prevention Code adopted hereunder, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any corrective order of the Office of Fire Marshal issued hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder shall be deemed to have committed a violation of this article and shall be held responsible and subject to the penalties and remedies herein provided. In addition, any such person owning, leasing, using, managing, or occupying any building, structure, or land wherein or whereon there exists anything in violation of this article, including the Fire Prevention Code, or any lawful order issued or plan approved hereunder; or any architect, builder, contractor, engineer, agent, or other person who acts in concert, participates, directs, or assists in the creation or maintenance of a violation of this article or any order issued or plan approved hereunder; or any person who shall erect or use any land, building or structure or any part thereof contrary to this article, the Fire Prevention Code, any order issued or plan approved hereunder; or any person who shall omit, neglect, or refuse to do any act provided for in this article, including the Fire Prevention Code, or any order issued or plan approved hereunder shall be held responsible for a violation of this article and be subject to the penalties and remedies herein provided. 
(c)  Penalties and Remedies. 
Enforcement may be by any one (1) or a combination of the following methods, and the institution of an action under any of these methods shall not relieve any party from any other criminal or civil proceeding prescribed for violations: 
(1)  Equitable remedies, including injunctions and orders of abatement. 
As authorized by the City Council, the City may apply for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this article, including mandatory or prohibitory injunctions commanding the defendant, or in the case of counterclaims the plaintiff, to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of property ; or apply for orders of abatement directing that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; that fixtures, furniture, or other movable property be moved; that improvements or repairs be made; or that other action be taken as necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of this article. The Fire Department is authorized to use the abatement power established in §5-2049 of the Code when appropriate instead of seeking Council authorization for an abatement order to be issued by the courts. 
(2)  Criminal offense. 
A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor offense as provided by G.S. 14-4; and the maximum fine or term of imprisonment, or both, as authorized by law is hereby imposed. 
(3)  Civil penalty. 
Any act constituting a violation shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the following amounts: 
Life Safety violation—First offense: 
For violations of Pamphlet 101, "Life Safety," of the Fire Prevention Code ..... $100.00 
Life Safety violation—Repeat offenses: 
For each successive violation of Pamphlet 101, "Life Safety," of the Fire Prevention Code, the penalty shall increase from the previous penalty assessed by ..... $100.00 
For violations of other provisions of this article, including the Fire Prevention Code ..... $50.00 
Any inspector of the Office of Fire Marshal who determines that a violation of this article has occurred shall either personally serve upon the violator or mail to the violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of violation and civil penalty citation. Such notice and citation shall : 
a.  State the nature of the violation and the penalty to be imposed. 
b.  Direct the violator to pay the civil penalty by mailing the citation and penalty to the City Revenue Collector, P.O. Box 590, Raleigh, N.C. 27602, or by personally paying the amount at the cashier's window, Raleigh Finance Department, room 118 of the Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street. 
c.  Notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court. 
d.  Provide and state that the penalty must either be paid as set forth above or the failure to pay must be approved by the Fire Marshal within thirty (30) days from the issuance of the notice and citation. The notice and citation shall further state that if the citation is not cleared within the specified period, the filing of a civil complaint for collection of the penalty may be initiated, together with other legal proceedings, including the filing of criminal charges. As used herein, the term "cleared" shall mean either: 
(i)  Payment; 
(ii)  Arrangement for payment to be made; or 
(iii)  A prima facie showing to the Fire Marshal that the notice and citation were issued as a result of mistake, inadvertence, or inexcusable neglect. 
e.  Provide and state that, unless the violation is corrected and the Civil Penalty paid or otherwise cleared within the specified time period or periods, respectively, the violator may be charged additional civil penalties for each day's continuing violation, as provided herein below: 
Settlement of civil claim: 
The Fire Marshal is authorized to accept payment in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the City may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations, only if the activities or non-activities which gave rise to the violations are abated or otherwise made lawful. 
f.  A penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the civil penalty shall apply in those cases in which penalties prescribed in subsection (c)(3) have not been paid within the prescribed period and a civil action has been instituted. 
(d)  Failure to Correct Violations; Continuing Violations. 
If a violation of this article is not corrected within the time specified in the notice and citation or other lawful order issued hereunder, the violator shall be guilty of a new and separate offense, and each day's further continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense, enforceable by all the remedies herein set forth, including additional civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-873-TC-344, §1, TC-6-11, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-253, §§1, 2, 1-7-14; Ord. No. 2015-492, §1, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
Sec. 5-2050. - ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY NUISANCES. 
(a)  Public Safety Nuisances Established. 
The failure to maintain the license for a private fire hydrant in violation of the Fire Prevention Code is hereby found, deemed and declared to constitute a detriment, danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and is found, deemed and declared to be public nuisance wherever the same may exist and the creation, maintenance, or failure to abate any nuisances is hereby declared unlawful. 
(b)  Nuisance Abatement Procedures. 
When any public nuisance as set out in this section is found to exist on any property , including rights-of-way and easements within the City and one (1) mile beyond the City limits, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Notice to Owner. 
The Office of Fire Marshal of the City shall notify the owner of the premises where the nuisance is located that: 
a.  The conditions identified in the notice of violation exist which constitute a public nuisance ; 
b.  The Code provision(s) identified by Code section number are violated by the stated conditions on the property ; 
c.  The Office of Fire Marshal will assess civil penalties and administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for second and subsequent notice of violation of the Nuisance Code provisions occurring within twelve (12) months of the first such notice of violation; 
d.  The property may have been posted on the date of the nuisance notice of violation with a placard or other appropriate means of notice declaring the property is a public nuisance property ; 
e.  Unless the public nuisance is abated within ninety (90) calendar days from the mailing of the notice, the Office of Fire Marshal will initiate the procedures to abate the conditions constituting a nuisance ; 
f.  The cost of abatement, including an administrative fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00), also including the cost, if any to reseed areas which were formerly a nuisance , shall constitute a lien against the premises with funds paid to discharge the lien payable to the Department of Public Utilities. 
The City Manager shall make, and may from time to time alter and amend, guidelines to be used by the Office of Fire Marshal in the implementation of the procedures to be used for posting nuisance notices of violation. The Office of Fire Marshal, to the extent required by law, shall make application for and obtain any permit required prior to undertaking the activities to abate the nuisance. The Office of Fire Marshal is authorized to request assistance from the Public Utilities Department in the abatement of nuisances. The Public Utilities Department is authorized, as requested by the Office of Fire Marshal, to abate nuisance pursuant to the section of the Code. 
(c)  Entry of Premises Authorized. 
The Office of Fire Marshal and the Utilities Departments are hereby given full power and authority to enter upon the premises involved for the purpose of posting the property as a public nuisance and of abating the nuisance found to exist as herein set out. Within the ninety-day period mentioned in subsection (a) hereof the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the Fire Marshal made pursuant to subsection (a) hereof to the Council by giving written notice of appeal to the Office of Fire Marshal, the appeal to stay the abatement of the nuisance s by the Fire Department until a final determination by the Council . In the event no appeal is taken, the Office of Fire Marshal and the Public Utilities Department may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(d)  Appeal. 
The Council in the event an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (c) hereof may , after hearing all interested persons and reviewing the findings of the Fire Marshal, reverse the finding made pursuant to subsection (b) hereof; but if the Council shall determine that the findings of the Fire Marshal made pursuant to said subsection is correct and proper it shall adopt an ordinance specifically declaring the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and a public nuisance and directing the Office of Fire Marshal to cause the conditions to be abated. An appeal of an administrative fee demand for payment must be filed in writing with the Fire Marshal within ten (10) days after service of the written demand for payment of the Office of Fire Marshal on the petitioner. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the administrative fee was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. 
(e)  Collection of the Abatement Costs. 
After the abatement of the nuisance as provided in subsections (b), (c) or (d) hereof the cost of such abatement shall become a lien against the premises upon confirmation of the cost thereof by the Council, which said confirmation shall take place only after ten (10) days' written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance existed of the proposed confirmation. Upon confirmation the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the premises from which the nuisance was abated the same to be recorded as provided in G.S. 160A-216 et seq. and to be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-253, §3, 1-7-14; Ord. No. 2015-492, §1, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
Sec. 5-2051. - METHODS OF SERVICE. 
(a)  Nuisance notices of violation issued by the Fire Department shall be served upon persons personally, by first class mail, or by posting on the property in conjunction with first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. Service by posting shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is returned and notice of the pending proceedings was posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected on the day the first class mail notice was sent. 
(b)  Abatement notices, assessments of civil penalties and administrative fees, and appeal decisions shall be served upon persons personally or by first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-253, §3, 1-7-14; Ord. No. 2015-492, §1, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
Sec. 5-2052. - APPEALS OF CIVIL PENALTY ASSESSMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES ISSUED FOR ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES. 
(a)  Any person assessed a civil penalty or an administrative fee as a result of a public nuisance abatement may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Fire Marshal within ten (10) days after service of the written demand for payment of the assessment. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the administrative fee was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. Failure to file a notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the civil penalty or the administrative fee. 
(b)  Using the information provided, the Fire Marshal shall conduct a review of the appeal. The Fire Marshal may amend or reverse the assessment. 
(c)  Unless the Fire Marshal resolves the appeal, the Office of Fire Marshal shall schedule the appeal for determination by the City Council if the person who filed the appeal so requests. The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, shall give due notice of such hearing to the petitioner and the City Manager, and shall render its decision in a reasonable time. 
(d)  The City Council 's decision on a civil penalty appeal or an administrative fee is subject to further review in the superior court of the County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within thirty (30) days after the date that the City Council 's decision is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2014-253, §3, 1-7-14; Ord. No. 2015-492, §1, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
CHAPTER 3. - POLICEMEN AND FIREMEN SPECIAL RELIEF FUND 
 
Sec. 5-3001. - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Fireman: 
The word fireman as used in this chapter shall mean and include only an employee of the Fire Department of the City , who shall be carried on the official payrolls of the City as a fireman, and who shall be engaged in or subject to active duties in the fighting and extinguishment of fires and in the protection of property and life therefrom, including but not being limited to a driver of a fire truck, a fireman-mechanic, a private, lieutenant, captain, Assistant Chief and Chief of the Fire Department. 
(b)  Policeman: 
The word policeman as used in this article shall mean and include only an employee of the Police Department of the City , who shall be carried on the official payrolls of the City as a policeman, and who shall be engaged in or subject to active duties as a law enforcement officer for the maintenance of order, preventing and detecting crime, directing traffic, or enforcing laws and ordinances, with power to make arrests, including but not limited to a private, patrolman, sergeant, lieutenant, captain, Assistant Chief, Chief, or other police officer of the Police Department. 
Charter reference: Authority to create and administer special relief fund, §2.14(31).  
Sec. 5-3002. - CREATION. 
There is hereby created and established a special fund which shall be known as the "Special Fund for Relief of Policemen and Firemen," hereinafter referred to as the "special fund." 
( Code 1959 , §2-48)  
Sec. 5-3003. - ANNUAL APPROPRIATION. 
Annually, in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, Article 3, Chapter 159 of the General Statutes, as amended, the Council shall appropriate from proper municipal revenues an amount sufficient to provide for the compensation payments authorized and directed by this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §2-49)  
Sec. 5-3004. - GIFTS, BEQUESTS, ETC.; AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT. 
The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to accept gifts, bequests and other donations to the "special fund" from any person ; provided that any and all such gifts, bequests and other donations shall be accepted and used solely and exclusively for the purposes prescribed and defined by this chapter; and provided, further, that no gift, bequest or other donation intended for this "special fund" shall be accepted if the terms and conditions thereof shall purport to impose special limitations or restrictions upon the use thereof not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §2-51)  
Sec. 5-3005. - REWARD OR COMPENSATION TO POLICEMEN OR FIREMEN, PAYMENT INTO FUND. 
No policeman or fireman in the employ of the City shall be allowed to receive and accept personally for his own use and benefit any reward for the rendition of any service of any kind which such policeman or fireman customarily renders or may be required to render as an employee in the Police or Fire Departments of the City ; provided that in the event any person shall offer to pay or tender the payment of any such reward for services, the moneys representing such reward shall be paid immediately to the Finance Director for deposit into the "Special Fund for Relief of Policemen and Firemen" established by this chapter. Any policeman or fireman who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be subject to discharge or suspension from the employment of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §2-52)  
Sec. 5-3006. - TRANSFER OF FUNDS PROHIBITED. 
None of the moneys appropriated or in any manner donated to the "special fund" established by this chapter shall be transferred to any other fund of the City . Each year any and all surplus moneys existing in the "special fund" shall be included in the budget estimate of the City and shall be included and reflected in the estimate of revenues of the "special fund," in accordance with the Local Government Fiscal Control Act.  
Sec. 5-3007. - PREREQUISITES FOR BENEFITS. 
(a)  Every fireman and policeman of the City who shall be disabled as a result of any injury by accident, or any occupational disease, arising out of and in the course of the employment of such fireman or policeman as an employee of the City under circumstances which shall entitle such fireman or policeman to compensation under the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act, G.S. Chapter 97, for temporary partial, temporary total, or permanent total disability, within the meaning of that act, shall be deemed to be an indigent and helpless fireman or policeman , as the case may be, within the meaning of §2.14(31) of the Charter and within the meaning of this chapter, and shall be entitled to compensation payable out of the "Special Fund for Relief of Policemen and Firemen," in an amount equal to the difference between the regular average weekly wages after deductions for social security, Federal and state income taxes and retirement benefits of such employee at the time of injury and the amount of weekly compensation to which such employee shall be entitled for such disability under the Workers' Compensation Act during the period of such disability, but in no case shall the period covered by the compensation provided for by this chapter be greater or longer than ninety-eight (98) weeks, effective on and after February 20, 1955; provided, if the disability shall be for a period of not more than twenty-eight (28) days, full wages or salary shall be payable under this chapter for the first week of such disability. 
(b)  The decision of the industrial commission, subject to judicial review as provided by the Workers' Compensation Act, as to any claim for compensation thereunder, shall be conclusive and final upon the question of the right of any fireman or policeman to compensation under the provisions of this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §2-54; Ord. No. 1981-654, §1, 5-5-81)  
Sec. 5-3008. - INJURIES NOT COVERED. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any injury or disability which occurred prior to July 1, 1950. 
( Code 1959 , §2-55)  
Sec. 5-3009. - RELATION TO WORKERS' COMPENSATION ACT. 
Unless an injury or disease is compensable under the provisions of the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act, as amended, such injury or disease, or disability therefrom, shall not be compensable under this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §2-56)  
Sec. 5-3010. - BENEFITS AS DELAYED COMPENSATION. 
The compensation provided for under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be delayed compensation to disabled policemen and firemen entitled to such compensation, as herein prescribed, in consideration of public services rendered in extraordinary hazardous and dangerous employment. 
( Code 1959 , §2-57)  
Sec. 5-3011. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. 
The Finance Director shall be responsible for the proper administration of this chapter.  
Sec. 5-3012. - WORKERS' COMPENSATION ACT INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE. 
For the purpose of determining the right to compensation under the terms of this chapter, the terms and provisions of the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act, as amended, shall be considered to be a part of this chapter (incorporated by reference) to the extent applicable. 
( Code 1959 , §2-59) 
State law reference: North Carolina Workmen's Compensation Act, G.S. 97-1 et seq.  
CHAPTER 4. - VOLUNTEER POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 5-4001. - VOLUNTEER POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS, AUTHORITY TO ORGANIZE. 
Pursuant to and subject to the provisions of the General Statutes of North Carolina, the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department of the City are respectively authorized to establish and maintain volunteer organizations of auxiliary police and fire officers whose members, when called upon for active duty, shall be clothed with all the power and charged with all the duties of regular members of the Police and Fire Departments. 
( Code 1959 , §2-32) 
State law reference: Auxiliary police, G.S. 160A-282.  
Sec. 5-4002. - REGULATED THE SAME AS REGULAR POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS. 
Such police and fire officers shall give the same bond and be subject to the orders and directions of their superior officers when on active duty as are the regular members of the Police and Fire Departments of the City . They shall take and subscribe the oath required by law. 
( Code 1959 , §2-33)  
Sec. 5-4003. - NO COMPENSATION; PAYMENT OF BOND PREMIUM. 
Such police and fire officers shall receive no compensation from the City except that the City shall pay the premium upon any bond which may be required of them. 
( Code 1959 , §2-34)  
Sec. 5-4004. - CALLING FOR DUTY OR TRAINING. 
Such police and fire officers shall be called to active duty only on emergency or on special occasions when regular police officers and fire officers of the City require their assistance and shall be subject to call of the Chiefs of their departments for training at other times. The Chiefs of the departments are authorized to determine when the services of volunteer police and fire officers are required. 
( Code 1959 , §2-36)  
Sec. 5-4005. - WORKERS' COMPENSATION AND INSURANCE. 
Volunteer police and fire officers shall be covered by the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act if injured during the performance of any of their duties during active service and shall be entitled to the benefits of insurance which may be provided employees of the City under the provisions of §2.14(31) of the Charter, if death shall ensue from injuries received in the performance of duties during active service. 
( Code 1959 , §2-38)  
PART 6 - CENTRAL ENGINEERING  
CHAPTER 1. - THE DEPARTMENT OF CENTRAL ENGINEERING  
ARTICLE A. - DEPARTMENT OF CENTRAL ENGINEERING 
 
Sec. 6-1001. - CHIEF ENGINEER, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Department of Central Engineering shall consist of the Chief Engineer, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council .  
Sec. 6-1002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department include: 
(a)  Performing field surveys and engineering design services as required for the expansion and improvement of the City water and sanitary sewer systems, streets , storm sewers, parks and other facilities of the City . 
(b)  Providing inspection, field engineering and office engineering and design with regard to the following : 
(1)  Street construction (annual paving program and topics program.) 
(2)  Water main installations. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer main installations. 
(4)  New sidewalk construction. 
(5)  Construction of stormwater management system. 
(6)  Manage the stormwater services of the City . 
(7)  Review and approve construction plans for subdivisions and site plans. 
(8)  Inspect construction work in all subdivisions and site plans including streets , utilities, sidewalks, driveways and storm drainage system, and the construction, reconstruction, extending and otherwise building or improving storm sewer and drainage systems. 
(9)  Inspect all construction work done by City contract including streets , utilities, new sidewalks, sidewalk repairs and construction of park facilities. 
(10)  Compute and prepare assessment rolls containing the cost to be assessed against properties benefitted by the construction of new streets , utilities, new sidewalks and sidewalk repairs. 
(11)  Enforce the following : soil erosion and sedimentation control (Part 10 Chapter 5), floodprone area regulations (Part 10 Chapter 4), sidewalks, and driveways (Part 10 Chapter 7) and stormwater control and watercourse buffer regulations (Part 10 Chapter 9). 
(12)  Compute and prepare monthly estimates and final estimates for paving contracts, resurfacing contracts, sidewalk contracts and water and sanitary sewer contracts. 
(13)  Compute fee in lieu payments and project cost reimbursements for site plan and subdivisions. 
(c)  Interpreting floodprone area boundaries interpretations. 
(d)  Assisting in the review of proposed engineering surveys and engineering works used in the planning, evaluation, and design of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §2, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 1998-454, §8, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2003-537, §1, 11-5-03) 
Editor's note: The Central Engineering Department is responsible for inspections with regard to sidewalk and driveway construction to ensure compliance with construction specifications. This includes inspections of construction materials and methods, including the location and number of driveways and width of driveways. 
Cross references: Paving policies of the City , including assessments, see Resolution No. 280, adopted 8-20-56, as amended; floodprone area regulations, Part 10, Ch. 4; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Part 10, Ch. 5; sidewalk and driveway provisions, Part 10, Ch. 7; use of streets and sidewalks, Part 12, Ch. 1.  
Secs. 6-1003—6-6010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 6-6011. - EASTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITON, DUTIES AND PROCEDURES. 
(a)  Establishment and Composition: 
The Raleigh Stormwater Management Advisory Commission shall be composed of ten (10) members who shall reside within the City limits. The membership of the Commission shall be appointed by the Council . Each member shall be appointed for a period of two (2) years except that the Council in appointing the original membership of the Commission may prescribe terms of fewer years to the end that the terms of the various members of Stormwater Management Advisory Commission shall be staggered. 
(b)  Duties: 
The Stormwater Management Advisory Commission shall have the following charge and duties: 
(1)  The Commission shall review and recommend to the Council stormwater management policies, policy changes, long range plans and their budgetary and rate impacts. 
(2)  The Commission shall review and comment to the Council on the annual stormwater management capital improvements program. 
(3)  The Commission shall respond to the City Council and city staff requests for advice on matters related to stormwater services and the stormwater management utility. 
(4)  The Commission shall present the Council with an annual report of key actions and issues and its annual work program. 
(c)  Procedure: 
The Stormwater Management Advisory Commission is directed to adopt rules of procedure necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provision of this Code , all policies of the City Council , and applicable State laws. Such rules of procedure, and any modifications to same, shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval. Except as provided in this Code , the rules of procedure adopted by the Commission shall at least provide for: selection of the officers of the Commission; the time and place of its regular meetings, which shall at least be held bi-annually, and the calling of special meetings; the procedures of the conduct of public hearings and voting. The Commission shall elect from its membership at least a chairperson and vice chairperson, who shall serve for terms of one (1) year , who shall be eligible for reelection, and who shall have the right to vote. The chairperson shall preside over the Stormwater Management Advisory Commission. In the absence or disability of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson. All meetings of the Stormwater Management Advisory Commission shall be open to the public, in accordance with the North Carolina Open Meetings Law, G.S. 143-318.10 et seq., and a public record shall be kept of the Commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The rules of procedure and minutes of the Commission are maintained as separate documents in the nature of a public record at the City Clerk's Office. The Central Engineering Department shall provide such technical, administrative, and clerical assistance as required by the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §2, 11-5-03)  
CHAPTER 2. - STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 1979-197, adopted Sept. 4, 1979, provided that "this ordinance is not intended nor shall it in any way, affect the provisions of Part 10, Chapter 3." The sections of this chapter have been renumbered by the codifier to allow for future expansion. The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from Ord. No. 1979-197. 
Cross reference: Street maintenance, §7-2001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 6-2001. - STATEMENT OF AUTHORITY. 
The procedure of improving any street or sidewalk financed by special assessments shall follow that prescribed in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes as amended and all applicable local acts enacted by the General Assembly. Street and sidewalk improvements may be initiated by the City Council or by a statutory petition of property owners .  
Sec. 6-2002. - CITY COUNCIL INITIATIVE. 
(a)  Whenever the City Council decides to finance a proposed street and sidewalk project by special assessments, it shall first adopt a preliminary resolution (resolution of intent) pursuant to Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. The Council may adopt a preliminary resolution without a petition and assess the costs against the property . 
(b)  (1) Upon the adoption of a preliminary resolution, an information meeting will be held in the neighborhood in conjunction with the local citizens' advisory Council to inform the public about existing City street and sidewalk standards and the availability of variances in these standards. At this meeting, the public will be given an opportunity to express their concerns and desires related to the public improvements. 
(2)  Efforts reasonably calculated to notify interested parties of the proposed public improvements and scheduled information meetings shall be made by the City . Such notice shall be made at least three (3) weeks prior to the meeting and may include, without limitation, first class mailings, citizens' advisory Council newsletters, and the posting of notice on the street . 
(3)  Further deliberations including review of the proposed variances to be recommended to the City Council, will be held with groups or individuals as warranted. 
(4)  The informational meeting, notice, and deliberations required in subdivisions (b)(1) through (3) shall not apply to repairs to resurfacing or to reconstruction of existing facilities. 
(c)  Following these deliberations, a hearing on the preliminary resolution (assessment resolution) and a hearing on the preliminary assessment roll (confirmation hearing) will be held in accordance with Article 10 Chapter 160A of the General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1985-613, §1, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 1987-69, §1, 10-20-87) 
Charter reference: Street and sidewalk assessments without petition, §6.44.  
Sec. 6-2003. - PROPERTY OWNER INITIATIVE. 
(a)  (1) All requests for street and sidewalk improvements shall be made by petition to the City Council on petition forms prepared and furnished by the Department of Central Engineering. This petition shall state the location of the proposed improvement, the names of the property owners affected by the petition as accurately as possible, the street and sidewalk improvement standards of the City , and the conditions for granting variances. 
(2)  A map shall be prepared by the Department of Central Engineering showing the names of property owners , location and frontage of each parcel of land or lot abutting on both sides of the proposed street or streets to be improved, and delineation of any lots which comply with the requirements of §6-2021(4)a. 
(b)  After the petition is signed by all property owners who wish to have improvements made, it is then returned to the Department of Central Engineering. The petition is then sent to the City Clerk and Treasurer to determine whether the petition conforms to the requirements of G.S. 160A-217. According to this statute, the sufficiency of the petition is determined by the number of property owners who sign the petition and the amount of lineal feet of frontage of the lands represented by the signatories, in most cases fifty (50) per cent of the owners and fifty (50) per cent of the lineal feet of frontage is required by the General Statutes; however, G.S. 160A-217 makes exception to this standard. If a valid petition is submitted, the City Clerk and Treasurer will notify the City Council that it may adopt a preliminary resolution (resolution of intent). 
(c)  The following considerations will be factors in the decision of the City Council to adopt a preliminary resolution: 
(1)  Availability of funds; 
(2)  Classification of street or streets proposed to be improved; 
(3)  Estimated unit cost of the proposed improvement; 
(4)  Impact on land use, soil erosion, water quality, and stormwater management; 
(5)  Percentage of development of lots on street or streets proposed to be improved; 
(6)  Percentage of owners and footage represented by the petition; 
(7)  Priority of the need for improvement of this street relative to the need for improvement of other streets ; and 
(8)  Time of filing petition with the Department of Central Engineering. 
(d)  If a preliminary resolution is adopted by the City Council, then the public shall be notified and informed as provided in §6-2002(b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provisions herein, the City Council, pursuant to §6-2002 may adopt a preliminary resolution of intent and assess the costs against property owners without a petition that conforms to the requirements of G.S. 160A-217.  
Sec. 6-2004. - LIMITATION OF PETITIONS. 
No petition shall be considered by the City Council for the proposed improvement of less than one block of a street and in multiples of less than full blocks except in instances when the petition proposes the improvement to: 
(a)  The end of a dead-end street ; 
(b)  The end or beginning of existing paving or sidewalk and it is requested to complete the sidewalk or paving in that block; or 
(c)  A street the remaining portion of which can be completed in its entirety and improved fully at City expense because the improvement complies with the standards of §6-2021(d), and it is requested to complete the paving in that block.  
Sec. 6-2005. - PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT ROLL. 
When the total cost of a project has been determined, the Department of Central Engineering shall prepare a preliminary assessment roll. The preliminary roll shall contain a brief description of each lot, parcel, or tract of land assessed, the basis for the assessment, the amount assessed against each, the terms of payment, and the names of the owner of each parcel of land as far as this can be ascertained from the County tax records. A map of the project on which is shown each parcel assessed with the basis of its assessment, the amount assessed against it, and the name of the owner , as far as this can be ascertained from the County tax records shall be a sufficient assessment roll. All completed preliminary assessment rolls shall be filed in the City Clerk and Treasurer's office, where it shall be available for public inspection. Notice of the preliminary assessment roll shall be published by the City Clerk and Treasurer as required by state law.  
Secs. 6-2006 — 6-2010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - STREET AND SIDEWALK STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 6-2011. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION. 
The City Council shall determine the character and type of construction and materials to be used in the construction of any street or sidewalk improvement, and it shall determine whether any or all of the work shall be done by contract or by City forces. All street and sidewalk improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of this Code and the specifications of the Department of Central Engineering as approved by the City Council.  
Sec. 6-2012. - CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS. 
The streets of Raleigh, other than state highways, are classified as principal thoroughfares and residential streets . The designation or redesignation and classification or reclassification of the streets of the City shall from time to time be made by the City Council. 
(a)  A principal thoroughfare is a street which because of the traffic it carries or will carry, is or should be wider or of more substantial construction than is necessary to provide access and service to residential property . Principal thoroughfares shall consist of: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares. 
Major thoroughfares are roadways with considerable City -wide continuity. These roadways are designed to accommodate large volumes of traffic from one area of the City to another. 
(2)  Minor thoroughfares. 
Minor thoroughfares are roadways leading to or connecting to arterials and major thoroughfares. These roadways are designed to accommodate large volumes of traffic, but not of major thoroughfare importance. 
(3)  Collector streets . 
Streets which collect traffic from three hundred and fifty-one (351) or more dwelling units, schools, libraries, art galleries or other residential institutions with similar vehicle trip generation and peak loading characteristics. Collector streets have continuity of more than one-half (½) mile in length, or they provide a connection either between thoroughfare system roads or between major traffic generators which would encourage through traffic on any street not classified as a thoroughfare system roadway. Other streets can be regarded as a collector street if the roadway is so illustrated on the City 's Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)  Commercial streets . 
A street , the predominant use of which is to provide access for abutting commercial, industrial or other nonresidential properties . 
In lieu of the above definitions, principal thoroughfares may also consist of collector streets as they appear on the "Thoroughfare Plan, Raleigh, Cary, Garner." A copy of this map is on file in the office of the City Clerk and Treasurer. 
(b)  Residential streets shall consist of: 
(1)  Residential collector streets . 
Streets which collect traffic from more than one hundred and fifty (150) dwelling units, but less than three hundred and fifty-one (351) dwelling units or from day care facilities of more than seventy (70) enrollees; or streets which collect traffic from schools, museums, libraries, art galleries, or other residential institutions that generate traffic volumes or peak loading characteristics equivalent to less than three hundred and fifty-one (351) dwelling units. Residential collector streets have continuity of more than one-half (½) mile in length, or they provide connection between either thoroughfare system roadways or major traffic generators which would encourage through traffic on any street not classified as a thoroughfare system roadway. 
(2)  Residential streets . 
Streets that collect traffic from no more than one hundred and fifty (150) dwelling units or from day care facilities with no more than seventy (70) enrollees; or streets which collect traffic from schools, museums, libraries, art galleries or other residential institutions that generate traffic volumes or peak loading characteristics equivalent to one hundred and fifty (150) dwelling units. Residential streets are not more than one-half (½) mile in length; nor do they provide a collection between thoroughfare system roadways, nor do they provide a connection between major traffic generators which would encourage through traffic movements. 
(3)  Minor residential streets . 
Streets that collect traffic from no more than forty (40) dwelling units. Minor residential streets have continuity of less than one-half (½) mile in length, and they do not provide a connection either between thoroughfare system roadways or between major traffic generators which would encourage through traffic on any street not classified as a thoroughfare system roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1982-971-TC-168, §2, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 1982-5, §1, 10-19-82; Ord. No. 1987-69, §§2, 3, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§3, 4, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95)  
Sec. 6-2013. - STREET WIDTHS. 
Street widths, from back of curbs and paving widths on streets without curbs shall be as follows: 
(a)  Major and minor thoroughfares, fifty-three (53) feet (16.6 meters) or more; 
(b)  Collector street , forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters); 
(c)  Commercial street , forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters); 
(d)  Residential collector street , thirty-six (36) feet (10.97 meters), but forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) within three hundred (300) feet of a collector street or thoroughfare system roadway intersection. 
(e)  Residential street , thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters); 
(f)  Minor residential street , twenty-six (26) feet (7.92 meters). 
(Ord. No. 1987-69, §4, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §5, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95)  
Sec. 6-2014. - SIDEWALKS. 
Street improvements made pursuant to this chapter shall contain sidewalks in accordance with the provisions contained in Street, Sidewalk and Driveway Access Handbook on file with the City Clerk. The City Council may authorize the construction of sidewalks on both sides of a street improvement if pedestrian generators (churches, schools, bus routes, shopping and office areas, etc.) create public need for additional sidewalks. The Council may also vary this standard and authorize the construction of no sidewalks pursuant to §6-2015 or asphalt sidewalks pursuant to §6-2016. 
(Ord. No. 1987-33, §1, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 1991-716, §1, 1-15-91; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §6, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95)  
Sec. 6-2015. - VARIANCES. 
(a)  It is recognized that the construction and design standards and specifications provided in this article may not safely and sensitively handle all situations in an area as diverse as the City . Therefore, the City Council, for existing residential streets , may vary the standards and specifications for street and sidewalk improvements, including but not limited to width of paving; horizontal and vertical alignment; shoulder design and treatment; pavement edge; drainage structures; grading; and elimination of sidewalks, if in the opinion of the Council , application of the standard is substantially injurious to the character or the environment of the neighborhood, and if all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The street must be classified as residential street ; 
(2)  The street is existing and abutting property is substantially developed; 
(3)  The street must serve a predominantly single family area; and 
(4)  The street by actual count does not carry more than approximately fifteen hundred (1,500) vehicles per day. 
(b)  When variances are requested, the Council shall consider the following : 
(1)  Safety to pedestrians, vehicular movement, and abutting properties ; 
(2)  Collection of significant amounts of water from other streets ; 
(3)  Availability of off-street parking; and 
(4)  Pedestrian generators (schools, office and shopping areas, bus routes, churches, etc.) and the availability of pedestrian walkways outside the public rights-of-way. 
In no event shall the travelled portion of the street be less than eighteen (18) feet (5.49 meters) in width. 
(c)  Design and construction variances may include but are not limited to the following : 
(1)  Curb and gutter on one side and shoulder on the other side; 
(2)  Header curbs; 
(3)  Shoulder and swale design; and 
(4)  Pedestrian walkways on public property outside the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1987-69, §5, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 1999-619, §1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 6-2016. - ASPHALT SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  Installation. 
Installation of asphalt sidewalks shall be permitted by the City Council only where all of the following are present: 
(1)  No curb or gutter exists on the street immediately parallel to the proposed sidewalk. 
(2)  Prior to construction sufficient right-of-way, existing or dedicated, is available to place the sidewalk in a safe location. 
(3)  There are no existing or projected stormwater deficiencies. 
(4)  No part of the proposed sidewalk extends into or over a proposed street or utility improvement as shown on the amended five- year capital improvements program of any governmental authority. 
(5)  The proposed sidewalk is either within an area that meets the linear distances established in §10-3051(a)(3) of this Code or the City Council finds that there is substantial pedestrian demand to make sidewalks beneficial. 
(b)  Construction standards. 
All asphalt sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with all of the following standards: 
(1)  The minimum stone base shall be four (4) inches. 
(2)  The asphalt shall be a minimum thickness of one and one-half ( 1/2) inches. 
(3)  The asphalt sidewalk is designed and installed in accordance with the standards of the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1991-716, §2, 1-15-91)  
Secs. 6-2017 — 6-2020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - ASSESSMENT CHARGES 
 
Sec. 6-2021. - STREET ASSESSMENT CHARGES. 
General street improvements for which assessments are levied include grading of the street right-of-way, paving and constructing bases and surfaces of the street , drainage structures, curb and gutters, swales, storm sewers, inlets, junctions, etc. In addition to general street improvements, assessment charges may include the cost of incidentals applicable to a particular piece of property and not the project as a whole. 
(a)  Principal Thoroughfares in Areas Zoned Residential Districts by the Zoning Ordinances of the City : 
(1)  Grading. 
The entire cost of grading up to and including the width required for an improvement thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) or less in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of grading in excess of street widths greater than thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(2)  Street widths. 
The entire cost of the base and surface course up to and including the width required for an improvement thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) or less in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of the base and surface course in excess of street widths greater than thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(3)  Surface thickness. 
The entire cost of the surface thickness up to and including the width required for an improvement thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) or less shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of surface thickness in excess of street widths greater than thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(4)  Base thickness. 
The entire cost of the base thickness up to and including the width required for an improvement thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) or less in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of base thickness in excess of street widths greater than thirty-one (31) feet (9.45 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) above, the maximum total cost of improvements to be paid for by any abutting property which is zoned a residential district by the zoning ordinances of the City shall be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . The maximum unit costs stated herein do not include sidewalk improvements or other particular items of cost ordinarily assessed against the property such as utility improvements, removal of encroachments, driveway improvements in excess of one sixteen-foot driveway, and other incidentals applicable to a particular piece of property and not to the project as a whole. 
(b)  Principal Thoroughfares in Areas Zoned Any District Other Than a Residential District by the Zoning Ordinances of the City : 
(1)  Grading. 
The entire cost of grading up to and including the width required for an improvement forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of grading in excess of street widths greater than forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(2)  Street widths. 
The entire cost of the base and surface course up to and including the width required for an improvement forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of base and surface course in excess of street widths greater than forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(3)  Surface thickness. 
The entire cost of the surface thickness up to and including the width required for an improvement forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of surface thickness in excess of street widths greater than forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(4)  Base thickness. 
The entire cost of the base thickness up to and including the width required for an improvement forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) in width shall be paid for by the abutting property . The cost of base thickness in excess of street widths greater than forty-one (41) feet (12.50 meters) shall be paid for by the City . 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b)(1) through (b)(4) above, the maximum total cost of improvements to be paid for by any abutting property which is zoned for a district other than a residential district by the zoning ordinances of the City shall be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . The maximum unit cost stated herein does not include the sidewalk improvements or other particular items of cost ordinarily assessed against the property such as utility improvements, removal of encroachments, driveway improvements in excess of one sixteen-foot driveway, and other incidentals applicable to a particular piece of property and not to the project as a whole. 
(c)  Residential Streets . 
(1)  The maximum total cost of residential street improvements to be paid for any abutting property shall be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . The maximum unit costs stated herein do not include sidewalk improvements or other particular items of cost ordinarily assessed against the property such as utility improvements, removal of encroachments, driveway improvements in excess of one twelve-foot driveway, and other incidentals applicable to a particular piece of property and not to the project as a whole. 
(2)  In addition to any other costs borne by the City , the City shall bear the following costs: 
a.  The cost of regrading an already improved residential street , when the City has determined that regrading of an already improved residential street is necessary or desirable; or 
b.  The cost of replacing that portion of a residential street , already improved, when in widening a residential street , it becomes necessary to replace the existing improved portion of the street . 
(d)  Street Improvements in Residential Areas Undertaken by the City Without Assessments. 
Notwithstanding the charges established in §6-2021(a)(5), (b)(5), (c)(1), the City shall make the following street improvements in residential areas without assessment: 
(1)  If street improvements are made simultaneously to both streets on which a lot abuts, assessment of the costs of the installations shall be based upon the entire frontage of one street (short side) plus the frontage of the other street in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(2)  If the lot is already served by a street which meets all City standards, any improvements to another abutting street shall be assessed against the lot owner to the extent that the frontage to be assessed exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. 
(3)  If a lot fronts on an existing street which meets City standards and abuts at the rear on another street to be built or improved, no assessment shall be made if it shall appear that no reasonable subdivision of the lot can be made by which the new arrangement of lots will benefit from the new or improved street . 
(4)  If a lot abuts on a street or road to be built or improved but physical or topographic restrictions prevent reasonable access thereto from the lot, then no assessment shall be made. In the event that such a lot later gains access formerly thought impossible to the street which was improved, no driveway permit shall be issued until the lot owner has paid a fee equivalent to the amount the lot would have been previously assessed. 
(5)  Street improvements within redevelopment areas as delineated pursuant to G.S. 160A-500 et seq. provided the cost of such work is exclusively paid from community development funds. 
(Ord. No. 1982-5, §§2—4, 10-19-82; Ord. No. 1986-855, §1, 9-16-86; Ord. No. 1987-54A, §1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 1989-293A, §1, 12-3-88; Ord. No. 1992-999, §§1, 2, 6-16-92; Ord. No. 1995-660, §§1, 2, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§7—9, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2000-905, §§1—3, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-67, §§1, 2, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Editor's note: Section 4 of Ord. No. 1987-54A, adopted Sept. 15, 1987, provided that "All petitions for street improvements which are received by the City of Raleigh prior to the first day of October, and which are determined to be sufficient as required by 6-2003(b), shall be assessed at the assessment rate prevailing on the date the petition is received by the engineering department. For City Council initiated street improvements, the assessment rate prevailing on the date the City Council adopted a resolution of intent shall be the assessment rate for that street improvement."  
Sec. 6-2022. - SIDEWALK ASSESSMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTING OR EXTENDING NEW SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  The cost of new sidewalk construction or extensions shall be assessed at the rate as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . The cost shall be assessed against the property abutting on both sides of the street . If there already exists a sidewalk on the other side of the street , the total cost of which was assessed against the abutting property , the owner of the property requiring the new sidewalk shall pay the assessment, the remaining cost of the sidewalk to be borne by the City . If the City Council decides pursuant to §6-2014 that there is a public need for a sidewalk on both sides of the street , and no sidewalk assessment has been previously levied, the full cost of the second sidewalk shall be borne by the City . 
(b)  Notwithstanding the charges established in §6-2022(a), the City shall make the following sidewalk improvements without assessment: 
(1)  If sidewalk improvements are made simultaneously to both streets on which a lot abuts, assessment of the costs of the installations shall be based upon the entire frontage of one street (short side) plus the frontage of the other street in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(2)  If the lot is already served by a sidewalk which meets all City standards, any improvements to another abutting sidewalk shall be assessed against the lot owner to the extent that the frontage to be assessed exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. 
(3)  If a lot fronts on an existing sidewalk which meets City standards and abuts at the rear on another street to be built or improved, no assessment shall be made if it shall appear that no reasonable subdivision of the lot can be made by which the new arrangement of lots will benefit from the new or improved sidewalk. 
(4)  If a lot abuts on a sidewalk to be built or improved but physical or topographic restrictions prevent reasonable access thereto from the lot, then no assessment shall be made. In the event that such a lot later gains access formerly though impossible to the sidewalk which was improved, no driveway permit shall be issued until the lot owner has paid a fee equivalent to the amount the lot would have been previously assessed. 
(5)  Sidewalk improvements within redevelopment areas as delineated pursuant to G.S. 160A-500 et seq. , provided the cost of such work is exclusively paid from community development funds. 
(Ord. No. 1979-236, 10-2-79; Ord. No. 1985-613, §2, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 1986-855, §2, 9-16-86; Ord. No. 1987-54A, §§1, 2, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 1992-999, §3, 6-16-92; Ord. No. 1995-660, §3, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §10, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 1996-814, §1, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2000-905, §4, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2019-949, §5, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 6-2023. - ASSESSMENT FOR REPAIRING, RECONSTRUCTING, AND OTHERWISE IMPROVING EXISTING SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, CURBS, GUTTERS, OR DRAINS. 
The Council may, without petition of abutting property owners , require the reconstruction, alteration or repair of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters or drains in conformity with the provisions of §6.44(a) of the Charter. If any of such improvements are required of a property owner and the property owner shall fail or refuse to make the same within thirty (30) days after notice thereof, the Council may cause such improvements to be made and assess the total cost thereof against the property abutting the improvement. In making and collecting assessments for such improvements, the procedure outlined in G.S. 160A-216 et seq. shall be followed to the extent that the same is not in conflict with §6.44 of the Charter. In the event of conflict in the provisions of the General Statutes and the Charter, the provisions of the Charter shall control. The total cost of the repairing, reconstructing or altering of driveways, curbs, gutters, drains, or sidewalks, including the cost of grading and the construction of retaining walls necessary to provide lateral support for abutting property , shall be assessed against the property abutting the improvement. The cost of relocation and construction of driveways, steps, or other means of access to his property from the street as he may deem necessary, shall be borne by the property owner . 
( Code 1959 , §19-27; Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, §6, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1985-613, §4, 7-16-85) 
Charter references: Authority for exemptions from special assessments, §2.14(71); street improvements without petition, §6.44(a). 
Cross reference: Responsibility for sidewalk and curb repair, maintenance, and replacement, §§7-2008, 10-7002(f)(2), 12-1037.1. 
State law reference: Authority and procedures for special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.  
Sec. 6-2024. - ASSESSMENT FOR RESURFACING EXISTING PAVED STREETS. 
The cost of resurfacing an existing paved street which does not otherwise meet or exceed the standards of either chapter 3, part 10 or chapter 2, part 6, of this Code, shall be assessed at eight dollars and fifty cents ($8.50) per front foot against the property abutting on both sides of the street . No assessment project will be initiated unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The base of the street meets or exceeds the standards of the City . 
(b)  The stormwater does not damage properties adjoining the street or undermine the street . 
(c)  The abutting properties are substantially developed. 
(d)  The street must serve a predominantly single family area. 
(e)  The street by actual count does not carry more than five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day. 
(f)  The abutting properties have driveways and available off-street parking. 
(g)  The travel portion of the street shall be eighteen (18) feet (5.49 meters) in width. 
Notwithstanding the charges established above, the City shall resurface the following streets described in this section without assessment: 
(1)  If resurfacing is done simultaneously to both streets on which a lot abuts, assessment of the costs of the resurfacing shall be based upon the entire frontage of one (1) street (short side) plus the frontage of the other street in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(2)  If the lot is already served by a street which meets all City standards, any resurfacing to another abutting street shall be assessed against the lot owner to the extent that the frontage to be assessed exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. 
(3)  If the lot is already served by a street that has been previously assessed a full prevailing assessment for street resurfacing, resurfacing to another abutting street shall be assessed against the lot owner to the extent that the frontage to be assessed exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. 
(4)  If a lot abuts on a street or road to be resurfaced but physical or topographic restrictions prevent reasonable access thereto from the lot, then no assessment shall be made. In the event that such a lot later gains access formerly thought impossible to the street which was resurfaced, no driveway permit shall be issued until the lot owner has paid a fee equivalent to the amount the lot would have been previously assessed. 
(5)  Resurfacing within redevelopment areas as delineated pursuant to G.S. 160A-500 et seq. provided the cost of such work is exclusively paid from community development funds. 
Streets resurfaced under this section which are later improved, resurfaced again pursuant to the provisions of this section, rebuilt, or reconstructed to the standards of either chapter 3, part 10 or chapter 2, part 6 of this Code shall be assessed the full prevailing assessment for such subsequent improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1987-69, §7, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 1996-814, §2, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 1998-315, §§1, 2, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 1998-377, §§1—3, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 1998-430, §1, 10-6-98; Ord. No. 2000-830, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 2008-463, §1, 10-7-08)  
Sec. 6-2025. - PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS. 
Assessments shall be payable in cash, or, if any property owner should so elect and give notice of the fact in writing to the City , in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 160A-232, such property owner shall have the option and privilege of paying the assessment in ten (10) equal installments, such installments to bear interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum from the date of the confirmation of the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 1987-69, §6, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 1996-814, §3, 2-6-96)  
Secs. 6-2026 — 6-2030. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE D. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS AND OTHER ITEMS 
 
Sec. 6-2031. - RESERVED. 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1998-377, §4, adopted July 21, 1998, repealed §6-2031 which pertained to responsibilities of property owners and derived from Ord. No. 1988-293, §1, adopted Dec. 13, 1988.  
Sec. 6-2032. - DEDICATED STREETS NOT OPENED. 
Dedicated streets not opened shall not be opened or maintained unless first improved by the owners of the property abutting thereon by the installation of improvements in conformity with City standards. Submission of a sufficient petition as provided in this chapter by abutting property owners requesting the improvement of the street on an assessment basis shall be considered as compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §11, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95) 
Cross references: City standards for streets , Part 10 chapters 3 and 7; Street Sidewalk and Driveway Access Handbook on file with the City Clerk. 
Editor's note: The provisions of Part 10 chapter 3 are unaffected by the provisions of Part 6 chapter 2, Ordinance No. (1979)-197 uncodified §2. 
State law reference: S.L. 1989 Chapter 511.  
CHAPTER 3. - RENAMING STREETS 
 
Sec. 6-3001. - PROCEDURES FOR RENAMING STREETS. 
Before the name of any street located within the City or located outside the City within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall be renamed by the City Council, the City Council must first: 
(a)  Establish a general procedure for renaming streets ; and 
Policy reference: Street names, City standard procedure, 900-9. 
(b)  Cause notice of the time, place and subject matter of the hearing to be prominently posted at the County courthouse and posted in at least two (2) public places in the township or townships where the road is located at least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing; and 
(c)  Conduct a public hearing on the matter and at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing cause notice of the time, place and subject of the public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation; and 
(d)  Notify the Wake County Board of Commissioners of any proposed street renaming inside the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City ; and 
(e)  Obtain the concurrence of the board of transportation if the road to be named is on the State road system. 
After approving the renaming of a public road, the City shall cause notice of its action to be given to the local postmaster with jurisdiction over the road, to the board of transportation if the road is on the State road system, and to any City within five (5) miles of the road. 
(Ord. No. 1990-495A, §1, 2-20-90) 
State law reference: Authority for above provisions, G.S. 153A-240.  
CHAPTER 4. - STORMWATER SERVICES 
 
Sec. 6-4001. - FINDINGS. 
(a)  Stormwater poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare because if unmanaged it floods properties, erodes watercourses and channels, and pollutes streams and rivers. 
(b)  By mapping, planning, constructing, operating, cleaning, regulating and maintaining the natural and constructed stormwater management system , the City reduces the adverse effects of stormwater and improves the quality of groundwater, streams, rivers, and lakes in and around the City . 
(c)  Providing a stable source of funding for stormwater services , as hereafter defined, can best be accomplished through stormwater management utility funds . Such a utility will benefit owners and occupants of developed land in the City and other Raleigh citizens. 
(d)  The amount of impervious surface on a property is the single most important factor affecting the peak rate of runoff, the total volume discharged, and pollutant loadings of stormwater that flows from property . 
State law reference: Authority to adopt a stormwater management utility, Chapter 160A, Article 16. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03)  
Sec. 6-4002. - DEFINITIONS. 
All definitions as used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meaning given herein: 
Customer or consumer means the person or entity to which a bill for stormwater service charges is sent. 
Developed land means real property that contains impervious surfaces , and includes improved land without structures and land on which improvements are under construction. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms physically arranged to create an housekeeping establishment with separate facilities for cooking, sleeping and toilet for occupancy by one (1) or more persons. 
Impervious surface means any surface which because of its material composition or compacted nature impedes or prevents natural infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, balconies, decks, including wooden slatted decks, athletic courts, swimming pools, excluding the water area of swimming pools, streets , parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, and any concrete, stone, brick, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces. Ungraveled natural footpaths, water surfaces of lakes streams and swimming pools and drain fields are not impervious surfaces . 
Other residential and nonresidential developed land means any individual lot or parcel of developed land that is not single-family developed land . It includes, but is not limited to, land upon which there are residential structures that contain more than one (1) dwelling unit , such as multi-family dwellings (duplexes and greater), manufactured home park, as defined in Part 10, §10-2002, condominiums, apartments, boarding houses, rooming houses, fraternity houses, sorority houses, dormitories, churches; institutional buildings, whether public or private; hospitals, rest homes, public and private schools, colleges, and universities, commercial, office, hotels and motels, and industrial buildings, storage areas, parking lots and land containing improvements under construction or impervious surfaces . 
Property owner or owner means the owner of a real property as shown on the Wake County tax records. 
Single-family equivalent unit (SFEU) is the median of impervious surface on a single-family (detached home) developed land in the City as established by City Council resolution. 
Single-family developed land means an individual lot or parcel of land developed with only one (1) single-family (attached [townhome] or detached) dwelling unit , one (1) manufactured home, or one (1) mobile home, and the ownership interest of the land and of the dwelling unit are united and identical. Single-family developed land shall not include structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes or other residential and nonresidential developed property . 
Stormwater management service charge is the charge to provide stormwater services to developed property . The charge is based upon the single-family equivalent unit (SFEU) as calculated for that property . 
Stormwater management system or system means the system of natural and constructed devices for collecting and transporting stormwater. It includes, but is not limited to, structural drainage systems such as open swales and ditches, catch basins, pipes, inlets, storm sewers, drains, culverts, junction boxes, and other stormwater management facilities that affect the quality and quantity of stormwater located within dedicated public street rights-of-way and City of Raleigh permanent drainage easements accepted by the City and all natural stormwater drainage systems. 
Stormwater management utility funds mean the stormwater management service charges and the interest generated by those charges. 
Stormwater services means City stormwater management programs designed to protect water quality by controlling the level of pollutants in, and the quantity and flow of, stormwater and City service of structural and natural stormwater and drainage systems of all types. Stormwater services include any cost necessary to assure that all aspects of stormwater quality and quantity are managed in accordance with federal and State laws, regulations and rules, and costs related to the mapping, planning, construction, operation, maintenance, inspection, management and regulation of the stormwater management system and the regulation of impervious surface and stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 2004-571-TC-243, §§1, 2, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 6-4003. - CREATION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT. 
All stormwater management service charges and interest generated by such charges, the stormwater management utility funds , shall be placed in a separate City account and shall be used by the City of Raleigh solely for the operational costs, maintenance costs, and management costs, indirect costs, capital improvements, debt principal and debt service, and establishment of a reserve fund for stormwater services . The City may use funds that are not stormwater management utility funds to provide stormwater services. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03)  
Sec. 6-4004. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICE CHARGES. 
(a)  All developed land in the City , whether public or private, shall be subject to a stormwater management service charge . Exemptions shall not be allowed based on age, tax exemption, or other status of an individual or organization. Stormwater management service charges may be subject to a credit system as further provided herein 
(b)  Stormwater management service charges on developed land shall be set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . These charges will be determined and modified from time to time by the City Council so that the revenues generated by said charges will be used to pay the principal and the interest on the debt incurred for stormwater purposes, and such expenses as are reasonably necessary for providing stormwater services within the City of Raleigh. 
Cross reference: The amount of impervious surface area for single-family equivalent units , the base rate, the tier structure for single-family developed land and late charges are set forth in Resolution No. (2003)-888. 
(c)  Computation of stormwater management service charges. 
For Other residential and nonresidential land , the monthly stormwater management service charges on developed land is calculated by dividing the total impervious surface area of the property divided by one (1) single-family equivalent unit , rounded to the nearest tenth, multiplied by the established monthly single-family equivalent unit rate as fixed by City Council Resolution. 
For developments with common property containing impervious surfaces, such as townhouse developments, cluster unit developments, or condominiums, each dwelling unit shall be responsible for its equal pro rata share of the total impervious surfaces area of the common areas of the development not served by City of Raleigh water or sewer or both unless other arrangements are made pursuant to §6-4006(e). 
(d)  The following exemptions from stormwater management service charges are allowed: 
(1)  Undeveloped land. 
(2)  Improved public streets , not including internal roads within public facilities which have been conveyed to the North Carolina Department of Transportation or City of Raleigh and which are used by the general public for motor vehicle transportation, and private streets constructed in accordance with the Raleigh City Code and City of Raleigh Streets Sidewalks and Driveway Access Handbook. 
(3)  Railroad tracks. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land shall not be exempted from stormwater management service charges . 
(4)  Developed land with less than four hundred (400) square feet of impervious surface area. 
(5)  Portions of developed land that directly drain outside the City limits. 
No exemption authorized under subsections (4) and (5) shall be made until a written request to the Chief Engineer of the City documenting the application of the exemption is approved. The Chief Engineer may approve or reject the request in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 2004-571-TC-243, §§3, 4, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 2019-949, §4, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 6-4005. - CREDITS APPLICABLE TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICE CHARGES. 
(a)  The City may provide a system of credits to reduce stormwater management service charges for properties on which stormwater control measures substantially mitigates the peak discharge or runoff pollution flowing from such properties or substantially decreases the City's cost of maintaining the stormwater management system . The Central Engineering Department will develop written policies to implement the credit system. No credit will be authorized until the City Council approves written policies to implement the system of credits; a copy of the approved policies shall be on file with the City Clerk. The City's policies may make credits retroactive to the date stormwater management service charges were initiated. Any bill charges requiring adjustments must be applied through the utility billing system. But no credit will be granted for more than three (3) past years . Nothing shall prevent the City Council from modifying the adopted system of credits, and such modifications may apply to holders of existing credits. 
(b)  Each credit allowed against the stormwater management service charge is conditioned on the continuing operation and functioning of the stormwater control measure as designed; credited stormwater control measures must comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, and credits may be rescinded for noncompliance with these standards. 
(c)  Each credit for which a customer applies shall be subject to review and approval by the Chief Engineer or his designee. The Chief Engineer may approve or reject any application for a credit in whole or in part. 
(d)  Credits shall only be applied to developed lands containing the credited stormwater control measure. For developments with common property containing credited stormwater control measures such as townhouse developments, cluster unit developments, or condominiums, each dwelling unit shall be eligible for its equal pro rata share of the credit unless other arrangements for billing the stormwater management service charge are made pursuant to §6-4006(e). 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03)  
Sec. 6-4006. - BILLING METHOD, RESPONSIBLE PARTIES. 
(a)  Bills for stormwater service shall be sent at regular periodic intervals. Stormwater management service charges may be billed on a combined utility bill that also contains charges for sewer service or combined sewer and water service and/or solid/waste management service. Stormwater management service charges that are shown on a combined utility bill may be for a different service period than that used for sewer service or combined sewer and water service. 
(b)  Stormwater management service charges for a property that receives sewer service or combined sewer and water service will be sent to the customer receiving such service. However, where multiple water and sewer accounts exist for a single parcel, the bill for stormwater management service charges may for good cause shown at the discretion of the City be sent to the property owner . Additional policies concerning billing will be developed by the City . 
(c)  The property owner is ultimately responsible for payment of the stormwater management service charge for property for which the party billed has not paid the stormwater management service charge. 
(d)  Owners of property may, with the consent of the City , designate each occupant of the property as the party to receive the bill for stormwater management service charge by completing and properly executing a form provided by the City . Such designation shall fairly allocate the impervious surfaces actually used by the billed party, and it shall be binding for the period of time specified by the City . No occupant may be designated as the party to receive the bill for stormwater management service charge unless the occupant is also receiving a City sewer service or combined sewer and water service bill. Such transfer does not relieve either the owner or occupant from liability for stormwater management service charges if they are not paid by the party billed. 
(e)  The residents of townhouse, cluster unit, and condominium developments and other similar properties containing impervious surface in common areas may in accordance with this subsection charge the total impervious surface of all commonly-owned or common areas to the homeowners association. The bill for stormwater management service charge will be sent to the homeowners' association upon official request of a majority of all lot or unit owners of the association; provided that (1) the current adopted budget of the association includes this additional charge to the homeowners association, (2) the association is receiving a City sewer service bill or combined sewer and water service bill and (3) a payment bond in the amount of six (6) months estimated bill in favor of the City . Stormwater management service charges applied to all individually-owned property within the development may likewise be billed to the homeowners association. Any request for homeowner association billing must contain all information required by the City and shall be binding for the period of time specified by the City . 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03)  
Sec. 6-4007. - PAYMENT PROVISIONS; UTILITY TERMINATION. 
(a)  Where stormwater management service charges appear on a combined utility bill or a master summary bill, and a customer does not pay the service charges for all the utilities on the bill, the partial payment will be applied to the respective service charges in the following order: delinquent stormwater management service charges , delinquent recycling and/or solid waste management service charges, delinquent sewer service or combined sewer and water charges, current stormwater charges, current recycling and/or solid waste management service charges and current sewer service or combined sewer and water charges. 
(b)  Stormwater management service charges are due at the collection office in City hall within the time period stated on the bill. Bills not paid within this time shall be charged a late fee as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
(c)  Where a property receives sewer service or combined sewer and water service, if stormwater management service charges for that property are not paid, sewer service or combined sewer and water service to that property may be terminated, whether or not the stormwater management service charges were included on a combined utility bill. Termination will be handled in accordance with standard operation provisions of the City . At least twenty-one (21) days prior to termination of service, the City will post a sign or signs either upon the subject property or at convenient locations as it deems appropriate. Such posting shall advise that City sewer service or combined sewer and water service may be terminated and direct further inquiry to a listed telephone number. All postings are for the convenience of the public and any defective posting shall not invalidate the termination of City utility services. 
(d)  No property for which stormwater management service charges are outstanding is entitled to receive sewer service or combined sewer and water service until the outstanding stormwater management service charge on that property is paid. No customer with a delinquent stormwater management service account is entitled to open a sewer service or a combined sewer and water account at the same or different location until the delinquency has been satisfied. 
(e)  If property is underbilled, or not billed, or a bill is sent to the wrong party, the City may backbill up to a three- year period. 
(f)  Customers with complaints about the accuracy of stormwater management service charges are entitled to a review as provided in section 6-4008. No charge will be retroactively adjusted to resolve customer complaints for a period of more than three- year prior to the date the City received the complaint. Any bill charges requiring adjustment must be applied through the utility billing system. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 6-4008. - APPEAL. 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the Chief Engineer. At the discretion of the Chief Engineer, the appeal may be required to include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor and such other information that show the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to the stormwater events. 
(2)  Using the information provided, the Chief Engineer shall conduct a technical review pursuant to good engineering practices. The Chief Engineer may adjust the stormwater service management charge so long as the adjustment is in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. At the conclusion of the review, the Chief Engineer shall issue a written determination stating whether an adjustment to the stormwater service management charge is appropriate, and if so, the percentage of such adjustment. Any approved adjustments must be communicated in writing to the appropriate utility billing staff. 
(3)  An appeal may be taken from any decision of the Chief Engineer which is adverse to the customer by giving notice of appeal to the City Manager within thirty (30) days after service of the Chief Engineer's written decision on the customer . Notice of appeal shall be given by the customer by delivery of a written statement to the City Manager stating the grounds for the appeal and providing the City Manager with a copy of the written decision of the Chief Engineer. The Chief Engineer shall transmit to the City Manager and the customer all documents constituting the record upon which the Chief Engineer's decision was made. 
(4)  All decisions of the Chief Engineer and City Manager shall be served on the customer personally or by registered or certified mail. Mailing shall be based upon the billing address of the customer . 
(5)  Following the decision of the City Manager, the customer may make an appeal to the City Council. The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, shall give due notice of such hearing to the customer and the manager, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. 
(6)  When an appeal is from a decision authorizing an adjustment to the customer's bill, the Chief Engineer's decision shall remain in effect until and unless reversed or otherwise modified. 
No adjustment to a customer's bill shall be made which is for more than the three-year period immediately preceding the date that the customer's request is first received by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03)  
Sec. 6-4009. - LIMITATIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY. 
(a)  The City shall be responsible only for the portions of the drainage system which are in City maintained street rights-of-way and permanent storm drainage easements conveyed to and accepted by the City. Repairs and improvements to the drainage system shall be in accordance with established standards, policies, and schedules. 
(b)  The City's acquisition of permanent storm drainage easements and/or the construction or repair by the City of stormwater control measures and drainage facilities does not constitute a warranty against stormwater hazards, including, but not limited to, flooding, erosion, or standing water. 
(Ord. No. 2003-537, §3, 11-5-03)  
PART 7 - SOLID WASTE SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, adopted Nov. 4, 1998, deleted and reenacted Pt. 7 as set out herein. Section 10 of 1998-454 transferred sections 7-2001—7-2008 to become Ch. 6 of Part 11. Prior to the enactment of 1998-454, Pt. 7 pertained to the Department of Public Works. The former §7-1002 derived from Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, §§4, 5, adopted Dec. 6, 1983. The former §§7-3001—7-3007 derived from Code 1959 , §§11-1—11-5, 11-7; Ord. No. 1975-774, §1, adopted Feb. 18, 1975; Ord. No. 1977-661, §1, adopted Nov. 15, 1977; Ord. No. 1978-751, §1, adopted March 2, 1978; Ord. No. 1980-544, §1, adopted Dec. 9, 1980; Ord. No. 1981-687, §§1, 2, adopted June 16, 1981; Ord. No. 1983-38, §1, adopted April 5, 1983; Ord. No. 1985-553, §§1—4, adopted May 7, 1985; Ord. No. 1986-812, §1, adopted June 17, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-983, §§1—8, adopted May 19, 1987; Ord. No. 1988-146, §§1—3, adopted April 19, 1988; Ord. No. 1988-231, §§1—5, adopted Aug. 2, 1988; Ord. No. 1989-351, §1, adopted April 18, 1989; Ord. No. 1990-593, §1, adopted June 5, 1990; Ord. No. 1990-696, §1, adopted Dec. 11, 1990; Ord. No. 1990-697, §1, adopted Dec. 11, 1990; Ord. No. 1991-743, §§1, 2, adopted March 19, 1991; Ord. No. 1991-782, §§1, 2, 4, adopted May 21, 1991; Ord. No. 1991-807, §1, adopted June 28, 1991; Ord. No. 1991-808, §1, adopted June 28, 1991; Ord. No. 1991-809, §1, adopted June 28, 1991; Ord. No. 1992-1, §1, adopted June 23, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-35, §1, adopted Aug. 4, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-36, §1, adopted Aug. 4, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-47, §1, adopted Sept. 1, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-68, §1, adopted Oct. 6, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-104, §§1, 2, adopted Dec. 8, 1992; Ord. No. 1993-125, §1, adopted Feb. 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1993-286, §§1—3, adopted Nov. 16, 1993; Ord. No. 1993-289, §§1—3, adopted Nov. 16, 1993; Ord. No. 1994-361A, §§1—5, adopted March 16, 1994; Ord. No. 1994-366, §§1, 2, adopted April 5, 1994; Ord. No. 1997-38, §§1, 2, adopted Jan. 21, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-154, adopted July 1, 1997. Prior to the enactment of 1998-454, §3 of Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, adopted Dec. 6, 1983, changed the title of Pt. 7 from "Public Works and Code Enforcement," to "Public Works," and changed the title of Ch. 2 from "Street and Sidewalks" to "Street Maintenance." §57 of 1983-245-TC-205 transferred Ch. 4, "Building and Housing Code Enforcement" to Part 10, Ch. 6 and Ch. 5, "Health, Sanitation and Public Nuisances" to Part 12, Ch. 6. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - THE DEPARTMENT OF SOLID WASTE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 7-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Department of Solid Waste Services shall consist of a Director of Solid Waste Services, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and City Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 7-1002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the Department of Solid Wastes Services shall include the following : 
Collecting solid waste from residential and commercial establishments, operating sanitary landfills and other approved facilities for disposal of solid waste generated within the corporate limits of the City of Raleigh; supervising and controlling access to rental landfill; administering recovery and sale of scrap metals and glass, removing dead animals during normal working hours, and emptying street cans throughout the City . 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98) 
Charter reference: Department of Public Works, §§6.16—6.18. 
State law references: Establishment and control of streets , G.S. 160A-196 et seq. ; solid waste collection and disposal, G.S. 160A-311(6), G.S. 160A-02.  
CHAPTER 2. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: Sections 7-2001—7-2008 were transferred by §10 of Ord. No. 1998-454, adopted Nov. 4, 1998, to become Ch. 6 of Part 11. Section 9 of 1998-454 added new §§7-2001—7-2005, and renumbered sections 7-3006 and 7-3007 as 7-2006 and 7-2007. The editor's footnote to Part 11 should also be consulted. Prior to the amendment of Pt. 7 by 1998-454, sections 7-2002 and 7-2004, as amended by 1983-245-TC-205, adopted Dec. 6, 1983, were transferred by §57 of that ordinance to become Ch. 7 of Part 10. Section 7-2003 was transferred by §9 to §12-1037.1. Sections 7-2005—7-2010 were renumbered 7-2002—7-2007 by §58. See the editor's footnote to Part 7 for further information. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7-2001. - DEFINITIONS. 
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings, respectively, ascribed to them in this section. 
(a)  Waste. 
Useless, unused, unwanted, or discarded materials resulting from natural community activities, including solids, liquids, and gases. Clean excavated earth devoid of any of the substances described in parts (1) through (9) of this section shall not be considered waste material for the purpose of §7-2007 of this Chapter and will therefore be exempt from the tipping fee. 
(b)  Refuse. 
Solid waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish and ashes. 
(c)  Garbage. 
Animal and vegetable refuse resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including a minimum amount of liquid necessary incident thereto. 
(d)  Ashes. 
Refuse resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material. 
(e)  Rubbish. 
Refuse (exclusive of garbage and ashes) including but not limited to paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, tires, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust, except for dust incidental to excavated earth. 
(f)  Building rubbish. 
Rubbish from construction, remodeling, and repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, and other structures, including but not limited to stones, brick, plaster, lumber, concrete, and waste parts occasioned by installations and replacements. 
(g)  Combustible refuse. 
Refuse, capable of incineration or burning, such as garbage, paper, rags, boxes and wood. 
(h)  Noncombustible refuse. 
Refuse not capable of incineration or burning, such as ashes, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, crockery, and glass. 
(i)  Industrial waste. 
Waste from factories, processing plants, and other manufacturing enterprises. 
(j)  Regulations. 
Regulations of the City Manager of the City , now or hereafter in effect, promulgated under this chapter or other authority. 
(k)  White goods. 
Residential appliances limited to washing machines, clothes dryers, stoves, ranges, ovens, refrigerators, freezers, dishwashers, and water heaters. 
(l)  Sharps. 
Needles, syringes with attached needles, capillary tubes, slides and cover slips. 
( Code 1959 , §19-22; Ord. No. 1983-98, §1, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 1985-639A, §§1—5, 9-17-85; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §12, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 1998-361, §§1—6, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98)  
ARTICLE B. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 7-2002. - ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCING OFFICER. 
The collection, removal and disposition of all waste from premises in the City shall be under the jurisdiction of the City Manager, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
( Code 1959 , §19-27; Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, §6, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1985-613, §5, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 1987-25, §1, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 7-2002.1. - ENFORCEMENT BY SOLID WASTE SERVICES DEPARTMENT. 
The Solid Waste Services Director, or his designee, is clothed with full power and authority imposed by this and other related sections of the Raleigh City Code and is hereby authorized to carry out its provisions. The Solid Waste Services Department is given the authority to prevent items banned from landfills, as set forth in N.C. Gen. Stat. §130A-309.10(f), from entering the waste stream through education, press release, public notice, other communications and events, and/or direct enforcement including the assessment of administrative fees and civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-822, §1, 1-4-11)  
Sec. 7-2002.2. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND CIVIL PENALTIES. 
(a)  Except as otherwise stated, the owner of record and/or tenant of any building, unit, or land in the City notice of violation of any provision contained within Part 7 of the Raleigh City Code, after issuance of an initial warning, shall be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(b)  Except as otherwise stated, the owner of record and/or tenant of any building, unit, or land in the City shall be subject to a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) civil penalty upon the issuance of a second notice of violation within a twelve (12) month period. For each subsequent violation within twelve (12) months of the issuance of a notice of violation the owner of record and/or tenant of any building, unit, or land in the City shall be subject to a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) civil penalty. Each twenty-four (24) hour period during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense; a separate civil penalty shall be assessed for each twenty-four (24) hour period during which a violation exists. 
(c)  Upon inspection of any property any owner of record and/or tenant of any building, unit, or land in the City placing items banned from landfills, as set forth in N.C. Gen. Stat. §130A-309.10(f), in solid waste containers or contaminating recycle loads shall be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation. 
(d)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within thirty (30) days after being notified of the amount due, the City may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(Ord. No. 2011-822, §2, 1-4-11)  
Sec. 7-2002.3. - APPEAL OF CIVIL PENALTY ASSESSMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES. 
(a)  Any person assessed a civil penalty or an administrative fee may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of the Solid Waste Services Department within ten (10) days after service of the written demand for payment of the assessment. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the administrative fee or civil penalty was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. Failure to file a notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the civil penalty or the administrative fee. 
(b)  Using the information provided, the Director of the Solid Waste Services Department shall conduct a review of the appeal. The Director of Solid Waste Services may amend or reverse the assessment. 
(c)  Unless the Director of Solid Waste Services resolves the appeal, the Director of Solid Waste Services shall schedule the appeal for determination by the City Council if the person who filed the appeal so requests. The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, shall give due notice of such hearing to the petitioner and the City Manager, and shall render its decision in a reasonable time. 
(d)  The City Council 's decision on a civil penalty appeal or an administrative fee is subject to further review in the Superior Court of Wake County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within thirty (30) days after the date that the City Council 's decision is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-822, §3, 1-4-11)  
Sec. 7-2003. - REGULATIONS, PROMULGATING AND CHANGING. 
(a)  The City Manager shall make, and may from time to time alter and amend, such regulations as are expressly required by the provisions of this chapter, and may make, and from time to time alter, amend or revoke such other regulations as to the applications, administration, interpretation and enforcement of this chapter as are necessary or expedient to execute and make effective its provisions; provided, no such regulations shall be in conflict with the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance or any statute. 
(b)  All regulations made by the City Manager and all alterations, amendments and revocations thereof, shall be published at least once in a daily newspaper published and of general circulation in the City , and shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication. 
( Code 1959 , §19-28; Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 7-2004. - COLLECTION PRACTICES. 
(a)  Availability and extent of service. 
Solid waste collection devices, design for access, container standards, and general limitations on services shall be as described in a Solid Waste Collection Design Manual, as amended, which is incorporated by reference as though set forth herein, and which is to be kept on file in the City Clerk's office. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or in other ordinances, and except in cases of inadequate funds, labor equipment or materials and of emergencies or circumstances over which the Solid Waste Services Director has no control, and subject to the limitations of this section regarding types of service and quantities of refuse handled, service quantities, type and frequency of service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any development consisting of detached single-family dwellings or attached single-family dwellings with a ground level individual entrance for each unit (townhouse buildings for example) of any number; or a development consisting of other multi-family dwellings up to six (6) units in any development with a ground level individual entrance for each unit are allowed curbside pickup of refuse from each individual unit utilizing containers meeting the size and weight specifications of the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual : once per week, if possible, with the following exception: 
(2)  All developments consisting of more than five (5) attached dwellings with common entrances in each building or with units arranged one above the other in multiple stories (flats), must provide a common collection facility in accordance with the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual, as amended and refuse collection must be contracted with a private hauler: Twice per week, if possible. 
(3)  Non-residential properties must be served by common collection facilities as noted in the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual, as amended, and refuse collection must be contracted with a private refuse hauler: Twice per week, if possible. The following are exceptions to this requirement: 
a.  Small businesses or offices located in an area that is primarily residential, may be allowed curbside collection service by the City , and curbside recycling service, provided that refuse generation for the building does not exceed two (2) individual ninety-six (96) gallon roll-out refuse containers meeting the standards in the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual, as amended, and that are purchased by the small business or office. Eligibility for this service will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Solid Waste Services Director or designee. Businesses not meeting the above criteria will be required to locate or cooperate in locating a dumpster or roll-off compactor and cardboard recycling container as noted in the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual, as amended, and to contract with a private hauler to remove refuse: at least once per week, if possible. 
b.  Central Business District. 
1.  Central Business District residential, commercial, office, entertainment, institutional, medical, educational, charitable and other non-industrial uses located in an area bounded by Cabarrus Street, Blount Street, Edenton Street and McDowell Street may request curbside pickup of refuse by the City six (6) days per week, excluding certain City holidays, as determined by the Solid Waste Services Director. Approval by the Solid Waste Services Director or his designee is required for seven (7) day service requests. 
Refuse shall be deposited in bags and carts (restaurants shall be required to use carts) approved by the City and must be placed on the sidewalk by the curb between the hours of 3:00—5:30 p.m., or alternatively between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., each day. All items to be collected must be removed from the curb by no later than 9:30 a.m. the following day. Charges and fees for the carts, bags and collection and disposal of refuse shall be fixed from time to time on schedules approved by the City Council and maintained on file in the Budget and Management Services Department. 
2.  Central Business District residential, commercial, office, entertainment, institutional, medical, educational, charitable and other non-industrial uses located in an area bounded by Peace Street, West Street, Hillsborough Street, and St. Mary's Street may request pickup of refuse by the City six (6) days per week excluding certain City holidays as determined by the Solid Waste Services Director. Approval by the Solid Waste Services Director or his designee is required for seven (7) day service requests. 
Refuse shall be deposited in bags and carts (restaurants shall be required to use carts) approved by the City and must be placed on the sidewalk by the curb between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day. All items to be collected must be removed from the curb by no later than 9:30 a.m. the following day. Charges and fees for the carts, bags and collection and disposal of refuse shall be fixed from time to time on schedules approved by the City Council and maintained on file in the Budget and Management Services Department. 
3.  Except as otherwise stated, any owner of record and/or tenant of any building, unit, or land in the City in violation of provisions in this chapter shall be subject administrative fees and civil penalties pursuant to Raleigh City Code §7-2002.2. 
(4)  If the development is a Planned Development in accordance with City Code §10-2057, a solid waste collection plan can be approved by the City 's Solid Waste Services Department in lieu of the requirements noted herein, if the design of public streets or other alternate designs create limitations to standard waste collections. 
(b)  Control of private collections by contract and permit. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of this City , the City Manager is authorized to enter into a written contract, either privately or after public advertisement for bids, for the collection and removal of waste paper, paper boxes or cartons or other paper products deposited upon the streets of the City (or other place designated by the person desiring to have such products removed as waste) upon such terms and conditions as he may deem best for the benefit of the City ; provided such contract shall define the area over which the collection of waste paper products shall be confined; provided further no such contract may be executed unless and until the person contracting to collect and remove such products shall have made a deposit with the City in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) cash, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon compliance with the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances of the City . No such contract may be made for a period exceeding one (1) year and shall be cancelable by either party upon thirty (30) days written notice. 
(2)  No person shall engage in the business of collecting, hauling or transporting in the City any waste without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager to engage in such business. The City Manager shall not issue any permit for collections in the areas covered by contracts as provided for above. The holder of such permit shall conform to the applicable ordinances, regulations of the City Manager and the lawfully prescribed requirements of other departments of the City ; and upon failure to so conform such permits shall be subject to revocation by the City Manager. 
(c)  Special collection programs. 
(1)  Bulky Load Program. Solid Waste Services provides free collection of enumerated items that do not fit into refuse containers. Bulky Load Collection is offered for the disposal of furniture, small appliances, mattresses, box springs, and similar household items. Yard waste, large appliances, odor-causing waste, or excess bags of garbage that would normally be placed in a refuse container will not be collected. 
A Bulky Load collection at a single address shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) cubic yards. Solid Waste Services shall not provide Bulky Load collection services for apartment complexes, businesses, or any other property that utilizes a dumpster, compactor or similar device for garbage collection purposes. All Bulky Load collections must be scheduled in advance. A collection for a specific address may be scheduled no more frequently than once every ninety (90) days. The Solid Waste Services Director or his designee shall determine whether the items to be collected qualify for the Bulky Load Program. 
(2)  Special Load Program. Collection of refuse unable to be collected by Solid Waste Services regularly scheduled collection and/or the Solid Waste Services Bulky Load Program may be collected by the Solid Waste Services Special Load Program for a fee. Fees for Solid Waste Services Special Load Programs are set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . Multiple Special Load collections may be purchased. The full amount due must be paid in advance; no items will be collected should the amount due exceed the amount paid. The Special Load Program is not available for rocks, dirt, building materials, loose leaves, tree limbs larger than five (5) feet long and six (6) inches in diameter, tree stumps, car parts, tires, chemicals or paints. Debris resulting from work performed by a contractor will not be collected. This service is a residential service and not available to businesses or commercial entities without special approval from the Solid Waste Services Director or his designee. 
( Code 1959 , §19-30; Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2000-786-TC-194, TC-1-2000, §1, 5-2-00; Ord. No. 2002-290, §§1, 2, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2004-628, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2006-55, §§1, 2, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 2011-820, §1, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 2011-821, §1, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 2012-137, §1, 12-4-12, eff. 1-1-13; Ord. No. 2019-949, §§1(Att.), 6, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 7-2005. - PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES; REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, WEEDS, AND OTHER REFUSE. 
The following standards and requirements shall be imposed on the preparation and handling of waste prior to collection by the City : 
(a)  Preparation of refuse . 
(1)  Garbage shall be deposited promptly in refuse containers and must be stored within the container at all times. Garbage located outside the container will not be collected. 
(2)  Any person desiring to place tree trimmings, hedge cuttings, or similar materials for collection shall cause the same to be securely tied in bundles not heavier than seventy-five (75) pounds nor more than five (5) feet in length and eighteen (18) inches in diameter. He shall place the same for collection at the curb line at the street on the area between the sidewalk and the curb. Any number of such bundles may be so placed and collected during any collection period. All tree trimmings, hedge cuttings, or similar materials (yard waste ), not prepared as described above, shall be placed in plastic permanent type containers no larger than fifty-five (55) gallons, other permanent type containers no larger than thirty-five (35) gallons, or clear plastic bags or biodegradable paper yard waste bags, each type of container not to exceed seventy-five (75) pounds in gross weight. 
(3)  No person shall burn leaves, shrubs, tree limbs, and the like on the streets or sidewalks or on private property except upon special permission of the Chief of the Fire Department. 
(4)  Building rubbish shall be collected, removed, and disposed of by the contractor or builder, or in event of their failure by the owner of the property , in accordance with applicable provisions of this code and with regulations not in conflict therewith promulgated by the City Manager. 
(b)  Refuse containers. 
(1)  All refuse containers shall conform to the standards described in the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual, as amended, on file in the City Clerk's Office and must be fully compatible with the City 's collection equipment. 
(2)  Dwellings eligible for individual unit collection will be provided one (1) ninety-six (96) gallon or smaller roll-out container, dark green in color if possible. The size of the container shall be as determined by the Solid Waste Services Director or designee. In the event that one container is insufficient, a resident or property owner may purchase one additional ninety-six (96) gallon roll-out container from the City . Individual units may place no more than two roll-out garbage containers at the curb for garbage pick-up. 
(3)  Any refuse container that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter or that has ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person s collecting the contents thereof, shall not be used for holding refuse intended for collection, but must be promptly replaced by a proper receptacle. Upon notification to its Solid Waste Services Department, the City shall repair or replace any defective container provided by it. 
(4)  Every person producing or having refuse shall provide and keep on the premises or property occupied or used by him sufficient refuse containers to handle all accumulation of refuse on such premises or property in the interval between collections by the Solid Waste Services Department. 
(5)  Any person may have leaves removed by the City if such leaves are placed in the parkway between the curb and the sidewalk, or, where there are no curbs and sidewalks, just by the roadside, so they may be easily handled by the collector. No tree limbs, shrubs or other material shall be mixed with leaves. 
(6)  No person shall throw, drop or deposit any leaves, shrubs, or other debris into any catch basin or manhole in the City . 
(7)  Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage and rubbish storage facilities the type and location of which are approved by the Solid Waste Services Director. 
(c)  Storing of refuse. 
(1)  Every owner and every occupant or other person in control of any building or land in the City , including vacant property , shall keep the same in a clean and orderly condition and shall deposit refuse for collection by the Solid Waste Services Department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations of the City Manager. Combustible and noncombustible refuse shall be stored in containers complying with this chapter. The owner of record and/or tenant of any building or land in the City shall be given ten (10) days to correct the violation. Should any violation remain after the ten (10) day period, the owner and/or tenant of any building or land in the City shall be subject to administrative fees and civil penalties pursuant to Raleigh City Code §7-2002.2. 
(2)  No person shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped or deposited on any land in the City (vacant or occupied) any waste (including but not limited to refuse, garbage , ashes, rubbish, building rubbish , dead animals, putrescible matter, and anything injurious to health); provided, however, the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to the deposit of waste not injurious to health on a public dump where permission to make such deposit is granted by the Solid Waste Services Director nor to the filling in or grading of property with earth, mud, ashes and similar materials. 
(d)  Points of collection. 
(1)  Refuse to be collected by the Solid Waste Services Department shall be placed at the street, alley or other City approved location of the property from which it was generated by 7:00 a.m. on the designated day for collection. If the Solid Waste Services Director or his designee deems an alleyway passable for City Solid Waste equipment, roll-out containers may also be placed at rear alleyways. Containers shall be placed at least five (5) feet away from any obstruction (including mailboxes, transformers, parked cars, and light poles) and shall not be placed near low hanging branches or power lines. Containers shall be placed at the curb no earlier than noon on the day before the designated collection day and shall be removed from the curb and placed off the public right-of-way, at a location not visible from the public right-of-way, or at the side of the building, no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day after the designated collection day. If a building fronts both a public and a private right-of-way, containers shall be stored in a location on the private right-of-way facing side of the building or another location not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Under no circumstances, within a fire district, may refuse or refuse containers be placed upon the public street before the hour of 3:00 p.m. or after 5:30 p.m. nor shall a refuse container be permitted to remain on a public street after the hour of 9:30 a.m. 
(3)  Any owner of record and/or tenant of any building, unit, or land in the City shall be responsible for the placement of refuse or refuse containers. Any person who shall be found in violation of any provisions of this Chapter, including those of Raleigh City Code §7-2005(d)(1), shall be subject to administrative fees and civil penalties pursuant to Raleigh City Code §7-2002.2. Each 24-hour period in which a violation occurs is a separate offense for which a separate civil penalty applies. Any violation of this subsection (d) shall be deemed a non-criminal violation and shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to G.S. 14-4 or §14-1005(a) of this Code of Ordinances. Both the Inspections Director or his designees and the Solid Waste Services Director or his designees may enforce the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Any property receiving services through the City of Raleigh Solid Waste Services Department is subject to the standards and requirements imposed on the preparation and handling of waste set forth in Raleigh City Code §7-2005 and the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual , as amended. 
(e)  Tree trimmings. 
Tree trimmings, hedge cuttings, grass, hay or other similar materials not prepared and handled in conformity with the provisions of this section will be removed, at the request of the owner or occupant of property used for residential purposes, at a cost of forty dollars ($40.00) as of July 1, 2003. The Solid Waste Services Director will determine which type of service will be used to remove the materials. 
(f)  Need Assistance Program—Exemptions to curbside requirements. 
Upon completion of an application for Need Assistance Collection by a resident, including a Physician's Statement and for the dwelling at which he/she resides, the following persons shall receive back yard (Need Assistance) pickup of garbage and recycling only: 
(1)  Citizens who have a permanent disability and there is no able-bodied person residing with them who can move the containers to the curb; and 
(2)  Citizens who have a temporary disability and there is no able-bodied person residing with them who can move the containers to the curb. 
Both the garbage and recycling must be serviced from the house in order for the customer to qualify for the Need Assistance Program. Citizens who do not have a completed application for Need Assistance Collection on file with the Solid Waste Services Department are not eligible for back yard pick up. Preparation of garbage and recycling must be in accordance with provisions in this Section of City Code and the Solid Waste Collection Design Manual. Solid Waste Services employees will not go on porches, behind fences or gates, in garages, up steps, on decks, or maneuver over terrain that creates topographical problems that make collections unsafe. All animals must be tied up and enclosed in a fence. The Solid Waste Services Director or his/her designee shall confirm the eligibility of residents requesting back yard pickup prior to providing back yard service. Customers may be subject to an audit in order to verify eligibility. Back yard service may be revoked if it is determined by the Solid Waste Director or his/her designee that the citizen no longer qualifies. Yard waste collection is not included in the Need Assistance Program. 
( Code 1959 , §19-31; Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2000-786-TC-194, TC-1-2000, §2, 5-2-00; Ord. No. 2004-628, §2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2007-161, §1, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2011-822, §§4—6, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 2012-137, §2, 12-4-12, eff. 1-1-13; Ord. No. 2013-171, §1, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-285, §§1—3, 4-15-14, eff. 4-20-14)  
Sec. 7-2006. - RATE SCHEDULES FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES. 
(a)  The schedule of rates and fees for collection and disposal of solid waste and of household hazardous wastes shall be as fixed and established from time to time by the City Council and maintained on file in the office of the Finance Director. Such rates and fees shall be collected from the users of the services and shall be due and payable monthly in accordance with law within twenty (20) days from the date such rates and fees are billed to the respective users. 
(b)  Properties which are connected to the water/sewer system shall pay a monthly fee for solid waste management services and a recycling service fee. 
(c)  The Revenue Collector shall have responsibility for billing and collecting the fees due to the City under the provisions of this section and shall have full authority to pursue all available remedies against those who fail to make payments required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2007-269, §1, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 2009-608, §5, 6-16-09, eff. 12-1-09; Ord. No. 2011-822, §7, 1-4-11)  
Sec. 7-2007. - SANITARY LANDFILLS, DUMPING THEREON. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit from trucks, trailers or other vehicles any waste, refuse, garbage, ashes, rubbish, building rubbish, combustible refuse, noncombustible refuse or industrial waste (hereinafter in this section referred to as waste material) upon any of the sanitary landfills of the City except as herein provided. 
(b)  Only waste material generated within the Raleigh City limits or authorized by contract with the City of Raleigh may be deposited in the City landfill. 
(c)  Persons hauling waste material generated from commercial, industrial and all other uses shall be charged disposal fees of twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) per ton for wastes . For wastes other than white goods there shall be a minimum charge, based on the prorated weight of one-half (0.5) ton for each transaction. The disposal fee for white goods shall be prorated based on actual weight. 
(d)  No fee shall be charged for disposal of scrap tires from any source, except as permitted by state law for (1) new tires disposed of by the manufacturer because they do not meet the manufacturer's standards, and (2) tires delivered without an accompanying certificate required by G.S. 130A-309.58 indicating that the tires originated within North Carolina. Where fees for tire disposal are permitted by state law, the fee charged shall be set according to the then current cost of disposal to the City. 
(e)  Persons , businesses, or organizations shall not be charged a disposal fee for waste collected under contract with the City, but shall be charged a disposal fee of twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) per ton for all other wastes. 
(f)  Each load, or part thereof, of waste material dumped, deposited or delivered to any of the City's landfills shall be weighed by an authorized agent of the City as it enters and leaves landfill. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pay or for the supervisor and/or employees at the landfill to receive anything of value for the privileges accorded by this section, or for the supervisor of any landfill to receive any waste material except in conformity herewith, except as provided for in above sections. 
(h)  The Solid Waste Services Director shall require all users of the landfill that are levied fees to be registered prior to dumping of refuse . A report on names of users to be charged along with fees will be provided to the Revenue Collector for collecting such fees. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to employees of City departments using City equipment in the performance of their assigned duties. 
(j)  Persons using the City's landfill, in addition, shall comply with all other reasonable regulations promulgated by the City Manager and/or approved by the City Council. 
(k)  Operating policies will be followed and adhered to by all landfill users. These policies are general in nature and may be expanded upon from time to time by the City Manager. 
(1)  Hours open to public: 7:00 a.m. to 3:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Closed Sundays and holidays. 
(2)  Prohibited waste materials: 
a.  All liquid wastes . 
b.  Hazardous solid wastes (includes but is not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, hot ashes , burning or smoldering materials, and groundwater contaminants). 
c.  Automotive vehicles and large parts thereof. 
d.  Large metal fabrications and appliances. 
e.  Building, roadway, drainage or other construction or demolition debris, unless it is reduced to its smallest practicable sizes. 
f.  Tree trunks and limbs greater than six (6) inches in diameter and six (6) feet in length. 
g.  Human bodies or parts thereof and/or pathological material. 
h.  All white goods (to include inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances). 
i.  All lead-acid batteries. 
j.  All tree trimmings, hedge cuttings, or similar materials (yard waste ). 
k.  All yard trash as described in G.S. 130A-309.10. 
l.  Aluminum cans. 
(3)  Users must comply with "Rules and Regulations Providing Standards for Solid Waste Disposal" as adopted by the North Carolina State Board of Health. 
(4)  Users must be registered with the Solid Waste Services Director and be able to identify sources of wastes delivered to the landfill. 
(5)  All loads of wastes shall be covered or otherwise loaded and secured to prevent contents from falling, leaking, spilling or blowing. 
(6)  Vehicles and containers containing garbage shall be covered and leakproof. 
(7)  All vehicles shall be weighed before and after dumping their loads. 
(8)  Only the vehicle operator and one additional person will be permitted to accompany each vehicle to the dumping site. No children (minors) will be authorized beyond the weigh station. 
(9)  Dumping will be permitted at designated areas only. 
(10)  City personnel and equipment will not assist in unloading vehicles or containers. 
(11)  City personnel and equipment will not assist in extricating disabled vehicles unless the vehicle operators execute appropriate waivers of liability. 
(12)  The following are specifically prohibited: 
a.  Fires or other burning. 
b.  Scavenging and loitering. 
c.  Dumping of wastes after 1:00 p.m., which contain foul odors (includes but is not limited to soy bean hulls). 
(l)  Recyclable corrugated cardboard: 
"Recyclable corrugated cardboard" as used in this subsection is corrugated cardboard which businesses and dealers in the area are willing to purchase upon delivery to them. 
Each vehicle disposing of solid waste from commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments which contains ten (10) per cent or more of recyclable corrugated cardboard by weight or volume shall , in addition to the disposal fee set forth in this section, be assessed a surcharge based on the following schedule: 
(1)  For the first disposal, a written notice will be issued. 
(2)  For the second disposal, a total charge will be made equal to two (2) times the disposal fee set forth in this section (the surcharge being equal to the disposal fee). 
(3)  For the third and any subsequent disposals, a total charge equal to three (3) times the disposal fee set forth in this section (the surcharge being equal to twice the disposal fee). 
(m)  Anyone dumping or depositing yard trash into any City -operated sanitary landfill shall remove such trash immediately upon being requested to do so by a representative of the City . If the person depositing any such trash fails to remove it upon request of the City , the trash will be removed by City forces and deposited in the yard waste center. The person who illegally deposited the yard trash shall be billed by the City for its cost in removing the waste from the sanitary landfill, for the cost of transporting the trash to the yard waste center, and for the standard tipping fee for a load of the requisite size to accommodate the removal. 
In addition to any other penalties and remedies available hereunder, any person depositing yard trash into a sanitary landfill of the City shall be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty for the initial deposit and a fifty dollar ($50.00) per day civil penalty for each day the trash remains in the sanitary landfill after its removal has been ordered. 
(n)  Anyone dumping or depositing aluminum cans into any City -operated sanitary landfill shall remove such cans upon request from a representative of the City. If the person depositing such cans fails to remove them at the request of the City, the cans will be removed by the City. The person who deposited the cans in the landfill shall be billed by the City for the cost of removing the cans from the landfill, and for the cost of delivering the cans for recycling, and for any cost of cleaning or emptying the cans to make them acceptable for recycling. 
In addition to any other penalties and remedies available hereunder, any person depositing aluminum cans into a sanitary landfill of the City shall be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty for the initial deposit and a fifty dollar ($50.00) per day penalty for each day the cans remain in the sanitary landfill after their removal has been ordered. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §9, 11-4-98) 
Editor's note: Subsection (k)(2)j was added by Ord. No. 1992-36, effective Jan. 1, 1993. That addition required the renumbering of the provisions added by Ord. No. 1992-104 from (k)(2)j to (k)(2)l. A new subsection (l) was added by §1 of Ord. No. 1992-68, §5 declared the surtax given in paragraphs (2) and (3) of that subsection effective July 1, 1993. That addition necessitated the renumbering of the provisions added by Ord. No. 1992-104 from §7-2007(l) to (m).  
PART 8 - PUBLIC UTILITIES  
CHAPTER 1. - THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 8-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Department of Public Utilities shall consist of a director, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council .  
Sec. 8-1002. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department include the following : 
(a)  Provision of management, staff assistance and accounting records support for the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities . Maintenance and operation at water treatment plants and laboratories to provide adequate quantities of potable water for residential, commercial and industrial use and to provide adequate water for fire protection purposes; to supply pure water free of pathogenic organisms, harmful chemicals, objectionable materials and excessive controls which meets all regulatory requirements of State and Federal agencies . 
(b)  Construction, operation, maintenance, repair and upgrade of the water distribution system which includes the water main grid system, water transmission mains, valves, fire hydrants and other system components. 
(c)  Maintenance and operation of a water pollution control system by transporting, treating and disposing of waste water from the City and from other municipalities contracting with the City for such services. 
(d)  Construction, maintenance and operation of the sewage collection system of the City , including installing, replacing, repairing, rodding, cleaning and inspecting sewer mains, sewer outfalls and sewer interceptors, and the maintenance and repair of manholes and easements. 
(e)  Installation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of water meters, including the installation and repair of water and sewer lateral services in accordance with §8-2003 of this Code and the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . 
(f)  Reception, maintenance and issuance of all materials used by the department's operating divisions and the maintenance of field operating facilities. 
(g)  Preparation and implementation of a Water Conservation Plan pursuant to State law and regulations. 
(h)  Construction, operation, maintenance, repair, and upgrade of the reuse water distribution system which includes the reuse water transmission mains, valves, and other system components; permitting the use of the reuse water distribution system pursuant to State law and regulations. 
(i)  Preparation of, including periodic updates of, and enforcement of the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook that is approved by Council. 
(j)  Regulation of the City 's lakes to ensure a safe and adequate supply of water as authorized in Part 9, Chapter 5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §§34, 35, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §1, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Charter references: Authority to acquire, provide, construct and operate waterworks and sewerage systems, §2.14(65); Department of Public Utilities, §6.26 et seq. 
State law reference: Public enterprise services generally, G.S. 160A-311 et seq.  
CHAPTER 2. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-2001. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
Adjacent lot. 
Adjacent lot shall mean that parcel of land that shares a common boundary and/or a common right-of-way with an existing lot seeking sewer service and/or water service; for the purposes of sewer service, an adjacent lot is a parcel of land located upgradient of the existing lot. 
Connection or connect. 
Connection or connect shall mean a link (or to cause a link) between any structure and the City's utility system that causes (i) water to be distributed from any City water treatment system to any structure or (ii) sewage to be collected from any structure to any City publicly operated treatment works, notwithstanding any intervening private utility system that may exist. 
Dedicators. 
Dedicators shall mean and include the person owning or constructing any private utility system being dedicated to the City . 
Developer. 
Developer shall mean a person who makes an application to the City for the City' s approval of a site plan or subdivision. 
Development. 
Development shall mean any human-caused change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to, constructing or changing any building or other structure. 
Existing lot. 
Existing lot shall mean any lot that has been recorded in the register of deeds of the County in which the land is located prior to the application for connection to City utilities. 
Major water and sewer mains. 
Major water and sewer mains or major water and major sewer mains shall mean those water and/or sewer lines which are twelve (12) inches in diameter or greater. 
Minor water and sewer mains. 
Minor water and sewer mains or minor water and minor sewer mains shall mean those water and/or sewer lines which are less than twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
Person. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, institution, corporation, municipalities and other political subdivisions, and governmental agencies . 
Sewer service stub. 
Sewer service stub shall mean any portion of a sewer service pipe which connects to a City sewer main and extends from a sewer main to the boundary of any public easement or right-of-way with private property . 
Structure. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. This includes a fixed or movable building which can be used for residential, recreational, business, commercial, agricultural, institutional or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes, but is not limited to, fences, decks, garages, swimming pools, hot tubs, children's play sets, barbeque pits, tennis courts, signs, walls, heating, ventilation and air conditioning units, storage tanks, sheds, docks, mooring areas, and other accessory construction. 
Tap size. 
Tap size shall mean the nominal diameter of the connection of the water service installed between a water meter assembly and the water main connected to the water utility system of Raleigh without regard to the configuration of that water assembly or ownership of the water meter assembly, service or water main. 
Utility system, utility mains. 
Utility system or utility mains shall mean and include any City of Raleigh owned or operated treatment works or water works, pumping stations, storage tanks, water mains, sewer mains and reuse water mains (individually or collectively as determined by the context), and shall include all pipes, valves, valve boxes, hydrants, water service stubs, meters and other appurtenant facilities, fixtures, equipment, and apparatus connected to and forming a part of the main water, sewer, or reuse water pipe lines and systems or both, and all appliances necessary and convenient thereto. The utility lines dedicated to the City as public shall include only main distribution pipes, main collection pipes, valves, hydrants and other apparatus, fixtures and equipment forming a part of the lines laid in public streets , roads, highways, alleys and any other public right-of-way or across City utility, water or sanitary sewer easements on private property , and shall not include services leading from mains to building connections on private property and shall not include the water, sewer or reuse water lines within any residences or other privately owned building or structure. 
Water service stub. 
Water service stub shall mean any portion of a water or reuse water service pipe which connects to a City water or reuse water main and extends from a water or reuse water main to a water or reuse water meter. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §1, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §13, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2014-262, §2, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-337, §§1—3, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14)  
Sec. 8-2002. - CONNECTING WITH WATER PIPES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe or take by any means water from or interfere with the pipes of the waterworks system of the City without authorization from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. In reviewing requests, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall consider the appropriateness of the size, location, character, and quality of all materials and connections. The size of the service shall be determined by the applicant. It shall be unlawful for any person , except City forces as directed by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, to operate any valve in the water distribution system of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §23-11; Ord. No. 1984-338, §1, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §1, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1986-746, §1, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 2014-262, §3, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Editor's note: Copies of the "Public Utilities Handbook" which includes City standards and procedures are on file in the Public Utilities Department.  
Sec. 8-2003. - MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICES. 
(a)  Owners of property served by the utility system shall be responsible for the maintenance necessary to keep such property owner's sewer service (which includes the sewer service stub) clean and sanitary and continually functioning. 
(b)  The replacement and/or repair of water and sewer service stubs may be caused by direction of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee or by application of owners of the property served that is filed with the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(c)  Except as indicated in §8-2039, all water and sewer service stubs shall be replaced or repaired by the City unless expressly permitted by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. Permits for the repair or replacement of water and sewer service stubs shall be granted for work in or upon the utility system in public street right-of-way only to licensed utility contractors. The replacement and/or repair of sewer services on private property , including within City easements, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property served by the sewer service. The replacement and/or repair of water services from the meter box to the structure shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property served by the water service. 
(d)  In the event of the paving or widening of streets , or the raising or lowering of the grade of a street , or in the installation of curbs or gutters and/or sidewalks, or in the case of the installation of new water or sewer lines initiated by the public, all water and sewer service stubs may be replaced so as to meet the standards prescribed by the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . 
(e)  Applications for the replacement of existing water stubs by owners of the property served shall be considered only in the event the service stub is leaking, needs enlarging or is delivering an insufficient quantity of water or the property owner replaces the galvanized service from meter box to house. In the case of an application as a result of an insufficient quantity of water only those service stubs delivering less than ten (10) gallons per minute (gpm) shall be considered for renewal or repair at no charge to the property owner. 
(f)  There shall be no charge for replacement or repair of defective stubs as provided by this §8-2003, except when the existing service stub is enlarged or relocated by request of the owner . If an existing galvanized water service stub or terra cotta sewer service stub is enlarged, a fee shall be charged equal to the difference between the fee corresponding to the existing service stub size and the fee corresponding to the proposed service stub size as set forth in §8-2039. If a copper water service stub or cast-iron sewer service stub is enlarged a fee shall be charged for the proposed service stub size as set forth in §8-2039. If an existing water or sewer service stub is relocated at the request of the owner , a fee shall be charged for the relocated service stub size as set forth in §8-2039. 
(g)  Replacement of water service stubs shall extend from the main to the property line, except where a structure or other obstruction prevents installation up to the property line, and shall conform to the provisions of this Code. Water meters shall be relocated as necessary. Replacement of sewer service stubs shall extend from the main to the property line or to the edge of the City 's easement, except where a structure or other obstruction prevents installation up to the property line, and shall conform to the provisions of this Code. 
(h)  Where an existing water meter is located on private property , then the City shall be authorized to relocate such water meter to the public right-of-way or easement and shall replace the water service stub pursuant to §8-2003(g) above. 
( Code 1959 , §23-10; Ord. No. 1985-543, §2, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §4, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-337, §4, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14)  
Sec. 8-2004. - CONNECTIONS TO THE UTILITY SYSTEM. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 8-2004(b) below, all water and sewer service stubs serving structures that exist at the time application for water and sewer service is made shall be installed and connections to the utility system made either (i) by City forces or contractors working for the City and subject to fees pursuant to §8-2039 or (ii) by licensed utility contractors (right of way or city easements) or plumbers (city easements) pursuant to this Code and the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . 
(b)  Any water or sewer connection made in conjunction with either a (i) a building permit for a new structure or (ii) any water or sewer connection made in new developments shall be made by the owner at his expense pursuant to this Code and the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . The installation and extension of water and sewer services on private property , including within City easements, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the water and/or sewer service. 
( Code 1959 , §23-25; Ord. No. 1985-543, §3, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §14, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2014-262, §5, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-337, §5, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14; Ord. No. 2019-923, §1, 3-5-19 ) 
State law references: Permits required for work in state roads, G.S. 136-93; license for public utility contractors, G.S. 87-10.  
Sec. 8-2005. - METER REQUIREMENTS; PLACEMENT OF METERS. 
(a)  A separate water meter and water and/or sewer connection is required for each lot at the time of connection with water and/or sewer service. All such meters shall be placed in the street right-of-way or in a two-foot easement adjacent to the street right-of-way at such locations as the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall determine, provided that nothing herein shall authorize the placement of a water meter on the opposite side of the street right-of-way from the building being served. All fire hydrants maintained by the City shall be installed in the street right-of-way or in a two-foot easement adjacent to the street right-of-way. All meters shall conform to the standards and material specifications of the City. All water meters shall be installed by City forces in accordance to a fee schedule on file by the City . 
City Water Meter Installation Fee Schedule 
Meter Size 	Meter Fee 	* Not Ready 
Fee 
?-inch 	$ 206.00 	$ 50.00 
1-inch 	286.00 	50.00 
1½-inch 	497.00 	50.00 
2-inch 	608.00 	50.00 
4-inch 	3,522.00 	50.00 
6-inch 	5,238.00 	50.00 
6-inch w/fire protection 	9,423.00 	50.00 
8-inch 	4,488.00 	50.00 
8-inch w/fire protection 	11,187.00 	50.00 
10-inch Protectus III 	15,621.00 	50.00 
 
*   Not ready fee shall be collected by the City only if the City has attempted to initially install the water meter and determined that the water service stub was either not installed to the property or the water service stub not installed in accordance with City standards. The * Not ready fee must then be paid to the City prior to the City proceeding to install the meter again after the initial failed attempt and prior to any water being provided to the property. 
(b)  Should any person wish to rent a hydrant meter from the City to obtain water from a fire hydrant, that person shall apply for a rental hydrant meter pursuant to the process outlined in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . Any person who rents any hydrant meter shall execute a rental agreement in the form and manner acceptable to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee and shall pay a deposit and rental fee for the hydrant meter, plus the monthly metered water charge in accordance with the schedule of Utilities Charges adopted by the City Council and on record with the Public Utilities Department and the City Clerk's Office. Users of hydrant meters shall self-report the flow through the hydrant meter pursuant to the rental agreement; failure to report flow for any month that the hydrant meter registered flow shall result in an additional charge in accordance with the Council-approved schedule of Utilities Charges. In addition, any person who rents a hydrant meter shall be responsible for the loss and/or damage to any such hydrant meter. In the event of loss or damage to any hydrant meter that occurs to the hydrant meter while in the person's possession, the person shall pay to the City the costs to repair (both labor and materials) the hydrant meter or the replacement cost, as appropriate, pursuant to the Council-approved schedule of Utilities Charges. 
( Code 1959 , §23-27.1(a); Ord. No. 1981-560, §1, 1-6-81; Ord. No. 1985-543, §5, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1986-746, §2, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 1986-775, §5, 4-15-86; Ord. No. 1999-558, §1, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 2000-805, §1, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 2002-200, §1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 2003-439, §1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2004-623, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2005-825, §1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 2006-15, §1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-218, §1, 5-1-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. 2008-378, §1, 4-15-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2009-556, §1, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-718, §1, 4-6-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-883, §1, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-41, §1, 5-1-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-175, §1, 4-16-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-262, §6, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-297, §1, 5-6-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-419, §1, 4-7-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-566, §1, 3-21-16, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-684, §1, 3-15-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-686, §1, 3-15-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-842, §1, 6-11-18, eff. 7-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 ; Ord. No. 2019-960, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 8-2006. - ADDITIONAL METERS; COMMON CONNECTIONS; ALLOWED USES. 
Additional meter locations , water connections and/or sewer connections, in compliance with the City 's Unified Development Ordinance if located within the jurisdiction of the City , or County zoning and subdivision ordinances if located within the jurisdiction of the County , may be permitted. A common water connection, sewer connection and/or meter will be permitted to serve more than one (1) building of the following categories as those terms are used in the City 's Unified Development Ordinance. 
(a)  Group living developments; 
(b)  Townhouse developments; 
(c)  Unit-ownership (condominium developments); 
(d)  Overnight lodging; 
(e)  Hospitals; 
(f)  Warehouses, industrial buildings (under one (1) ownership and engaged in one (1) business only); 
(g)  Schools, colleges, community colleges or universities; 
(h)  Manufactured home developments; 
(i)  Shopping centers; 
(j)  Places of worship. 
( Code 1959 , §23-27.1(b); Ord. No. 1985-543, §6, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2000-734-TC-189, TC-2-00, §1, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 2014-262, §7, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Cross references: Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), Part 10A.  
Sec. 8-2007. - COMMON METERS AND CONNECTIONS; REQUIREMENTS. 
A common water connection, sewer connection and/or water meter, including a private water or sewer distribution system will be permitted to serve the above categories of buildings meeting the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  The building or buildings to be served are in compliance with the City's zoning and subdivision ordinances, if located within the jurisdiction of the City , or with the County zoning and subdivision ordinances, if located within the jurisdiction of the County . 
(b)  The building permit and plat shows a single owner and indicates that the complex of buildings will be constructed on a single lot. 
(c)  If one (1) common meter is used, such meter shall be located within the street right-of-way or in a two-foot easement adjacent to the street right-of-way at such locations approved by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(d)  If a common water connection and/or sewer connection and more than one (1) meter is used, the meters may be located on private property . In such cases the applicant shall be required to submit to the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities a site plan showing the proposed water and sewer construction. The plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer who shall also provide periodic inspection of the work. When the work is complete, he shall furnish the owner and the City with a certification that the work has been done properly and has been approved by him. The plan shall be approved by the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities to include size of water and sewer line, materials to be used for construction, valve locations, hydrant locations, manhole locations, meter locations and any other appurtenances that may be necessary as determined by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. All construction from the property line to the water meter shall be in accordance with the City standards and specifications. Construction beyond the water meter may be with materials permitted in the North Carolina Plumbing Code. All sewer construction within easements shall be in accordance with City standards and specifications; all other sewer construction shall be in accordance with the North Carolina Plumbing Code. All construction shall be performed by either a licensed master plumber or a licensed utility contractor. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may enter the premises of any water or sewer user to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of water being used and the manner of its use, to take meter readings and to make meter repairs. 
(e)  Should a building within such a multiple constructed area be conveyed to a new owner , or should a multiple constructed area be subdivided, the City shall require a separate water and sewer connection from that building to the public main. Each development in any of the above categories shall have a fire protection plan reviewed by the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities and approved by the Fire Department prior to the issuance of a building permit and prior to the installation of water connections or the extension of existing water installations. 
(f)  The fire protection plans shall be submitted in triplicate to the Raleigh Fire Chief or his designee for approval. The City reserves the right to require proper size water lines, proper hydrants spacing and location, and the installation of metering devices where it shall be determined that water is being used for other than fire protection purposes exclusively. All water facilities constructed on private property for the purpose of fire fighting shall be in accordance with City standards and specifications. Construction beyond the water meter may be with material permitted in the North Carolina Plumbing Code. 
( Code 1959 , §23-17.1(c); Ord. No. 1985-543, §§7—10, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §§8, 51(2), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Cross references: Water and sewer rates and connection fees, §§2-3001—2-3004.  
Sec. 8-2008. - WELLS; PERMIT REQUIRED. 
No well shall be installed within the City without first securing a well permit from Wake County and plumbing and electrical permits from the City' s Office of Development Services for such installation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-262, §9, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2009. - NEW OR REPLACEMENT WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS TO BE FLOOD-RESISTANT. 
(a)  Any and all new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems within floodprone areas shall be designed and constructed to minimize and eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into such systems and to minimize and eliminate discharges from such systems into floodwaters. 
(b)  Any and all on-site new waste disposal systems within floodprone areas shall be located, designed and constructed so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(c)  Any venting of any sanitary sewer system and nonwatertight manholes shall be constructed to a height at least three (3) feet above the 100-year flood elevation provided nothing herein shall prevent the construction of watertight manholes below the 100-year flood elevation. 
( Code 1959 , §23-35; Ord. No. 1978-872-TC-88, §§16—19, 8-15-78; Ord. No. 2014-262, §10, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2010. - EMERGENCY DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE AND REPAIRS. 
The responsibility for maintaining and repairing sewer and water stubs shall be in accord with City Code, §8-2003 and the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . The repair of all pipes and fixtures on private property shall be the responsibility of the property owner or consumer. When a minor failure occurs in a pipe or fixture on private property , and such failure is not corrected within forty-eight (48) hours of notification by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee to the owner or person in charge, the City , for the purpose of conserving water and protecting the public, may discontinue service until the failure is corrected or enter the property and make the necessary repairs. When a major failure occurs in a line or fixture and creates the possibility of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the City may make the necessary repairs. The work done by the City shall be limited to the necessary line repair and such backfilling as needed to protect the pipe. The cost of any repairs performed by the City shall be charged to the property owner . Failure to pay the City 's repair costs may result in discontinuation of service until such costs are paid. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §10, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §11, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2011. - PAYMENT OF FEES AND CHARGES. 
Any person using the utility system hereby contracts with the City to pay all required permits, fees, and charges as required by laws, ordinances, and resolutions. 
Prior to a customer receiving potable water and/or sanitary sewer service from the City's utility system , an application for service must be received by the City's Office of Development Services . For new customer accounts, this service application is received in the form of a utility connection permit. For existing utility system service accounts, customers must contact the Utility Billing Office to close or initiate service in the new customer's name. In order to initiate service on a new account or to initiate service on an existing account in the name of a new customer, an initiation fee must be billed to the customer and collected by the City in the customer's first utility bill mailed to the customer. Failure of the customer to pay the full amount of the initiation fee will be treated in the same manner as the utility bill being past due. 
A utility service initiation fee will be established by City Council and kept on record in the Schedule of Fees and Charges kept in the office of the Finance Director. This fee shall be billed by the City Utility Billing office as described in this section. The City's utility system customers are required to pay for their utility service by a date specified on their utility system bill. Failure to pay their bill by this date will result in the addition of a delinquency fee added to the amount past due on their utility bill. The delinquency fee and the past due utility bill amount must be paid in full to the City, in order for the customer's utility account to be considered current. Failure of the customer to pay the full amount of the delinquency fee will be treated in the same manner as the utility bill being past due for the customer's next utility bill and grounds for utility service interruption by the City, if not paid in full in the subsequent utility bill. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §11, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2003-461, §1, 6-17-03; Ord. No. 2009-608, §6, 6-16-09, eff. 12-1-09; Ord. No. 2014-262, §12, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2012. - ACCESS TO AND OBSTRUCTIONS OF THE UTILITY SYSTEM AND EASEMENTS. 
(a)  No person shall open, enter into, place, or allow anything to be placed in any manhole, hydrant, valve box, meter box or any other appurtenances of the City 's water or sanitary sewer system without written approval from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(b)  No person shall damage, obstruct, or cover any manhole, hydrant, valve box, meter box or any other appurtenances of the City 's water or sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  No person shall plant trees, shrubs, or other plants within a water or sewer easement without prior written approval from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. Shallow-rooted ground cover material may be planted and maintained within the easement area provided that all risk of damage to any such improvements caused by maintenance or repair of the sewer line and appurtenant facilities shall be with the property owner . Further, the City is authorized to remove and keep removed from the easement all trees, vegetation, and other obstructions as necessary to maintain, repair or protect the sanitary sewer line or lines and appurtenances. 
(d)  No person shall place any part of a structure or any permanent equipment within a water or sewer easement without prior written approval from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(e)  Any unapproved structure, equipment, or landscaping located within a water or sewer easement, that limits access in the event of an emergency, will be removed by the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities at the property owner's expense. In times of nonemergency, property owners will be notified to remove unapproved structures, equipment, or landscaping located within a water or sewer easement within forty-five (45) days of notice. Any structures, equipment, or landscaping not removed by the property owner within the specified time, may be removed by the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities at the property owner's expense. 
(f)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and in addition may be punished under §8-2014 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §11, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1999-658, §1, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2014-262, §13, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2013. - DAMAGE TO UTILITY SYSTEM; UNAUTHORIZED USE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, remove, damage, or interfere with any part of the utility system . Provided, it shall further be unlawful for any person to turn off or discontinue or turn on water, sewer or reuse water service to any part of the utility system without the written consent of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1983-154, §1, 7-19-83; Ord. No. 1986-775, §2, 4-15-86; Ord. No. 2014-262, §14, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2014. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE. 
(a)  Whenever the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. If requested by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee within the timeframe specified in the enforcement policy adopted in accordance with subsection (e) below. Submission of this plan does not relieve the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. In the event of an emergency that requires the City to take immediate action to correct the violation, the City is not required to provide an opportunity for the violator to correct the violations and may assess penalties and costs pursuant to this section without prior notice. 
(b)  Any person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  Residential meter obstruction, alteration, bypass or tampering, first violation, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Residential meter obstruction, alteration, bypass or tampering, repeat violation within the previous five (5) years, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(3)  Non-residential meter obstruction, alteration, bypass, tampering, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(4)  Make any connection or reconnection with the water system without first procuring from such person a written permission, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(5)  Retain possession of or refuse to deliver a hydrant meter assembly issued by the City after authorized use ends, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(6)  Turn on or off or in any manner interfere with any valve without written permission, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(7)  Any other violation not specifically listed herein, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(8)  In the case of a violation of Chapter 14, Section 151 of the North Carolina General Statutes ( i.e. , willful or fraudulent interference with the utility system to obtain utility service) that causes damages to the utility system or other loss to the City , the civil penalty shall be subject to a penalty three (3) times the amount of losses and/or damages caused by the violation or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater. 
The notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable care the basis of the civil penalty and any administrative costs and the costs to the City of rectifying the noncompliance that are assessed. 
(c)  Failure to obtain any permit required by this article or any other violation by any person authorized to perform work in or upon the utility system shall subject the violator to the following penalties: 
(1)  For the first violation, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable. 
(2)  For the second violation in a five-year period, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable. 
(3)  For the third violation in a five-year period, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable, and for each subsequent violation the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable, up to the fifth violation. 
(4)  After the fifth violation in a five-year period, the privilege and right of the person to work in and/or upon the Raleigh water and sewer utility system shall be suspended for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the sixth violation. 
(d)  Any person violating any section of this article must pay to the City all expenses incurred by the City in repairing any damage to the utility system caused in whole or in part by such violation and any expense incurred by the City in investigating such violation. 
(e)  The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall prepare an enforcement policy to implement this section which shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. 
(f)  From and after the expiration of the time period specified in the notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (a) above of this section for correcting a violation of this article, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
(g)  Any appeal from a notice of violation or civil penalty assessment shall be made in writing to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of violation or civil penalty assessment issued pursuant to this section. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall use all reasonable efforts to notify the appellant in writing of his or her decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal pursuant to the enforcement policy adopted in subsection (e) of this section. 
(h)  All notices required by this subsection may be served by certified mail or hand-delivery to the violator; certified mail or hand-delivery to the owner of the property in violation; or posting the notice at the property in violation. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by First Class U.S. Mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice sent by First Class U.S. Mail is not returned by the U.S. Post office seven (7) days after mailing. 
(i)  If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached after thirty (30) days after demand for payment is first made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the general court of justice of Wake County for recovery of the penalty. If payment is not received or equitable settlement has not been reached within the specified time period, the City may interrupt water and sewer service to the property until such time that payment is received or equitable settlement has been reached. 
(j)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension or construction of the utility system or part thereof without first obtaining a permit or written permission or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment to the maximum number of days prescribed by law. 
(k)  Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate any of the provisions of this article, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or is undertaking or continuing any alteration, extension and construction of the utility system without first obtaining a permit or written permission, or is undertaking or continuing any alterations, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both, the City may , either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this subsection shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. The terms "undertakes" or "undertaking" as used in this section means the initiating of or continuing of or being financially responsible for any activity or phase of activity which results in the extension, construction, or alteration of any part of the utility system of the City . 
(l)  The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this article may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the penalties established by other sections of this Code and applicable ordinances. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 1986-775, §4, 4-15-86; Ord. No. 2014-262, §15, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-337, §6, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14)  
Sec. 8-2015. - DUTY TO REPORT DAMAGE. 
Every person who observes damage to any manhole, hydrant, valve or meter or to any other part of the utility system has a duty to report the damage to the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities . 
(Ord. No. 1999-658, §2, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2014-262, §16, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2016. - RALEIGH PUBLIC UTILITIES HANDBOOK. 
The design, installation, construction and testing of public and private utilities shall be in accordance with the standards and requirements in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook as amended, on file in the City Clerk's Office, Raleigh Department of Public Utilities and online at the City's website. 
(Ord. No. 2010-793, §1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2014-262, §17, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2017. - SEWER BACKFLOW DEVICES. 
The current North Carolina Plumbing Code requires that where plumbing fixtures are installed on a floor with a finished floor elevation below the elevation of the manhole cover of the next upstream manhole in the public sewer, such fixtures must be protected by a backwater valve. For existing services that have plumbing fixtures installed on a floor with a finished floor elevation below the elevation of the manhole cover of the next upstream manhole in the City sewer system and that do not have a backwater valve installed, the property owner must sign a sewer release, in the form and manner provided by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, waiving the City 's liability in case of a sewage backflow from the main into the building. This form will be recorded in the appropriate register of deeds office. 
(Ord. No. 2014-337, §7, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14)  
Secs. 8-2018 — 8-2030. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - WATER AND SEWER EXTENSION POLICIES  
DIVISION 1. - PUBLIC EXTENSIONS OF THE UTILITY SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note: The title of Div. 1 was changed from "General Provisions" by §12 of Ord. No. 1985-543, adopted April 16, 1985. 
 
Sec. 8-2031. - ASSESSMENT FOR EXTENSIONS AND REPLACEMENTS. 
Except for water and sewer main extensions and replacements which are funded exclusively from community development funds and are located within redevelopment areas as delineated pursuant to Article 22 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended, water and sewer main extensions and replacements will be made by assessment of the cost thereof against property owners to be benefitted thereby in conformity with Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended, and, if applicable, Raleigh City Charter, as amended, or both. The Raleigh Public Works Department shall determine which method of assessment authorized by G.S. 160A-218, as amended, would be most equitable to be used in an assessment roll, but any interested property owner may appeal from such determination to the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §23-9(1); Ord. No. 1977-586, §1, 7-19-77; Ord. No. 1983-200, §1, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1984-338, §4, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §14, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §18, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Charter reference: Authority about assessments, §§2.14(71), 6.28.  
Sec. 8-2032. - ASSESSMENT; CITY TO SHARE COST OF OVERSIZED LINES. 
In the event it is necessary or desirable in the opinion of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee to lay a water main larger than a six-inch main, or sewer main larger than an eight-inch main, the City will bear the cost of the difference between the size of main required and a six-inch water main or eight-inch sewer main. The property owner will be assessed the cost of the six-inch water main and/or the eight-inch sewer main based on the prevailing assessment rates. 
( Code 1959 , §23-9(1); Ord. No. 1985-543, §15, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §19, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Editor's note: Regulations concerning reimbursements for oversized utility lines are found in Standard Operating Procedure No. 700-6.  
Sec. 8-2033. - ASSESSMENTS; PROVISIONS FOR REPLACEMENT SERVICE. 
When water or sewer mains exist but are inadequate (less than eight-inch sewer or less than six-inch water or deteriorating pipe) for the system and are being replaced, property should be assessed for the difference in cost between the cost of existing inadequate mains at current prices and the cost of the size installed not to exceed the cost of six-inch water mains or eight-inch sewer mains. 
( Code 1959 , §23-9(1); Ord. No. 1985-543, §15, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §20, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2034. - ASSESSMENTS; CORNER LOT PROVISIONS. 
Lots at an intersection of streets shall be assessed as follows: 
(a)  If water or sewer service mains or both are installed simultaneously on both streets on which the lot abuts, assessment of the cost of the installations shall be based upon the entire frontage on one street (short side) plus the frontage on the other street (long side) in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(b)  If the lot abuts adequate (eight-inch sewer, six-inch water) or larger size water or sewer mains in a street on which the lot abuts and a water or sewer main providing a duplicating service is installed in the other abutting street , the cost of the new installation shall be assessed against the lot to the extent that the lot abutting the street in which the new main is installed exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(c)  If water or sewer service is installed in a street abutting a corner lot, and the lot is not served by adequate (eight-inch sewer or six-inch water) or larger size water or sewer mains in the other abutting street , and the method of assessment used is the street frontage method, the cost of the installation shall be assessed against the side of the lot abutting the installation. A credit will be provided for the distance, if any, that the side of the lot abutting the street in which no improvement is made is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(d)  If the lot abuts adequate (eight-inch sewer or six-inch water) or larger size water or sewer mains in two (2) or more streets on which the lot abuts and a water or sewer main providing a duplicating service is installed in other abutting streets , the cost of the new installation shall not be assessed against the lot if that lot cannot be subdivided in any manner which would benefit from the installation. 
(e)  A property parcel is hereby exempted from any duplicating water and/or sewer assessment by the City of Raleigh if all of the following conditions exist: 
(i)  the parcel is zoned for residential use; 
(ii)  the parcel is not eligible for subdivision pursuant to City Code; 
(iii)  the parcel contains an existing single-family residence at the time of project direction by City Council ; 
(iv)  the parcel abuts an existing six-inch water main and/or an eight-inch sewer main of the City of Raleigh. 
( Code 1959 , §23-9(2); Ord. No. 1980-328, 3-4-80; Ord. No. 1985-543, §16, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1999-683, §1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2014-262, §21, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2035. - ASSESSMENTS; PROVISIONS FOR DUPLICATING SERVICE. 
(a)  When a duplicating water or sewer service is extended to a lot not at the intersection of two (2) streets but with adequate (eight-inch sewer or six-inch water) existing service within a public utility easement, assessment of the cost of the duplicating service shall be limited to the frontage of the lot abutting the right-of-way or easement in which the duplicating service is installed in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. The exemption shall apply to lots having an existing adequate (eight-inch sewer or six-inch water) or greater size water or sewer service main or the right-of-way or easement containing an adequate size water or sewer service main crossing or touching the property subject to assessment. The exemption contained herein shall not relieve a lot from an additional assessment for the extension of an existing water or sewer line if the existing water or sewer line extends across only a part of the frontage of the lot and assessment has theretofore been made against only that part of the lot abutting on the existing line. 
(b)  Where one (1) or more water or sewer lines traverse a lot or tract of land, the abutting footage for each lot, tract or parcel assessed according to the assessment roll shall not exceed the straight line distance between the beginning point and the ending point of the line or lines. Provided, upon the installation of a duplication service to a traversed lot or tract of land, an exemption of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be allowed for the duplicating service pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
( Code 1959 , §23-9(3); Ord. No. 1985-543, §16, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §22, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2036. - ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS ON ASSESSMENTS. 
(a)  The term "lot" as used in this section is defined as a parcel of land owned by one (1) owner without regard to whether or not shown on any subdivision map as separate lots and without regard to how or when acquired, except that when an assessment is made on a per lot basis in a subdivision, the term "lot" shall apply to each separate subdivided lot or a combination of subdivided lots where a single building unit is constructed on a portion of all the lots. Provided, however, that when a lot in a subdivision abuts a water or sewer line and the lots in the subdivision are assessed on a per lot basis, such lot shall not be assessed a greater amount than the amount which would be assessed against the lot on a linear foot basis after giving credit for the exemptions contained in this section. 
(b)  The exemptions provided for in §§8-2034 and 8-2035 shall apply only if the cost of the existing water and sewer service main has been assessed against the property for which a duplicating service is provided, or if the existing water or sewer main, including major mains, was installed by a subdivider of property without cost to the City , or if the cost of the existing water or sewer service main has been paid from community development funds and such mains are located within redevelopment areas as delineated pursuant to Article 22 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended. 
( Code 1959 , §23-9(4), (5); Ord. No. 1977-586, 7-19-77; Ord. No. 1985-543, §16, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1989-417, §1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 1992-75, §1, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 2014-262, §23, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2037. - CHARGE IN LIEU OF ASSESSMENT ON PROPERTY NOT ASSESSED. 
(a)  If property to be served by a water or sewer line is to be connected to a line constructed on an assessment basis pursuant to the provisions of §§8-2031 through 8-2036 of this Code and no assessment was made against the property for its proportionate part of the line because ownership of the property would not permit the collection of an assessment, or the property was not deemed by the City to benefit from the water or sewer lines at the time the water or sewer line was originally constructed, then either at the time of authorized connection or presentation of a subdivision for recordation, whichever occurs first, there shall be collected, in addition to all other charges provided herein, or by other law, or ordinance, or resolution, the amount which would have been assessed against the property to be served by the line had such property been assessable at the time the line was constructed. 
(b)  In those cases where the City has paid the cost of the installation of a water and/or sewer line outside the City , either at the time of connection or presentation of a subdivision for recordation, whichever occurs first, there shall be in addition to all other fees, an amount charged at the time of connection equal to the amount that would have been assessed, if the property had been assessed but was not, due to the fact that property was located outside the City limits at the time the line was installed. 
( Code 1959 , §17-10(c); Res. No. 176, 3-20-61; Res. No. 1961-223, §3; Ord. No. 1984-336, §§5, 6, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §17, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §24, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2038. - DEPTH AT WHICH SEWER LINES TO BE LAID; CITY INSTALLATIONS. 
The City shall not be obligated to install facilities to provide gravity sewer service to any floor level of any existing or proposed structure at an elevation lower than ten (10) feet below the crown of the street directly in front of the structure. Notwithstanding this provision, property owners desiring that the line be placed at a depth greater than necessary to serve a floor level ten (10) feet below the crown of the street shall be required to pay the difference in cost of laying such line at that depth and the depth at which the property owner desires the line to be laid. Such cost shall be estimated by the City based on the difference in cost for installing a line at twelve (12) feet of depth and the depth at which the property owner desires the line to be laid. Payment of the estimated cost shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of the demand for payment or the line will be laid at a depth as if the property owner had not requested that the line be installed at a greater depth. Notwithstanding the payment of the estimated cost of the greater depth of lines, the property owner making the payment shall still be assessed for his proportionate cost of the installation of the line consistent with the normal assessment policy. 
(Res. No. 1963-948, §1, 5-6-63; Ord. No. 1983-63, §1, 2-1-83; Ord. No. 1985-543, §4, 4-16-85)  
Sec. 8-2039. - FEES FOR THE INSTALLATION OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICES BY CITY FORCES AND CONTRACTORS WORKING FOR THE CITY. 
  
Size and Type of Service 	Lump Sum Fee 
¾-inch water* ..... 	$4,580.00 
1-inch water* ..... 	4,800.00 
¾-inch split water (new application) ..... 	598.00 
¾-inch split water (existing application) ..... 	1,236.00 
1-inch split water (new application) ..... 	1,018.00 
1-inch split water (existing application) ..... 	1,438.00 
4-inch sewer service* ..... 	5,708.00 
* The City does not install taps across divided roadways, or across roadways/streets measuring forty-five (45) feet or longer as measured from back of curb to back or curb. When no curb exists, the measurement shall be marked from the edge of pavement. 
Sewer only Disconnection fee ..... 	1,507.00 
Sewer only Reconnection fee ..... 	1,507.00 
 
These fees apply to services installed by City employees or contractors working for the City . 
Taps for water services larger than one (1) inch and sewer services larger than four (4) inches shall be installed by a private licensed utility contractor retained by the applicant. Tap fees for owner -occupied residential structures may be financed by the City for a term of five (5) years at eight (8) per cent interest upon the request of the homeowner. 
Water and sewer tap fees relating to public extension projects are subject to a one-year freeze following service availability. This freeze shall apply only to owners of developed properties within the project area upon which a tap was installed as part of the public extension project. During the one-year freeze period, the eligible property owners may connect to the City system(s) and pay the tap fees which were in effect on the date the City Council directed construction of the project. All other property owners in the project area shall pay the prevailing tap fee(s) in effect on the date service connection is requested. 
(Ord. No. 1991-894, §§1—3, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 1992-81, §1, 11-4-92; Ord. No. 1996-873, §1, 5-7-96; Ord. No. 1997-55, §1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1997-164, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 1998-336, §1, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 1999-557, §1, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 2000-83, §1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-993, §1, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2002-198, §1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 2003-438, §1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2004-622, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2004-714, §§1, 2, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2009-558, §1, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-720, §1, 4-6-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-881, §1, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-40, §1, 5-1-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-174, §1, 4-16-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-262, §25, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-296, §1, 5-6-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-418, §1, 4-7-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-565, §1, 3-21-16, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-685, §1, 3-15-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-841, §1, 6-11-18, eff. 7-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-961, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 8-2040. - INSPECTION FEES FOR SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS AND WATER AND SEWER SERVICE STUBS INSTALLED BY PRIVATE CONTRACTORS. 
Prior to being placed into service, all sewer main extensions and water and sewer service connections to the City's water and sanitary sewer systems installed by a private contractor shall be inspected and determined to have been properly installed by City inspectors. A sewer main extension inspection fee of one-dollar ($1.00) per linear foot shall be collected by the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities for closed circuit television (CCTV) inspection of each sewer main extension project at the time of permit application. Sewer main extension projects which are determined by the City during their initial CCTV inspection to not be ready for inspection shall be charged a re-inspection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for re-inspections that are 500 linear feet or less, for each attempted re-inspection. Sewer main re-inspections greater than 500 linear feet shall be charged one dollar ($1.00) per linear foot, for each attempted re-inspection. 
A water and sewer service connection inspection fee of ninety-three dollars ($93.00) shall be collected for each water and sewer service stub. 
(Ord. No. 1998-360, §1, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 2002-197, §1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 2003-440, §1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2004-624, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2005-826, §1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 2006-16, §1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-219, §1, 5-1-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. 2008-379, §1, 4-15-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2009-557, §1, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-719, §1, 4-6-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-880, §1, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-39, §1, 5-1-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-173, §1, 4-16-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-262, §26, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-295, §1, 5-6-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-417, §1, 4-7-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-563, §1, 3-21-16, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-683, §1, 3-15-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-845, §1, 6-11-18, eff. 7-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-963, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Editor's note— Prior to its re-enactment, §8-2040 was reserved, as its provisions had been moved to §8-2063.  
Sec. 8-2041. - INSPECTION FEE FOR SANITARY SEWER PUMP STATIONS INSTALLED BY PRIVATE CONTRACTORS. 
Prior to being placed into service, all sanitary sewer pump station connections to the City's sanitary sewer system installed by a private contractor shall be inspected and determined to have been properly installed by City inspectors. The developer shall pay a construction inspection fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per sanitary sewer pump station with the submittal of the construction permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-827, §1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 2014-262, §27, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2019-964, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Editor's note— Prior to its re-enactment, §8-2041 was reserved, as its provisions had been moved to §8-2076.  
Secs. 8-2042 — 8-2045. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Section 8-2042 is now §8-2077. §8-2043 (deriving from a resolution of Feb. 4, 1974) was repealed by §22 of Ord. No. 1985-543, becoming part of §8-2063. §23 of Ord. No. 1985-543 repealed §§8-2044 and 8-2045, concerning sewer extensions to serve annexed areas where intervening properties are traversed, derived from Code 1959 , §23-9.1, and concerning procedure for connections derived from the following resolutions: 1961-223, §4; 404 of June 1, 1964; 976 of Dec. 21, 1970; 659 of Nov. 6, 1972; and 773 of March 2, 1973.  
Secs. 8-2046 — 8-2060. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE EXTENSIONS OF UTILITY SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: The title of Div. 2 was changed from "Connections to Privately Installed Utility Lines Outside the Corporate Limits" by §24 of Ord. No. 1985-543. §25 of Ord. No. 1985-543 repealed and reenacted §§8-2061—8-2071. The repealed sections derived from Code 1959 , §§23-12—23-22, and from Ord. No. 1979-161-TC-105, adopted Aug. 7, 1979; Ord. No. 1984-338, adopted April 17, 1984; Ord. No. 1984-343-TC-215, adopted May 1, 1984; Ord. No. 1984-470, adopted Dec. 18, 1984; 1985-477 and 478, both adopted Jan. 15, 1985. 
 
Sec. 8-2061. - APPLICATION. 
Any person owning or proposing to construct any private utility line or system inside or outside the corporate limits of the City which it is desired to have connected with the public utility lines and systems of the City shall make written application for permission to make such connections, upon forms furnished by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. Applications will be received and acted upon in accordance with the provisions of this article. The application must contain a preliminary utility plan which shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered to practice in the State of North Carolina. The application must also be accompanied by a map made by a professional engineer or registered land surveyor authorized to practice in the State , which map shall show accurately the property to be served with water and/or sewer service, and, if within any real estate development or subdivision, the map shall show the property lines and subdivision of lots and the layout of streets therein. When the private utility lines or systems are to be laid and constructed within any subdivision, such subdivision and the map thereof showing the property lines and subdivision of lots and the layout of streets must have been duly approved in accordance with Chapter 3, Part 10 of this Code before the approval of any application for permission to make connections with the utility system of the City . Unless the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee has information that indicates that there is adequate existing sewer capacity to meet the needs of the property for which sewer service is sought, the application shall also include a downstream sewer capacity analysis that demonstrates that there is capacity along the tributary wastewater path from the property to the wastewater treatment plant. Fees of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for main extensions and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for pump stations permits will be paid by the developer at the time engineering plans are submitted for review. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1986-778, §1, 5-6-86; Ord. No. 1991-781, §1, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 2002-196, §1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 2014-262, §28, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
State law reference: Utility construction plans and specifications, G.S. 89C-19.  
Sec. 8-2062. - SIZES AND LOCATIONS OF PIPES, ETC. 
No application will be considered by the Council under the provisions of this article until the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee has reviewed the sizes, location, character and quality of all pipes, stubs, valves, valve boxes, hydrants and other fixtures, equipment and apparatus to be laid and constructed and to be connected with the utility systems of the City . The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall have authority to recommend the approval or disapproval of such application and to indicate reasonable conditions and requirements for approval, and to recommend any measures that may be requisite or necessary to protect the interests of the City or to prevent improper connections being made with the utility system of the City . 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §29, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Editor's note: Copies of the "Public Utilities Handbook" which includes City standards and procedures are on file in the Public Utilities Department.  
Sec. 8-2063. - CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL OF OUTSIDE EXTENSIONS. 
All utility extensions outside the corporate limits shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. After action has been taken by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee (and by the Planning Commission, when required) and recommendations have been made to the Council , the Council shall consider and act upon the question of approving or disapproving the application, and the action of the Council shall be final; provided, however, the Council may indicate to the owners or promoters of any such addition, extension, subdivision, or development the requirements which must be met as a prerequisite for approving the application. 
(a)  Street standards. 
In prescribing such requirements and prerequisites for approval of the application for utility connections, the Council shall, in approving the subdivision or development, determine the width of streets , the adequacy of drainage, and flood control measures and facilities, the type of paving, the size and type of pipes and other equipment, the location of streets , particularly with respect to their coordination with the street plan of the City , and such other matters with respect to the development or subdivision as the Council in its discretion may deem proper. 
(b)  Water and sewer lines required. 
No private water line, lines or system within any greater than two-acre development or subdivision outside the corporate limits shall be approved for connection with the water system of the City , nor will the City accept any dedication of the same nor will the City agree to furnish water service to consumers within any such development or subdivision, unless, at the same time, there is connected with the City sewerage system and dedicated to the City sewer a sewerage system laid and constructed to City standards sufficient to make available adequate sewerage services for each of the lots within such development or subdivision. No private sewer line, lines, or system within any greater than two-acre development or subdivision outside the corporate limits shall be approved for connection with the sewer system of the City , nor will the City accept any dedication of the same, nor will the City agree to furnish sewer service to consumers within any such development or subdivision, unless, at the same time, there is connected with the City water system and dedicated to the City a water system laid and constructed to City standards sufficient to make available adequate water services for each of the lots within such development or subdivision. On lots greater than two (2) acres that have existing buildings that are having well and septic tank problems, [these] would be able to use one (1) utility without the other if both utilities are not available to the site. 
In such case where both utilities are not available to a particular tract of land and the property owner wishes to connect to the one that is available, the property owner will be allowed to connect to the particular utility that is available. Available for the purpose of this paragraph shall be defined to mean that the utility is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest point on the property . 
Cross reference: Property owners located outside City limits which connect to one (1) or more City utilities must submit a voluntary petition annexation, Resolution No. 1993-208. 
(c)  Adequate flood control facilities required. 
The City hereby states a policy of not extending water and/or sewer service facilities, or any other facilities under its control, into areas of Wake County outside the City's Chapter 160A, Article 19 planning jurisdiction, except in unusual circumstances, unless and until areas into which such services are extended and the areas within the Chapter 160A, Article 19 planning jurisdiction of the City are adequately protected through the installation of flood control and other such devices, and unless and until adequate facilities are available for the supply of water and the treatment of sewage. 
Cross reference: Floodprone area regulations, Part 10, Ch. 4. 
(d)  Community systems. 
Developments located outside the corporate limits but within the utilities planning area as provided in the comprehensive plan that install or propose to install a community water system, sanitary sewer system, or both must install said systems in accordance with the City design, materials, and construction standards and methods. Such design, materials, and construction standards and methods are subject to the same regulations as if the community water and community sewer system were connected to the system of Raleigh. If the conditions of G.S. 160A-374 are met by the City , full dedication of a community water system, including all wells, pumps, and utility lines , is required. 
(Ord. No. 1985-577-TC-237, §3, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 1986-892, §1, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 1991-768, §1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §14, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2011-868, §1, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-262, §30, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Cross reference: Resolution No. 1993-208 requires that connections to City utilities for any property outside corporate limits must be accompanied with a petition for annexation.  
Sec. 8-2064. - PRE-CONSTRUCTION APPROVALS. 
(a)  After approval of the development by the City Council , detailed construction plans of the utility extension including pipes, stubs, valves, valve boxes, hydrants, and other fixtures, equipment and apparatus, shall be submitted to the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities for review and approval. The construction plans shall be accompanied by any necessary Federal, State, County and City permit applications. 
(b)  In the event that any portion of the utility system is to be constructed and laid in and along any public highway or the right-of-way thereof, or in and across lands not owned and possessed by the promoters or developers or in and across lands owned and possessed by the developers or promoters but not within the current phase of development, the promoters and developers without cost or expense to the City shall procure, prior to construction plan approval, all written easement or right-of-way deeds deemed necessary and proper by the City , which legal instruments shall be subject to the approval by the City Attorney. The easement and right-of-way deeds shall be procured from (i) the proper officials and agencies having control of any public highways which the utility system is constructed in or across and (ii) the owners of lands which the utility system is constructed in or across. The easement and right-of-way deeds shall contain a grant of the right and authority to construct, improve, install, remove, replace, maintain, inspect and repair and use any and all parts of the utility system together with all appurtenant facilities and equipment necessary and convenient thereto that is constructed within the easement area or right-of-way, with appropriate rights of ingress and egress over private lands, when necessary, with the right to remove and keep removed therefrom all trees, shrubs, underbrush or parts thereof and other obstructions as necessary to maintain, repair, or protect the utility system . The City will join in the execution of such documents, when required, subject to approval of the legal instrument by the City Attorney. 
(c)  After the issuance of all required Federal, State, County and City permits, the construction plans shall be resubmitted to the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities together with the required Federal, State, County and City permits. The construction plans will be signed and approved for construction by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee only after all required Federal, State, County and City permits are obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §31, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
State law references: North Carolina Drinking Water Act, G.S. 130A-216 et seq. ; control of sources of water pollution; permits required, G.S. 143-215.1.  
Sec. 8-2065. - FEE IN LIEU OF CONSTRUCTION. 
(a)  Where the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee determines that construction of private utility water, sewer and/or reuse water improvements would not be feasible, a fee in lieu of construction may be permitted. In determining the feasibility, development requirements or topographic conditions may be considered. In this instance, right-of-way dedication and all necessary easements shall be dedicated to the City. Infrastructure construction drawings may be required to determine the extent of improvements and easement locations. 
(b)  All fees received pursuant to subsection (a) above may allow a combination or partial payment of funds and partial construction and dedication of the utility improvements when it is determined that this combination is in the best interests of the properties of the area. 
(c)  All fees received shall be used only for the development of the utility improvements that will best serve the consumers of the subdivision or development. These fees may be used to serve more than one subdivision or development. 
(d)  For mains under twelve (12) inches, fees in lieu payments shall be calculated using the costs to be reimbursed as set forth in §8-2077 based on unit cost per linear foot. For mains twelve (12) inches and above, the fees in lieu payments shall be calculated using the reimbursement costs as set forth in §8-2094(c) based on construction cost per linear foot. 
(Ord. No. 2013-210, §1, 7-2-13) 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2013-210, §1, adopted July 2, 2013, repealed the former §8-2065, and enacted a new §8-2065 as set out herein. The former §8-2065 pertained to construction approval and derived from Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, adopted April 16, 1985.  
Sec. 8-2066. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-262, §32, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, effective Jan. 26, 2014, repealed §8-2066, which pertained to easement and rights-of-way, procuring and derived from Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, adopted April 16, 1985.  
Sec. 8-2067. - CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT COST TO CITY. 
After receiving the necessary approvals and permits for the connection of any proposed privately owned utility line or system with the public utility lines or systems of the City , the applicant or applicants at their own proper cost and expense and without unnecessary delay shall furnish, construct and lay the utility lines as approved without cost or expense to the City and the utility lines , together with all appurtenant facilities and equipment, shall be laid and constructed in approved easements and rights-of-way according to the standards and specifications, and of the character, size, quality and durability, as prescribed by the City through and by its proper officials and employees, and shall be subject to the approval of the City through its proper officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85)  
Sec. 8-2068. - DEDICATION OF SYSTEMS. 
Before any person , firm or corporation shall connect in any manner any privately owned water or sewer line or lines or system with any water or sewer line or lines of the City , including water or sewer lines dedicated to the City , such person , firm or corporation shall , by proper written instrument, in consideration of making such connection and the benefits to be derived therefrom, dedicate, give, grant and convey such water, or sewer line, or lines or system to the City ; no such connection shall be made with the City water or sewer line or lines without the express approval of the City and the payment of required utility connection and inspection fees, nor shall such connection be effected except by the forces or employees of the City properly supervised, for which a charge may be made; and should any person , firm or corporation connect any privately owned water or sewer line or lines or system with any City water or sewer line or lines without first dedicating, giving, granting and conveying same to the City the act of connecting such water or sewer line or lines to the water or sewer line or lines of the City shall be deemed a dedication, gift, grant and conveyance of such water or sewer line or lines to the City . 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §33, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Charter reference: Authority to require dedication, §2.14(65).  
Sec. 8-2069. - INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BEFORE CONNECTING. 
Upon the completion of the construction and laying of the utility lines as authorized by this article for connection, and upon inspection and approval thereof by the City , the dedicators shall be permitted to connect such private utility lines with the utility lines and systems of the City upon the terms and conditions prescribed by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85) 
Cross references: City Engineer to inspect water and sewer construction work, §6-1002.  
Sec. 8-2070. - MAP OF SYSTEMS. 
The dedicators shall furnish the City an accurate map, in formats required by the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities showing in detail the location and dimensions of all recorded easements, mains, pipe lines, laterals, stubs, valves, valve boxes, hydrants, and other fixtures, apparatus, and equipment forming a part of the utility lines constructed and dedicated pursuant to the Code, and showing the depth of all pipes and apparatus below the ground level, which map shall be subject to the approval of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee or other proper official of the City designated by the Council , and after such map is so approved there shall be no changes to the map made without the written consent of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee or other such officials of the City authorized to give such consent. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2014-262, §34, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2071. - NONLIABILITY OF CITY; LIABILITY INSURANCE. 
The dedicators shall have and assume all risk in the laying, installation, and construction of the utility lines and system. Dedicators of any portion of the utility system not already subject to a warranty required by this Code or dedicators installing pump stations and appurtenances shall give warranties against any material defect, equipment defect, malfunction, or failure during design conditions for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance of such installation. The cost of repair, replacement or both of the subject facilities during the warranty period shall be at the sole expense of the dedicator and without cost to the City . Any repair or replacement made during the warranty period by the dedicator , his agent, or his independent contractor shall also be warranted for a one- year period beginning from the date of acceptance of the repair or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 1985-543, §25, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §15, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95)  
Sec. 8-2072. - CONTROL BY CITY; FEES TO CITY. 
All connections by consumers with the utility lines constructed and dedicated pursuant to this article and the Charter and all services through those lines and apparatus shall be in accordance with the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of and applicable to the City and its Department of Public Utilities, as now in force or as may be enacted, adopted and amended from time to time. The City shall have complete supervision and control over the lines, taps, connections and all other parts of the utility lines and system so constructed for the purpose of making any and all necessary inspections, and turning the water on and off; and for other purposes. The City shall collect all rents, fees and charges from consumers connected with such utility lines , for its sole use and benefit without compensation to the dedicators . 
( Code 1959 , §23-23; Ord. No. 1984-343-TC-215, §2, 5-1-84)  
Sec. 8-2073. - DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CITY. 
The City shall have the right to cut off the water and to discontinue the furnishing of water and sewer services through the utility lines constructed and dedicated pursuant to this article, at any time, without notice, whenever it shall appear to the City in the sole and absolute discretion of the governing body of the City that to continue to furnish water or sewer services to the consumers along any of the lines would render the City unable to properly furnish an adequate water supply or adequate sewer service for the use of its consumers and citizens living within the corporate limits of the City , but in such event, the City shall give the dedicators and the consumers an ample notice of such intention to discontinue the water supply or sewer service, or both, as the circumstances of the situation render practicable. The City specifically does not and shall not agree or undertake or be required to furnish to the dedicators or to any consumer along any of the utility lines constructed and dedicated pursuant to this article and the Charter any stated or particular pressure of water, and the City specifically does not and shall not agree to furnish fire protection, nor shall there be any such responsibility. The City shall not be liable to the dedicators or to any consumer or to any person for any failure to supply water or for the character or quality of the water supplied, or for any failure or inadequacy of sewer service. 
( Code 1959 , §23-24) 
State law reference: Discontinuance of service for nonpayment, G.S. 160A-214.  
Sec. 8-2074. - SPECIAL CONDITIONS IN CITY'S TAKING OVER PRIVATE UTILITY SYSTEMS. 
(a)  The following policy shall serve as a condition under which the City shall eventually take responsibility for and accept private community type utility system lines into the public system: 
(1)  The owner shall install a utility system , both water and sewer, if possible, using City standards as a minimum level of design. 
(2)  This system shall be supplied by a central temporary source from wells, pumps and tanks and/or sewage disposal system. 
(3)  At such time as the area of the City expands to encompass the development and City utility supply main and/or outfall reaches the privately developed community-type system, an agreement may be entered into for the City to connect to, serve and operate the system. 
(4)  The agreement shall provide for the utility system in the streets and drainage easements to become a part of the City system without cost to the City . The agreement shall further provide that following the connection of the properties served by the privately developed community utility system to the City 's utility system , the owner shall properly abandon the wastewater treatment plant pursuant to applicable laws and regulations at no cost to the City . 
(5)  All lots connecting to the utility system shall bear their share of the utility connection cost, which cost must be paid in a lump sum. 
(b)  Privately owned water distribution mains and sewer collection mains that connect multiple individually owned single family residential properties to the City of Raleigh public water system or sewer system may be dedicated to the City of Raleigh for ownership, operation and maintenance if those systems meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Water distribution systems and sewer collection systems shall be constructed in conformance with the City of Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook and comply with all State and Federal requirements for publicly owned water and sewer systems; 
(2)  The mains shall be properly sized and have sufficient capacity to serve the community according to the requirements of the City of Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook and all State and Federal requirements for publicly owned water and sewer systems. 
(3)  The condition of the mains and accessories are in good working order and do not require repair at the time of dedication. 
(4)  Easement area as required by the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook for proper operation and maintenance of the mains, meters and other accessories is provided. For mains within existing private street right-of-way, the easement area may be synonymous with the right-of-way lines such that all public mains and appurtenances are within the easement. 
(5)  Engineering record drawings of the water and sewer systems are provided in accordance with the City of Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook. 
(6)  The system is not currently connected to the City of Raleigh Public System through a master meter. 
(c)  A person whose system meets the criteria of §8-2074(a) or (b) above, and who desires to dedicate their water and or sewer system to the City , at no cost to the City , shall make written application to the City upon forms furnished by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee will review the application for compliance with the standards of this section. Following approval of the application, the applicant shall dedicate the system and appropriate easements for the components of the utility system to be conveyed by deed of easement, which deed shall be approved by the City , and record the deed or deeds in the appropriate county register of deeds at no cost to the City . Any private utility system that does not meet the requirements and standards of §8-2074(a) or (b) above, as applicable, shall not be accepted by the City for ownership, operation and maintenance of such system. 
(Res. No. 1964-588, §1, 10-5-64; Ord. No. 2014-262, §35, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2017-665, §1, 2-7-17 )  
Sec. 8-2075. - EXTENSIONS TO NEW DEVELOPMENTS INSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS; DEVELOPER TO BE REIMBURSED FOR MINOR LINES. 
(a)  If the water and sewer lines installed pursuant to this section are over six (6) inches in size for water or over eight (8) inches in size for sewer, but less than twelve (12) inches in size, and the lines or the area to be served are within the City limits, the City shall reimburse the applicant for certain costs and under certain conditions as stated herein. 
(b)  For developments inside the City limits or developments which it has been agreed shall be annexed to the City , the City , under the conditions listed in §8-2077 below, will reimburse the developer for costs incurred over and above those required to serve his/her immediate development. Such reimbursement shall be made in accordance with §8-2094 and §8-2095. Payment may be a one-time payment if the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee determines that there are sufficient funds to meet all outstanding obligations and the immediate request. Otherwise, reimbursement shall be in annual installment payments over a period of up to ten (10) years beginning on January 1 following the time of final inspection and acceptance of the improvement by the Chief Engineer of the City . The following installations are subject to reimbursement: 
(1)  Differential unit costs as set forth in the reimbursement fee schedule provided in §8-2094 between a six-inch water main and water mains over six (6) inches in diameter, but less than twelve (12) inches in diameter when required by the City and not necessary to serve the subject property . 
(2)  Differential unit costs as set forth in the reimbursement fee schedule provided in §8-2094 between an eight-inch sewer main and sewer mains over eight (8) inches in diameter, but less than twelve (12) inches in diameter, when required by the City and not necessary to serve the subject property . 
(3)  Unit cost of off-site utility lines less than twelve (12) inches in diameter constructed by the developer to reach the outer boundary of the development, whether the lines are installed inside or outside the City limits. 
( Code 1959 , §20-31(b); Res. No. 1961-223, Res. No. 404, 6-1-64; Res. No. 976, 12-21-70; Res. No. 659, 11-6-72; Res. No. 773, 3-2-73; Ord. No. 1985-543, §18, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1987-31-TC-296, §§25—27, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§14, 16—19, 21—23, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2014-262, §36, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2076. - EXTENSIONS TO NEW DEVELOPMENTS OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS; DEVELOPER TO BE REIMBURSED FOR MINOR LINES CONSTRUCTED WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS. 
For developments outside the City limits, the City , under the conditions listed below in §8-2077, will reimburse the developer for unit costs of utilities less than twelve (12) inches in diameter constructed within the City limits by the developer to reach his/her developments. Payment may be a one-time payment if the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee determines that there are sufficient funds to meet all outstanding reimbursement obligations and the immediate request. Otherwise, reimbursement shall be in annual installment payments without interest over a period of up to ten (10) years beginning on January 1 following the time of final inspection and acceptance of the improvement by the Chief Engineer of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §20-31(c); Ord. No. 1985-543, §20, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§14, 16, 19, 20, 24, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2014-262, §37, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14) 
Cross reference: Utility lines twelve (12) inches and over in diameter are eligible for reimbursement under the utility main policy, division 3 of this article.  
Sec. 8-2077. - REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES FOR EXTENSIONS TO NEW DEVELOPMENTS INSIDE AND OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS; PROCEDURES. 
(a)  Following completion, acceptable to the Chief Engineer of the City , of such improvements, the developer shall furnish the Chief Engineer an itemized list of costs to be reimbursed by the City . The following unit costs per lineal foot of installed main shall be used in determining the amount of reimbursement: 
Water mains: 
Six-inch: Forty-three dollars ($43.00)/lineal foot. 
Eight-inch: Fifty-two dollars ($52.00)/lineal foot. 
Sewer mains: 
Eight-inch: Fifty-six dollars ($56.00)/lineal foot. 
Ten-inch: Seventy-three dollars ($73.00)/lineal foot. 
Design and inspection: Ten (10) per cent of construction cost. 
Following the last working day in June, all fees stated herein shall be adjusted annually based on Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, as published in December. After the fees are indexed, the fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar. 
(b)  The City shall pay such other costs incidental to the development of the general area which, in the opinion of the Council should properly be borne by the City . 
( Code 1959 , §20-31(d)—(g); Ord. No. 1985-543, §21, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1987-31-TC-296, §29, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§25, 26, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2007-165-TC-299, §1, TC-1-07, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2012-81, §§1, 2, 6-19-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-176, §1, 4-16-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-298, §1, 5-6-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-420, §1, 4-7-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-562, §1, 3-21-16, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-682, §1, 3-15-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-844, §1, 6-11-18, eff. 7-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-962, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 8-2078. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE. 
(a)  Whenever the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. If requested by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee within the timeframe specified in the enforcement policy adopted in accordance with subsection (e) below . Submission of this plan does not relieve the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. In the event of an emergency that requires the City to take immediate action to correct the violation, the City is not required to provide an opportunity for the violator to correct the violations and may assess penalties and costs pursuant to this section without prior notice. 
(b)  Any person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  For a first-time violator where the violation was not committed willfully or intentionally, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day per violation. 
(2)  For a repeat violator where the violation was not committed willfully or intentionally, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day per violation. 
(3)  For a first-time violator where the violation was committed willfully or intentionally, twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation. 
The notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable care the basis of the civil penalty and any administrative costs and the costs to the City of rectifying the noncompliance that are assessed. 
(c)  Failure to obtain any permit required by this article or any other violation by any person authorized to perform work in or upon the utility system shall subject the violator to the following penalties: 
(1)  For the first violation, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable. 
(2)  For the second violation in a five-year period, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable. 
(3)  For the third violation in a five-year period, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable, and for each subsequent violation the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable, up to the fifth violation. 
(4)  After the fifth violation in a five-year period, the privilege and right of the person to work in and/or upon the Raleigh water and sewer utility system shall be suspended for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the sixth violation. 
(d)  Any person violating any section of this article must pay to the City all expenses incurred by the City in repairing any damage to the utility system caused in whole or in part by such violation and any expense incurred by the City in investigating such violation. 
(e)  The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall maintain an enforcement policy to implement this section which shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. 
(f)  From and after the expiration of the time period specified in the notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (a) above of this section for correcting a violation of this article, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
(g)  Any appeal from a notice of violation or civil penalty assessment shall be made in writing to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of violation or civil penalty assessment issued pursuant to this section. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall use all reasonable efforts to notify the appellant in writing of his or her decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal pursuant to the enforcement policy adopted pursuant to subsection (e) above of this section. 
(h)  All notices required by this subsection may be served by certified mail or hand-delivery to the violator; certified mail or hand-delivery to the owner of the property in violation; or posting the notice at the property in violation. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by First Class U.S. Mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice sent by First Class U.S. Mail is not returned by the U.S. Post Office seven (7) days after mailing. 
(i)  If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached after thirty (30) days after demand for payment is first made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the general court of justice of Wake County for recovery of the penalty. If payment is not received or equitable settlement has not been reached within the specified time period, the City may interrupt water and sewer service to the property until such time that payment is received or equitable settlement has been reached. 
(j)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension or construction of the utility system or part thereof without first obtaining a permit or written permission or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment to the maximum number of days prescribed by law. 
(k)  Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate any of the provisions of this article or any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or is undertaking or continuing any alteration, extension and construction of the utility system without first obtaining a permit or written permission, or is undertaking or continuing any alterations, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both, the City may , either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this subsection shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. The terms "undertakes" or "undertaking" as used in this section means the initiating of or continuing of or being financially responsible for any activity or phase of activity which results in the extension, construction, or alteration of any part of the utility system of the City . 
(l)  The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this article may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the penalties established by other sections of this Code and applicable ordinances. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 1986-775, §1, 4-15-86; Ord. No. 2006-100, §2, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §38, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-337, §8, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14) 
State law reference: Criminal offenses, G.S. 14-4; G.S. 143-215.6(b).  
Secs. 8-2079—8-2090. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 3. - CAPITAL FACILITIES FEES AND REIMBURSEMENTS; UTILITY MAIN POLICY FOR MAJOR WATER AND SEWER MAINS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2013-179, §1, adopted April 16, 2013, amended the title of Div. 3 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said division was entitled "Acreage Fees and Reimbursements; Utility Main Policy for Major Water and Sewer Mains." 
 
Sec. 8-2091. - UTILITY MAIN POLICY—MAJOR MAINS. 
It shall be the utility main policy of the City , subject to conditions and limitations set forth herein, to fully or partially reimburse developers who, at the request of the City , install major water and/or major sewer mains either inside or outside the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 1984-338, §8, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 1984-470, §3, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §28, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2013-179, §2, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-197, §1, 6-18-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2015-396, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-938, §1, 4-16-19 )  
Sec. 8-2092. - SEWER CAPITAL FACILITIES FEES IMPOSED ON ALL CONNECTIONS. 
(a)  In addition to all other fees, prescribed by ordinance or resolution now or hereafter in effect, there shall be a fee for connecting with the sewer system of the City , within or without the corporate limits of the City . The fees shall be calculated based on the water meter size for the property served by the connection. The amounts of such fees to be paid to the City at the time that application for the connection is made shall be as follows: 
Sewer Capital Facilities Fee Schedule 
Water Meters 
(inches) 	Sewer Capital 
Facilities Fee 
(per tap) 
? 	$ 2,522.00 
¾ 	  3,783.00 
1 	  6,305.00 
1½ 	 12,610.00 
2 	 20,176.00 
3 	 40,352.00 
4 	 63,050.00 
6 	126,100.00 
8 	201,760.00 
10 	529,620.00 
12 	668,330.00 
 
(b)  For approved sewer-only connections, the capital facilities fee shall be two thousand five hundred twenty-two dollars ($2,522.00) per 4-inch sewer service connection. The fee will increase proportionately to the increased connection size and/or volume. 
(c)  For redevelopment projects, the amount of the capital facilities fee shall take into account and provide credit for the number of meters and their respective sizes on the property that were connected to the utility system prior to redevelopment of the property . In no case shall the credit for the existing connections exceed the amount of the new capital facilities fee. 
(Res. 1961-233; Res. 1964-404; Res. 1970-976; Res. 1972-659; Res. 1973-773; Ord. No. 1979-186, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 1981-670, §1, 5-19-81; Ord. No. 1984-338, §§2, 3, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 1984-470, §1, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §13, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1985-585, §1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 1985-628, §1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 1985-681, §1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 1986-754, §1, 4-1-86; Ord. No. 1986-860, §1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1987-955, §1, 4-21-87; Ord. No. 1988-145, §1, 4-19-88; Ord. No. 1988-291-TC-327, §13, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 1989-375, §1, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 1989-418, §1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 1990-599, §1, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 1991-718, §1, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 1991-878, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 1992-966, §1, 5-5-92; Ord. No. 1993-199, §1, 6-1-93; Ord. No. 1994-398, §1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 1995-624, §1, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 1997-112, §1, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1998-258, §1, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 1998-334, §1, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 1999-545, §1, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2000-795, §1, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 2001-994, §1, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2002-195, §1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 203-436, §1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2004-620, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2005-823, §1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 2006-13, §1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-165-TC-299, §1, TC-1-07, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2007-223, §1, 5-1-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. 2008-376, §1, 4-15-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2009-554, §1, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-716, §1, 4-6-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-882, §1, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-52, §1, 5-14-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2012-81, §3, 6-19-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-179, §3, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-197, §§3, 4, 6-18-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2017-735, §1, 9-5-17, eff. 9-30-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-835, §1, 6-5-18, eff. 7-1-18 )  
Sec. 8-2092.1. - WATER CAPITAL FACILITIES FEES IMPOSED ON ALL CONNECTIONS. 
(a)  In addition to all other fees, prescribed by ordinance or resolution now or hereafter in effect, there shall be a fee for connecting with the water system of the City , either within or without the corporate limits of the City . The fees shall be calculated based on the water meter size for the property served by the connection. The amounts of such fees to be paid to the City at the time that application for the connection is made shall be as follows: 
Water Capital Facilities Fee Schedule 
Water Meters 
(inches) 	Water Capital 
Facilities Fee 
(per tap) 
? 	$ 1,373.00 
¾ 	  2,060.00 
1 	  3,433.00 
1½ 	  6,865.00 
2 	 10,984.00 
3 	 21,968.00 
4 	 34,325.00 
6 	 68,650.00 
8 	109,840.00 
10 	288,330.00 
12 	363,845.00 
 
(b)  For redevelopment projects, the amount of the capital facilities fee shall take into account and provide credit for the number of meters and their respective sizes on the property that were connected to the utility system prior to redevelopment of the property . In no case shall the credit for the existing connections exceed the amount of the new capital facilities fee. 
( Ord. No. 2017-735, §2, 9-5-17, eff. 9-30-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-835, §2, 6-5-18, eff. 7-1-18 )  
Sec. 8-2093. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2013-197, §2, adopted June 18, 2013, effective July 1, 2013, repealed §8-2093, which pertained to acreage fees; exceptions and derived from Res. No. 1961-223; Res. No. 1964-404; Res. No. 1970-976; Res. No. 1972-659; Res. No. 1973-773; Ord. No. 1985-543, §13, adopted April 16, 1985; Ord. No. 2012-70, §1, adopted June 19, 2012.  
Sec. 8-2094. - REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES FOR NEW MAJOR MAINS. 
(a)  Developers or promoters proposing to install major water mains , or major sewer mains , or both shall follow the ordinances, policies, and procedures for such installations established by the City , under the direction of the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities. Properly prepared preliminary utility plans and profiles shall be first submitted to the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities (or to the Planning Department for projects involving a subdivision) and thereafter shall follow the provisions of Division 2, Article B, Chapter 2, Part 8 (and the Raleigh Unified Development Ordinance for projects involving a subdivision) of this Code. 
(b)  Within one year following completion of the project and acceptance by the City of the utility improvements, a reimbursement contract shall be prepared and submitted to Council for approval, and then executed by the City and developer. No reimbursement contract shall be executed until such time as main trunk or interceptor facilities which serve the major mains are operational. Should the developer fail to execute the reimbursement contract within one year of the City's acceptance of the utility improvements, the City shall have no further obligation to reimburse the developer for the cost of the main or interceptor facilities that the developer constructed. 
(c)  The reimbursement amounts will be calculated based on the differential unit cost between a six-inch water main and eight-inch sewer main and the main size installed multiplied by the length of the main installed. The differential unit costs to be used are listed below: 
Item 	Construction 
Cost 
(per linear foot) 	Reimbursement 
Cost 
(per linear foot) 
Water mains 		
   6-inch 	$43.00 	
  12-inch 	$75.00 	$32.00 
  16-inch 	$92.00 	$48.00 
  24-inch 	$169.00 	$126.00 
		
Sewer mains 		
   8-inch 	$56.00 	
  12-inch 	$83.00 	$29.00 
  15-inch 	$96.00 	$40.00 
  18-inch 	$123.00 	$65.00 
  24-inch 	$183.00 	$129.00 
		
Bore 		
  12-inch 	$207.00 	
  16-inch 	$244.00 	$36.00 
  20-inch 	$248.00 	$40.00 
  24-inch 	$269.00 	$58.00 
  36-inch 	$329.00 	$121.00 
		
Design &
Inspection 	10% of construction cost 
 
Following the last working day in June, all fees stated herein shall be adjusted annually based on Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, as published in December. After the fees are indexed, the fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar. 
(Ord. No. 1984-470, §4, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §29, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 1995-669, §§1, 2, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 1996-891, §2, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 1997-113, §2, 7-1-97; Ord. No. 1998-335, §1, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 1999-550, §1, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 2000-794, §1, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 2001-992, §1, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 2002-199, §1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 2003-437, §1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2004-621, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2005-824, §1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 2006-14, §1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-165-TC-299, §1, TC-1-07, 2-6-07; Ord. No. 2007-217, §1, 5-1-07, eff. 7-1-07; Ord. No. 2008-377, §1, 4-15-08, eff. 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2009-555, §1, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2010-717, §1, 4-6-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-878, §1, 5-17-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-38, §1, 5-1-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2012-81, §2, 6-19-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-197, §§5—7, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 2013-172, §1, 4-16-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-294, §1, 5-6-14, eff. 7-1-14; Ord. No. 2015-396, §2, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-416, §1, 4-7-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-567, §1, 3-21-16, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-687, §1, 3-15-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-843, § 1, 6-11-18, eff. 7-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-966, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 8-2095. - REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACT; TERMS. 
(a)  A party to a reimbursement contract involving a major main extension shall pay the City capital facilities fee at the time service connection application is made in accordance with Article 8 of Chapter 162A of the North Carolina General Statutes. 
(b)  Unless the party has been given a credit as required by G.S. 162A-207(c), the reimbursement payment may be a one-time payment if the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee determines that there are sufficient funds to meet all outstanding obligations and the immediate request for reimbursement. Otherwise, reimbursement shall be in annual installment payments over a period up to ten (10) years beginning on January 1 immediately following the execution of the contract. 
(c)  If more than one (1) extension of a major main or mains have been made, reimbursements shall be paid to the developers making such extensions in the order that the reimbursement contracts are signed. 
(d)  The City Manager or his designee is authorized to enter into such reimbursement contracts on behalf of the City . 
(Ord. No. 1984-338, §§9—11, 4-17-84; Ord. No. 1985-543, §30, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 2013-197, §8, 6-18-13, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2019-938, §2, 4-16-19 ) 
Editor's note: Reimbursements for oversized utility lines are found in Standard Operating Procedure No. 700-6, major mains , §7.2 et seq.  
Sec. 8-2096. - REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES FOR REPLACEMENT OF EXISTING MAINS. 
(a)  During the rezoning, development plan, or building permit review process, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may determine that the increase in sewer discharge associated with a project will exceed the available capacity of downstream sewer mains and that replacement of the existing downstream sewer mains is required or that replacement of existing water mains is necessary to facilitate the potable water demands or fire flow requirements for a project. The City's Urban Redevelopment Main Replacement Reimbursement Program will provide reimbursements to developers who are required by the City to replace existing water and sewer mains in association with development projects. Reimbursements under this program may be for replacing water and/or sewer mains to provide adequate pipe capacity, and/or when the City requires the replacement of existing water and sewer infrastructure adjacent to a proposed project based on the condition of the existing pipes. The available reimbursement amount, as a percentage of estimated construction cost, will vary based on the age, condition and available capacity of the existing mains that are being replaced in association with the development project. The highest levels of reimbursement will be provided for projects replacing mains which are old, deteriorated, or over capacity in existing conditions, with the intent of distributing the costs of such projects between developers, the existing customer base, and future developments equitably. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall adopt an Urban Redevelopment Main Replacement Reimbursement Policy pursuant to the requirements and standards set forth in this §8-2096 to implement this program, which shall be approved by the Council and incorporated into this Code by reference. 
(b)  The developer shall identify the proposed increase in sewer capacity associated with the proposed development project. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee will determine if there is enough information readily available to ensure that there is adequate downstream capacity for the proposed project. If the City determines there is adequate downstream sewer capacity based on readily available information, no capacity improvements will be required downstream of the project. In the event that not enough information is available, the developer shall be required to provide a sewer capacity study, prepared and sealed by a North Carolina licensed professional engineer, evaluating the downstream sewer capacity. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may require the study to extend to include major interceptors where there is concern that a large project may exceed the capacity of downstream interceptors. 
(c)  Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may determine that existing mains adjacent to a project require replacement as part of the proposed project due to age or deterioration. Replacement of mains adjacent to a project will only be required when the project will be modifying connections to the existing mains or constructing other improvements, such as street or storm drainage improvements in the right of way or easement containing the water and sewer mains. The City will provide 100% reimbursement based on the unit prices in §8-2096(f) below when replacement of the mains is not needed to accommodate additional sewer capacity or water demands or to address conflicts associated with the project. 
(d)  Following the identification by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee of mains requiring replacement, the developer shall provide construction drawings for the proposed improvements through the infrastructure construction plan approval process. Prior to construction drawing approval, the developer shall notify the City that an application for reimbursement will be made for the proposed project. The City will determine the applicable reimbursement value based on the criteria described in this section and the Urban Redevelopment Main Replacement Reimbursement Policy. 
(e)  Within one year following completion of the project and acceptance of utility improvements by the City , a reimbursement contract shall be prepared pursuant to §8-2095 and submitted to Council for approval, and then executed by the City and developer. No reimbursement contract shall be executed by the City until such time as main trunk or interceptor facilities which serve the major mains are operational. Should the developer fail to execute the reimbursement contract within one year of the City's acceptance of the utility improvements, the City shall have no further obligation to reimburse the developer for the cost of the main or interceptor facilities that the developer constructed. 
(f)  The reimbursement amount will be calculated based on the unit costs below and the Urban Redevelopment Main Reimbursement Policy. The City will require that the reimbursement be based on the lowest cost alternative which is feasible for the construction being pursued. If the developer chooses to pursue a higher cost construction method or alignment, the City will reimburse based on the lower cost alternative. (i.e. the developer may choose a more expensive alternative to speed schedule). Reimbursement based on unit costs is intended to cover both design and construction. In the event that the developer believes that actual construction cost will significantly exceed the costs below, the developer may request to be reimbursed according to the amounts and procedures established in the Anomaly Process in §8-2096(g) below. 
WATER: 
Pipe 
(linear feet) 			Services 
(each) 
Diameter 	Total 	Bore and Jack 	Diameter 	Each 	Diameter 	Each 	Each 
6" 	$133.59 	$222.78 	¾" 	$1,412.88 	2" 	$5,564.09 	$5,427.72 
8" 	$138.01 	$278.14 	1" 	$1,475.80 	4" 	$10,153.35 	
12" 	$169.86 	$487.41 	2" 	$7,801.87 	6" 	$13,214.21 	
16" 	$227.40 	$626.48 			8" 	$16,273.73 	
24" 	$239.06 	$765.56 			12" 	$22,394.09 	
 
SEWER: 
Pipe (linear feet) 	Manholes (each) 	Services 
Diameter 	Depth 	Bore and Jack 	Diameter 	Depth 	(Each) 
	0—16 	16+ 			0—16 	16+ 	
8" 	$156.04 	$206.77 	$548.57 	4" 	$4,208.31 	$9,836.10 	$2,070.90 
12" 	$165.71 	$217.95 	$759.17 	5" 	$9,181.77 	$12,907.83 	
16" 	$172.67 	$227.66 	$1,240.68 	6" 	$14,565.33 	$25,144.17 	
18" 	$184.39 	$239.40 	$1,722.15 				
24" 	$222.25 	$279.99 	$2,166.74 				
 
  
Bypass Pumping 	Rock 	Asphalt 
Per 150 linear feet (LF) 	< 10 CY (LS) 	additional (CY) 	per LF of sewer main 
8" 	12" 	16" 	24" 			
$11,145.28 	$15,475.45 	$20,475.35 	$20,475.35 	$1,669.15 	$76.51 	$52.88 
 
Following the last working day in June, all costs stated herein shall be adjusted annually based on the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, as published in December. 
Notes: 
(1) The service line item is intended to cover existing services which are required to be replaced as part of the main replacement. Services for the proposed development are not eligible for reimbursement. 
(2) Payment for rock excavation will only be applicable when the developer has provided geotechnical boring information pursuant to the standards and requirements in the Urban Redevelopment Utility Main Reimbursement Policy. 
(3) Bore and jack unit costs are based on carrier pipe size and include both the casing and carrier pipes. 
(4) Unit costs for pipe bursting will be based on the 0'—16' deep open cut unit prices with a multiplier applied based on the Difficulty Classifications found in the International Pipe Bursting Association "Guideline for Pipe Bursting". Unit prices for pipe bursting are based on the proposed pipe diameter. Asphalt will not be considered for pipe bursting projects. 
Pipe Bursting Multipliers 
	Bursting Class A 	Bursting Class B 	Bursting Class C 
Degree of Difficulty 	Minimal 	Moderate 	Comprehensive 
8" 	118% 	118% 	141% 
12" 	127% 	136% 	173% 
16" 	146% 	154% 	179% 
18" 	156% 	163% 	186% 
24" 	161% 	176% 	192% 
 
(g)  In the event that site conditions exist that may cause construction costs to exceed the published unit costs above, the developer may choose to pursue this Anomaly Process in lieu of applying for reimbursement according to the published costs. The developer shall provide the City with the approved construction drawings and specifications based on the City's standard specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . After the developer enters into a contract with the City for payment of the developer's portion of the project costs, the City will initiate a Capital Improvement Project to construct the proposed improvements. The City will bid the proposed water or sewer main replacement project in accordance with North Carolina Law for Public Contracts, N.C.G.S. 143, Article 8 and award the construction contract to the lowest responsible, responsive bidder. The developer shall pay to the City the total amount of the developer's portion of the proposed construction costs prior to contract award based on the low bid construction cost and the Reimbursement Percentages calculated above. The City will administer the construction of the proposed main replacement. Upon project completion, the final project cost shall be determined including approved change orders. The developer's portion of the project cost shall be based on the actual final project cost. The Developer may choose to pursue building permits following the bid opening, however no Certificate of Occupancy will be provided until all required improvements have been completed and accepted by the City . The City does not guarantee the project will meet the Developer's schedule. 
(h)  Projects which were approved for construction prior to effective date of this ordinance but which have not yet been accepted for ownership by the City are eligible to apply for reimbursement under this §8-2096. 
( Ord. No. 2015-396, §3, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-697, §1, 4-18-17, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-846, § 1, 6-11-18, eff. 7-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-967, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Secs. 8-2097—8-2110. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - USE OF SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, adopted Dec. 6, 2011, amended Art. C in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. C, §§8-2111—8-2140.11, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-329, §1, adopted Dec. 4, 2007. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-2111. - PURPOSE AND POLICY. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the waste water collection and treatment system for the City of Raleigh, hereafter referred to as the City , and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, Federal regulations and State rules including 15A NCAC 02H Part .0900, the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code Section 1251 et seq. ) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal waste water system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal waste water system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the State or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial waste water and sludges from the municipal system; 
(4)  To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public; 
(5)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal waste water system ; and 
(6)  To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or Non-discharge Permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the municipal waste water system is subject. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal waste water system , through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(d)  This article shall apply to all users of the municipal waste water system . [Note: as authorized by G.S. 160A-312 and/or G.S. 153A-275.] Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other City personnel. By discharging waste water into the municipal waste water system , industrial users located within or outside the City limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this article, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2112. - DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Approval Authority: The Director of the Division of Water Quality of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) or his designee. 
Authorized representative of the industrial user: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation, or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the industrial user is a Federal, State or local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing , the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City. 
(5)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to POTW Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
Baseline monitoring report (BMR): A required report for all industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard . A BMR provides information that documents an industrial user 's compliance status with all applicable pretreatment standards . 
Biochemcial oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration ( e.g. , mg/l). 
Building sewer: A sewer conveying waste water from the premises of a user to the POTW . 
Bypass: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Categorical standards: National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standards. 
Consumer of sewer services or consumer: Any person who discharges waste water or other substances regulated by this Article into the POTW or otherwise uses the POTW and who is not an industrial user. 
Control Authority: Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW organization's pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn. 
Division: The Division of Water Quality of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency , or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Food preparation or serving facility: Any commercial, or industrial facility that prepares or serves food, including a restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, snack bar, grill, deli, catering service, bakery, grocery store, butcher shop, or similar establishment. 
Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Grease and septage haulers: Any person or business entity permitted by DENR to remove and haul grease or septage which would otherwise be transported to the POTW . 
Hazardous waste: A substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks, including but not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge or discharge: The discharge or the introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user or user: Any person who is a source of indirect discharge . 
Interference: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Control Authority's (and/or the POTW's if different from the Control Authority 's) NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable State and Federal statutes, regulations or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. ), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA), or more stringent State criteria (including those contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, and potentially contaminated laboratory wastes. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or Categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users , and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. 
National prohibitive discharge standard or Prohibitive discharge standard: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in §8-2113 of this article and are developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants , the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c), provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or waste water generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)b. or (1)c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
(i)  any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Noncontact cooling water: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES, permit: A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342), or pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1 by the State under delegation from the EPA . 
Non-discharge permit: A permit issued by the State pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface waters of the State or for a waste water treatment works which does not discharge directly to surface waters of the State . 
Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, of the Control Authority 's (and/or POTW 's, if different from the Control Authority 's) NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local government entities. 
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant: Any "waste" as defined in G.S. 143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes , chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of waste water ( e.g. , pH , temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, BOD , COD, toxicity, and odor). 
POTW Director: The City of Raleigh Director of Public Utilities, or authorized representative . 
POTW treatment plant: That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to waste water . 
Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants , the elimination of pollutants , or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in waste water prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW collection system and/or treatment plant . The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment program: The program for the control of pollutants introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the City in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the Approval Authority as authorized by G.S. 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11. 
Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment , other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical standards , or local limits which apply to an industrial user . 
Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) or municipal waste water system: A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment , recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey waste water to the POTW treatment plant . For the purposes of this article, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey waste waters to the POTW from persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City , or in any other way, users of the City's POTW . 
Severe property damage: Substantial physical damage to property , damage to the user's treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass . Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Significant industrial user: An industrial user who discharges waste water into a publicly owned treatment works and who: 
(1)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process waste water to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown waste waters ); or 
(2)  Contributes process waste water which makes up five (5) per cent or more of the NPDES or Non-discharge permitted flow limit or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant . In this context, organic capacity refers to BOD , TSS, Ammonia; Total Phosphorus, and Total Nitrogen; or 
(3)  Is required to meet a national categorical pretreatment standard; or 
(4)  Is found by the City , the Division of Water Quality or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users , on the waste water treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or compliance with any pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(5)  Subject to Division of Water Quality approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraphs (1) and (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW ';i§ ..... i; operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirement , the POTW ';i§ 
(6)  Subject to Division of Water Quality approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (3) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial user . 
Significant noncompliance or SNC: The status of noncompliance of a Significant Industrial User when one or more of the following criteria are met. Additionally, any Industrial User who meets the criteria in Part (1)c.; (1)d.; or (5) below shall also be SNC . 
(1)  Violations of waste water discharge limits. 
a.  Chronic violations of waste water discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) per cent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1). 
b.  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) per cent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD , TSS, fats, oil, and grease); 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow and pH ). 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Control Authority and/or POTW Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges , interference or pass through ; or endangered the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the public. 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant or waste water that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in either the Control Authority's or the POTW's, if different from the Control Authority's, exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge . 
(2)  Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date. 
(3)  Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports , ninety (90) day compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within thirty (30) days from the due date. 
(4)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(5)  Any other violation or group of violations that the Control Authority and/or POTW Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug load, slug discharge or slug: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through , or in any other way violates the POTW ';i§\i; regulations, local limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to spills and other accidental discharges ; discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge ; or any other discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §8-2113 of this ordinance. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting there from. 
Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, waste water or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic substances: Substances listed or defined as toxic in 15A NCAC 2B Section .0200. 
Upset: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user . An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
Vehicle maintenance facility: Any commercial or industrial facility where automobiles, trucks, or equipment are serviced or maintained, including garages, service stations, repair shops, oil and lubrication shops, or similar establishments. 
Waste water: The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Waste water permit: As set forth in §8-2127 of this article. 
Waters of the State: All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof. 
This article is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice-versa. " Shall " is mandatory; " may " is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD: Biochemical Oxygen Demand. 
(2)  CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD: Chemical Oxygen Demand. 
(4)  EPA: Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  gpd: Gallons per day. 
(6)  l: Liter. 
(7)  mg: Milligrams. 
(8)  mg/l: Milligrams per liter. 
(9)  G.S.: North Carolina General Statutes. 
(10)  NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(11)  O & M: Operation and maintenance. 
(12)  POTW: Publicly-owned treatment works. 
(13)  RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
(14)  SIC: Standard Industrial Classification. 
(15)  SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act. 
(16)  TSS: Total suspended solids. 
(17)  TN: Total Nitrogen. 
(18)  U.S.C.: United States Code. 
(19)  F.O.G.: Fats, Oils, Grease. 
(20)  TP: Total Phosphorus. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 8-2113. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS. 
(a)  General prohibitions. 
No person, user or consumer shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW , directly or indirectly, any pollutant or waste water which causes interference or pass through . These general prohibitions apply to all users or consumers of a POTW whether or not the user or consumer is a significant industrial user or subject to any national, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. 
No person, user or consumer shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants , substances, or waste water : 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW , including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference [but in no case solids greater than one-quarter (¼) inch in any dimension]. 
(3)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; but in no case, concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l. 
(4)  Any waste water having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0 or waste water having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the POTW or equipment. Any pH above 12.5 is considered hazardous under 40 CFR 261.22. 
(5)  Any waste water containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, in sufficient quantity (flow and/or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants , to cause interference with the POTW. 
(6)  Any waste water having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-six (66) degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference , but in no case waste water which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius). 
(7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants , except at discharge points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with §8-2121 of this article. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other waste water which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(10)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of the Act ; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(11)  Any waste water which imparts color which cannot be removed by the pretreatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for any designated uses. 
(12)  Any waste water containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 
(13)  Stormwater , surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial waste water , unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director. 
(14)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director. 
(15)  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director. 
(16)  Any medical wastes , except as specifically authorized in the medical facility's Policy for Disposal of Medical Wastes after it has been approved by the POTW Director as an attachment to and as part of the medical facility's waste water discharge permit. 
(17)  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal waste water system. 
(18)  Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director. 
(19)  Any waste water causing the treatment plant effluent to violate State water quality standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B .0200. 
(20)  Waste water causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(21)  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
(22)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal waste water system. 
(23)  At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) per cent nor any single reading over ten (10) per cent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(24)  Any type of paper product, other than toilet paper. 
(25)  Any type of cloth, including diapers and wash cloths. 
(26)  Any type of disposable diaper. 
(27)  Any type of tobacco product, including cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, and snuff. 
(28)  Any type of condom. 
(29)  Any type of personal hygiene product, including tampons, sanitary napkins, and towelettes. 
(30)  Wood, debris, or wood product, including trees, limbs, roots, leaves, yard waste, grass clippings, or lumber. 
(31)  Construction material, debris, or tools, including rocks, gravel, cement, concrete, masonry bricks or block, shovels, and hand tools. 
(32)  Adhesives, glue, dye, or stones used in the manufacture of products. 
(33)  Product containers, including boxes, bottles, cans, or buckets. 
(34)  Appliances or parts of appliances. 
(35)  Vehicles or parts of vehicles. 
(36)  Rope, string, twine, thread, or similar materials. 
(37)  Material made of fabric, including carpet, blankets, sheets, sleeping bags. 
(38)  Trash bags, whether paper or plastic. 
(39)  All other solids or liquids, other than wastes from the human body, that may accumulate in sewer pipes and cause or contribute to blockages. 
(c)  Processing and storage of prohibited pollutants , substances, etc. 
Pollutants , substances, waste water , or other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal waste water system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
(d)  Actions of POTW Director upon determination of violation. 
When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) or consumer(s) is contributing to the POTW any of the substances enumerated in subsection (b) above in such amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through , the POTW Director shall : 
(1)  Advise the user(s) or consumer(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on the POTW in accordance with §8-2140.4 of this article; and 
(2)  Take appropriate actions in accordance with Division 4 of this article for such user or consumer to protect the POTW from interference or pass through. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2114. - NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. 
Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 which standards are incorporated herein. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in waste water , the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits consistent with the requirements set forth with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When waste water subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with waste water not regulated by the same standard , the POTW Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, consistent with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard consistent with the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.15. 
(5)  A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard pursuant to the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.7. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2115. - LOCAL LIMITS. 
(a)  An industrial waste survey is required prior to an industrial user , consumer , or other person discharging waste water containing in excess of the following daily average discharge limits. Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop user -specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW's maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of concern. User -specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern s hall be included in waste water pretreatment permits. 
0.005 mg/l antimony 
0.005 mg/l arsenic 
1.000 mg/l barium 
0.005 mg/l beryllium 
0.003 mg/l cadmium 
0.050 mg/l chromium 
0.038 mg/l copper 
0.010 mg/l cyanide 
1.000 mg/l iron 
0.00875 mg/l lead 
0.0001 mg/l mercury 
0.005 mg/l molybdenum 
0.005 mg/l nickel 
0.005 mg/l selenium 
0.010 mg/l silver 
0.175 mg/l zinc 
1.0 mg/l nitrate nitrogen 
10 mg/l sulfide 
55 mg/l sulfate 
65 mg/l chloride 
1.000 mg/l fluoride 
1.000 ug/l phenolic compounds 
300 mg/l BOD 
250 mg/l TSS 
20 mg/l NH3-N 
5 mg/l PO4-P 
(b)  Industrial user -specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall be included in waste water permits and are considered pretreatment standards . The POTW Director may impose mass limits in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limits above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2116. - STATE REQUIREMENTS. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2117. - RIGHT OF REVISION. 
The City reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by either State or Federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §8-2111 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in §8-2113 of this article, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2118. - DILUTION. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards , unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard , or in any other pollutant -specific limitation developed by the City or State . 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2119. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTE WATER. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide waste water pretreatment as necessary to comply with this article and waste water permits issued under §8-2127 of this article and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards , local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §8-2113 of this article within the time limitations as specified by the EPA , the State , or the POTW Director , whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain waste water be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge , separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A waste water discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  All food preparation or serving facilities and all vehicle maintenance facilities connected to the City's sanitary sewer system shall install, maintain, and keep in continuous operation a grease trap interceptor. The interceptor shall be sized in accordance with standards established by the Public Utilities Department. Food preparation or serving facilities and vehicle maintenance facilities shall maintain a written record of maintenance performed on the interceptor for a minimum of three (3) years and shall immediately produce that record upon the City's request. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2120. - ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS. 
(a)  The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges. All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU . The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the POTW Director may develop such a plan for any user . 
(b)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges , discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge , or a slug load . Also see §§8-2132 and 8-2133 of this article. 
(c)  A slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following : 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges ; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any accidental or slug discharge , as required by §8-2133 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any slug discharge . Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants , including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2121. - HAULED WASTE WATER. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the POTW Director , and at such times as are established by the POTW Director . Such waste shall not violate Division 2 of this article or any other requirements established by the City . The POTW Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain waste water discharge permits. 
(b)  The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain waste water discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain waste water discharge permits. The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the POTW Director . No load may be discharged without prior consent of the POTW Director . The POTW Director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes . 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2122. - GREASE AND SEPTAGE HAULERS. 
(a)  Grease and septage haulers must hold a permit issued by DENR to engage in the business activity for any person, consumer or user discharging waste water to the POTW . 
(b)  Any person , consumer or user using a grease and septage hauler not holding a current and valid license issued by DENR is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
DIVISION 3. - FEES 
 
Sec. 8-2123. - PURPOSE. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this Division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the City's waste water disposal system for the implementation of the program established herein. 
(b)  The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the City's schedule of charges and fees. A copy of these charges and fees will be made available from the POTW Director . 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2123.1. - USER CHARGES. 
A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to, persons , firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge , cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW. 
(1)  The user charge shall reflect, at a minimum, the cost to the City of debt service, and operation and maintenance costs (including, but not limited to, replacement costs) of the POTW . 
(2)  Each user shall pay its proportionate share of cost based on the volume of the user 's flow. 
(3)  The POTW Director shall review annually the sewage contributions of users , the total costs of debt service, and operation and maintenance costs of the POTW (including, but not limited to, replacement costs) and shall make recommendations to the City Council for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary. 
(4)  The costs to the City for repair, remedial measures, and other costs caused by unlawful discharges of pollutants into the POTW . 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-42, §1, 5-1-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2012-49, §1, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 2013-179, §4, 4-16-13)  
Sec. 8-2124. - SURCHARGES. 
(a)  All industrial users of the POTW are subject to industrial waste surcharges on discharges which exceed the following levels: 
(1)  BOD greater than three hundred (300) mg/l and/or sixty-three (63) pounds. 
(2)  COD greater than five hundred (500) mg/l and/or one hundred four (104) pounds. 
(3)  TSS greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l and/or fifty-two (52) pounds. 
(4)  TN greater than thirty (30) mg/l and/or six (6) pounds. 
(5)  TP greater than five (5) mg/l and/or one (1) pound. 
(6)  F.O.G. greater than three hundred (300) mg/l and/or sixty-three (63) pounds. 
(b)  The amount of surcharge will be based upon the mass emission rate (in pounds per day) discharged above the levels listed above. The amount charged per pound of excess will be set forth in the schedule of charges and fees. 
(1)  The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of waste water for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the following ; 
a.  Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the City ; or 
b.  If required by the City or at the individual discharger's option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of waste water discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the City . The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense according to arrangements that may be made with the City. 
c.  Where any user procures all or part of his water supply from sources other than the City , the user shall install and maintain at his own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the City . 
(2)  The character and concentration of the constituents of the waste water used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and analyzed by the City and/or industrial user . Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using procedures set forth in §8-2137 of this article. 
(3)  The determination of the character and concentration of the constituents of the waste water discharge by the POTW Director or his duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2125. - PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES. 
The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the City may include charges and fees for: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications; 
(4)  Permitting; and other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the pretreatment program. 
(5)  Pretreatment permit fees, as established below, shall be collected either at the time of submittal of application for a new permit, a permit modification or permit renewal. Also, the annual administrative, sampling and inspection fee shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days of receipt of the City invoice, else the permit and permission to discharge be rescinded. These fees shall be collected, in addition to any other user charges and fees required by City ordinances and resolutions. The fees shall be collected by the City Public Utilities Department as follows: 
Significant Industrial User (SIU) 
New permit application or permit modification ..... $200.00 
Existing permit renewal ..... $100.00 
Annual administrative, sampling and inspection ..... $400.00 
Non-Significant Industrial User (Non-SIU) 
New permit application or permit modification ..... $100.00 
Annual administrative, sampling and inspection ..... $200.00 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 2019-968, §2, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
DIVISION 4. - WASTE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE 
 
Sec. 8-2126. - WASTE WATER DISCHARGERS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the City . When requested by the POTW Director , a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its waste water within thirty (30) days of the request. The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2127. - WASTE WATER PERMITS. 
All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW . Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within one hundred eighty (180) days of receiving notification of the POTW Director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may, at the discretion of the POTW Director, be required to obtain a waste water discharge permit for non- significant industrial users. 
(1)  Significant industrial user determination. 
All persons proposing to discharge non-domestic waste water , or proposing to change the volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic waste water shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed. 
(2)  Significant industrial user permit application. 
Users required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the City an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director , and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial user permit within thirty (30) days after notification of the POTW Director's determination in subsection (1) above. The application shall include at a minimum the information required by 15A NCAC 02H 0.0916(c)(1)(A-M): 
a.  Name of industrial user ; 
b.  Address of industrial user ; 
c.  Standard industrial classification (SIC) codes or expected classification and industrial user category; 
d.  Waste water flow; 
e.  Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the discharge including but not limited to those mentioned in Division 2 of this article, any of the priority pollutants (Section 307(a) of the Act ) which the applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge and any other pollutant of concern to the POTW ; 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of flow and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation, and locations of discharge points; 
g.  Description of products manufactured or services supplied and existing on-site pretreatment facilities; 
h.  Raw materials used or stored at the site; 
i.  Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user ; 
j.  Number of employees; 
k.  Operation and production schedules; 
l.  Description of current and projected waste reduction activities; 
m.  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any City , State, or Federal pretreatment standards , and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
n.  If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards , the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule: 
(i)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards . No increment in the schedule shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(ii)  No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW Director. 
o.  If subject to a categorical standard , a baseline monitoring report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H .0908(a), as outlined in §8-2128 of this article; 
p.  Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(3)  Application signatories and certification. 
All waste water discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized representative of the user on file with the POTW Director and/or Municipality as defined in §8-2112 of this article and contain the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(4)  Application review and evaluation. 
The POTW Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
a.  The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the City and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation. 
b.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is required. 
(5)  Tentative determination and draft permit. 
a.  The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an onsite inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit. 
b.  If the staff's tentative determination in subsection (5)a. above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in writing: 
(i)  proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to be limited; 
(ii)  a proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and 
(iii)  a brief description of any other proposed special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the application. 
c.  The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to subsections (5)a. and b. above and the City's general permit conditions into a significant industrial user permit. 
(6)  Permit Supporting Documentation. 
The Control Authority staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits: 
a.  An Allocation Table (AT) listing permit information for all significant industrial users , including but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW , including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the Division . The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is revised. 
b.  The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations, including the following : 
(i)  documentation of categorical determination, including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment standards ; and 
(ii)  documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which monitoring has been waived consistent with 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2). 
(7)  Final action on significant industrial user permit applications. 
a.  The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications not later than ninety (90) days following receipt of a complete application. 
b.  The POTW Director is authorized to: 
(i)  issue a significant industrial user permit containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article and G.S. 143-215.1; 
(ii)  issue a significant industrial user permit containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(iii)  modify, revoke and/or suspend any permit(s); 
(iv)  deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW Director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or interference of the waste water treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes of G.S. 143-215.1. 
(8)  Hearings. 
a.  Initial adjudicatory hearing. 
An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable, a permittee/ user assessed a civil penalty under §8-2140.5 of this article, or one issued an administrative order under §8-2140.4 of this article, including an order to suspend or terminate a user's discharge , shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW Director or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW Director upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director within thirty (30) days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the permit being modified may be adjudicated. The POTW Director shall make a final decision on the contested permit, penalty or order within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit a copy of the decision by registered or certified mail. The terms and conditions of a permit under appeal shall be as follows: 
(i)  New permits: Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(ii)  Renewed permits: Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution. 
(iii)  Terminated Permits: Upon appeal, including review in the General Courts of Justice, of a permit which has been suspended or terminated, the permit is in effect until either the conclusion of review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution except when the POTW Director has suspended or terminated the permit in accordance with the procedures established in 8-2140.4. 
b.  Final appeal hearing. 
Any decision of the POTW Director made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under Section 2127(8)a. above may be appealed to the City Council upon filing a written demand within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of each decision(s). Hearings held under this section shall be conducted in accordance with the City of Raleigh procedures set forth in §10-2141. Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein shall bar further appeal. A final decision on the appeal shall be made within ninety (90) days of the date the appeal was filed and a written copy of the decision shall be transmitted by registered or certified mail. The decision is a final decision for the purposes of seeking review in the courts. 
c.  Official record. 
When a final decision is issued under §8-2127(8)b. above, the City Council shall prepare an official record of the case that includes: 
(i)  all notices, motion, and other like pleadings; 
(ii)  a copy of all documentary evidence introduced; 
(iii)  a certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken; 
(iv)  a copy of the final decision of City Council. 
d.  Review in the courts. 
Any person against whom a final order or decision of the City Council is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted under §8-2127(8)b.(ii) above, may seek review of the order or decision by filing a written petition for review by the Superior Court of Wake County within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, with the Superior Court of Wake County along with a copy to the City . Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the copy of the written Petition for Writ of Certiorari, or any other written request filed in the court, the City Council shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record. 
(9)  Permit modification. 
a.  Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows: 
(i)  changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change in the permit is indicated; 
(ii)  a single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess of four (4) months ; 
(iii)  modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new schedule will not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational. 
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
b.  Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard , the waste water discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user , subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard , has not previously submitted an application for a waste water discharge permit as required by subsection §8-2127(2), the user shall apply for a waste water discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. 
c.  A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a waiver of the sixty-day notice required by G.S. 143-215.1(b) for modifications. 
(10)  Permit conditions. 
a.  The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this article and G.S. 143-215.1. Waste water permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following : 
(i)  a statement of duration (in no case more than five (5) years ); 
(ii)  a statement of non-transferability; 
(iii)  applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or local limits or both; 
(iv)  applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and Local law; 
(v)  requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in 8-2112 of this article; 
(vi)  requirements to implement a spill control plan or other controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in 8-2112 of this article, if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the user ; and 
(vii)  requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges , or slug load as defined in 8-2112 of this article. Also see 8-2132 and 8-2133 of this article. 
(viii)  a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. 
b.  In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following : 
(i)  limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge , and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(ii)  limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified waste water pollutants or properties; 
(iii)  requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(iv)  development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal waste water system; 
(v)  the unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the waste water discharged to the system; 
(vi)  requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(vii)  specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules; 
(viii)  requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s); 
(ix)  compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(x)  requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or special notification reports; 
(xi)  requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating to waste water discharges as specified in §8-2139.1 and affording the POTW Director, or his representatives, access thereto; 
(xii)  requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW Director of any new introduction of waste water pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the waste water prior to introduction in the system; 
(xiii)  requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee; 
(xiv)  a statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the terms of the permit; 
(xv)  other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director to ensure compliance with this article, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(11)  Permits duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years . A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(12)  Permit transfer. 
Waste water permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A waste water discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner , new user , different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(13)  Permit reissuance. 
A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with §8-2127 a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
DIVISION 5. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 8-2128. - BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard , or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge , new sources , and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard , shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards . A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged . 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. 
The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. 
A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. 
A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user . This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. 
Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW Director , of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §8-2137 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in §8-2138 of this article and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4). 
(6)  Certification. 
A statement, reviewed by the user's current authorized representative as defined in 8-2112 of this article and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. 
If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards , the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard . A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §8-2129 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. 
All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §8-2127(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2129. - COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by §8-2128(b)(7) of this article. 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW Director. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2130. - REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards , or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of waste water into the POTW , any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW Director a report containing the information described in §8-2128(b)(4) through (b)(6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §8-2127(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2131. - PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS. 
Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of or in addition to requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall , at a frequency determined by the POTW Director , but in no case less than once every six months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in §§8-2137 and 8-2138 of this article. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §8-2127(3) of this article. 
If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director , using the procedures prescribed in §§8-2137 and 8-2138 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2132. - REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS. 
Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its waste water at least thirty (30) days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the Control Authority. See §8-2133(d) of this article for other reporting requirements. 
(1)  The POTW Director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a waste water discharge permit application under §8-2127 of this article. 
(2)  The POTW Director may issue a waste water discharge permit under §8-2127 of this article or modify an existing waste water discharge permit under §8-2127 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of twenty (20) per cent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2133. - REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge , including, but not limited to, accidental discharges , discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge , or a slug load as defined in 8-2112 of this article, that may cause potential problems for the POTW , the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge , type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge , the user shall , unless waived by the POTW Director , submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW , natural resources, or any other damage to person or property ; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharges , discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge , or a slug load as defined in §8-2112 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2134. - REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS. 
All users not required to obtain a waste water discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. 
All users classified as Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users under §8-2112 shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the Annual Certification of continuing to meet the Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User criteria as required under 40 CFR 403.12(q). 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2135. - NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING. 
(a)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW Director immediately and not less than within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the [ POTW Director }, the user is not required to resample: 
(i)  if the POTW Director monitors at the user 's facility at least once a month; or 
(ii)  if the POTW Director samples between the user 's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2136. - DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE BY INDUSTRIAL USERS. 
No industrial user shall discharge any hazardous wastes without notification to and approval by the POTW Director . 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW , the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing , of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW , the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user : an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharge during the calendar month , and an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months . All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days before the discharge commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until receipt of written approval from the City . Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge . However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under §8-2132 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§8-2128, 8-2130, and 8-2131 of this article. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes , unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month , or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulation under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste , the user must notify the POTW Director , the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued there under, or any applicable Federal or State law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2137. - ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a waste water discharge permit application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the State of North Carolina Laboratory Certification Program, and in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard . If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA . 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2138. - SAMPLE COLLECTION. 
(a)  All waste water samples must be representative of the user's discharge . Waste water monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge . 
(b)  Grab samples must be used for pH , cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge . See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90 Day Compliance Reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24 hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136. 
(c)  Composite Samples: All waste water composite samples shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a discharge . All waste water composite samples shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director . When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2139. - TIMING. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2139.1. - RECORD KEEPING. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years . This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City , or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW Director. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2139.2. - GREASE INTERCEPTOR MAINTENANCE RECORDS. 
(a)  Grease interceptor maintenance records must include the following information. 
1.  FSE - name and physical location. 
2.  Date and time of each grease interceptor service. 
3.  Name of grease interceptor service company. 
4.  Name and signature of person doing said service. 
5.  Established service frequency and type of service (Example Full pump out, partial pump out, on site treatment , etc.). 
6.  Number and size of each grease interceptor serviced. 
7.  Approximated amount, per best professional judgment, of grease and solids removed from each grease interceptor. 
8.  Total volume of waste removed from each grease interceptor. 
9.  Destination of removed wastes, food solids, and waste water disposal. 
(b)  Maintenance records that do not include all the above information will be considered incomplete. Incomplete records are a violation of the City of Raleigh Sanitary Sewer Use Ordinance and may subject the facility to penalty assessments and/or service termination. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
DIVISION 6. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 8-2140. - MONITORING FACILITIES. 
(a)  The City requires the user to provide and operate, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the Building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the City may , when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user , allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user . 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property , the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.1. - INSPECTION AND SAMPLING. 
The City will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where waste water is created and discharged shall allow the City , Approval Authority and the EPA or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The City, Approval Authority , and the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City , Approval Authority and the EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the POTW Director's, City's , Approval Authority 's, or the EPA 's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.2. - SEARCH WARRANTS. 
If the POTW Director, City , Approval Authority , or the EPA , has been refused access to a building, structure, or property , or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the POTW Director , City , Approval Authority , or the EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.3. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user . Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit , non-discharge permit , and/or the pretreatment programs ; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Waste water constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the Approval Authority and the EPA upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 8-2140.4. - ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES. 
(a)  Notification of violation. 
Whenever the POTW Director finds that any industrial user, consumer or other person has violated or is violating this article, waste water permit , or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by the industrial user, consumer or other person. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. 
The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant to §8-2140.4(d), below. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. 
The POTW Director may order any industrial user, consumer or other person who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge , has violated this article or is in noncompliance with a waste water discharge permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served on the industrial user, consumer or other person specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the industrial user, consumer or other person show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate. 
A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under §8-2140.5 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section subject to an administrative appeal under §8-2127(8). 
(d)  Administrative orders. 
When the POTW Director finds that an industrial user, consumer or other person has violated or continues to violate this article, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following : 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in the order; 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; 
(4)  Disconnect, unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified time period. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions. 
The POTW Director may suspend the waste water treatment service and/or waste water permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit. 
Any industrial user, consumer or other person notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment service and/or the waste water permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the industrial user's, consumer's or other person's waste discharge permit terminated. 
In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the waste water permit and the waste water treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge . The industrial user, consumer or other person shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date of the above described hearing. 
(f)  Termination of permit or permission to discharge. 
The POTW Director may revoke any industrial user's , consumer ';i§\i;, or other person ' s waste water discharge permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to accurately report the waste water constituents and characteristics of his discharge ; 
(2)  Failure to report significant changes in operations, or waste water constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's, consumer's or other person's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to discharge , conditions of this article, or any applicable State and Federal regulations. 
Noncompliant industrial users, consumers or other persons will be notified of the proposed termination of their waste water permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under §8-2140.4 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(g)  Investigative costs. 
The POTW Director may access the reasonable costs to the City of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which revealed the violation against the person or business entity responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.5. - CIVIL PENALTIES. 
(a)  Any user, consumer or other person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation. 
(1)  Penalties between ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation may be assessed against a violator only if: 
i.  For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator with in the five (5) years preceding the violation, or 
ii.  In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five (5) years preceding the violation. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director shall consider the following : 
(1)  The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation; 
(2)  The duration and gravity of the violation; 
(3)  The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air quality; 
(4)  The cost of rectifying the damage; 
(5)  The amount of money saved by noncompliance; 
(6)  Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally; 
(7)  The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply with the pretreatment program; 
(8)  The costs of enforcement to the City. 
(c)  Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section shall be as provided in §8-2127(8). 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.6. - OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES. 
Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this article, are available to the POTW Director who may use any single one (1) or combination against a noncompliant user, consumer or other person. Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Criminal violations. 
The District Attorney may , at the request of the City , prosecute noncompliant users, consumers or other persons who violate provisions of G.S. 143-215.6B. [Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments ( G.S. 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments ( G.S. 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury ( G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes ( G.S. 143-215.6B(i)).] 
(2)  Injunctive relief. 
Whenever a user, consumer or other person is in violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW Director , through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question. 
(3)  Water supply severance. 
Whenever an industrial user, consumer or other person is in violation of the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user, consumer or other person may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's, consumer's or other person's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to comply. 
(4)  Public nuisances. 
Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this article or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the POTW Director . Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.7. - REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user, consumer or other person. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's Enforcement Response Plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action against any user, consumer or other person when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user, consumer or other person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11) 
Policy reference— City of Raleigh Enforcement Response Plan.  
Sec. 8-2140.8. - ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. 
At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW , a list of those industrial users which were found to be in significant noncompliance , also referred to as reportable noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements , during the previous twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
DIVISION 8. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-2140.9. - UPSET. 
(a)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b), below, are met. 
(b)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user an identify the cause(s) of the upset ; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the POTW Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset [if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days]: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(c)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(d)  Users will have the opportunity for a determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(e)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.10. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE. 
(a)  A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §8-2113(a) of this article or the specific prohibitions in §§8-2113(b)(2), (3), (5) through (7), (9) through (23) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge , alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference ; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES Permit , and in the case of interference , was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(b)  The references in §8-2140.10 refer only to specific prohibitions actually listed in the article; pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(2), the affirmative defense outlined in §8-2140.10 cannot apply to the specific prohibitions in §8-2113(b)(1), (4), and (8). 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 8-2140.11. - BYPASS. 
(a)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  (1) ;hg;If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass , it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director , at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass , if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass . A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass . The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass , including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurence of the bypass . 
(c)  (1) ;hg; Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass , unless 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass , such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) above. 
(2)  The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass , after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (c)(1) above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-981, §1, 12-6-11)  
ARTICLE D. - WATER QUALITY PROTECTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, adopted Feb. 16, 2015, effective Feb. 21, 2015 , repealed the former Art. D, §§8-2141—8-2156, and enacted a new Art. D as set out herein. The former Art. D pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1987-20, §1, adopted July 21, 1987, effective Sept. 30, 1987. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 8-2141. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings provided in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Air-gap . A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the public water system and any other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one (1) inch. 
Auxiliary intake . Any piping connection or other device whereby water may be obtained from a source other than the City's public water supply. 
Auxiliary water supply . Any water other than the City of Raleigh's public water supply as defined herein; including, but not limited to recycled water, grey water, rain water, well water, cistern water, reuse water and any other water supply from water purveyors other than the City of Raleigh. 
Backflow . The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances, under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of the public water supply from any source other than its intended source. 
Backflow assembly . An inline testable and repairable mechanical valve arrangement used to protect the public water supply that meets or exceeds standards set forth by the University of Southern California for Cross Connection control and Hydraulic Research (USCFCCHR) and the American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) by being on the agency's approval list. A backflow assembly used on fire suppression systems must have the additional approval of the Factory Mutual (FM) and comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) code. 
Backflow device . A mechanical backflow assembly without shut-off valves or test cocks and that is not testable after installation. 
Backpressure . A condition in which an owner's water supply system pressure is greater than the public water supply system pressure. 
Backsiphonage . The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of the public water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the public water supply system. 
Building Story . A building story is equal to 10' for the purpose of this article. 
Certified tester . A person who has proven his/her competency to test and make reports on backflow assemblies as evidenced by certification of successful completion of a training program approved by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
Containment assembly . A backflow assembly, installed at the point of separation between the public water supply and a private service or private distribution system or at the point of metering. 
Containment protection . A containment assembly installed at the point of separation between the public water supply and a private service or private distribution system or at the point of metering. 
Cross-connection . Any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution. 
Cross-connection control coordinator . The official position established and authorized by the City and designated by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities to administer, interpret this section and who shall be a certified tester and may serve as Operator in Responsible Charge as recognized by North Carolina Department of Environmental and Natural Resources 15A NCAC 18D .0701. 
Double check valve assembly (DCVA) . A type of backflow assembly manufactured pursuant to ASSE Standard 1015. 
Dual check valve . A type of backflow device manufactured pursuant to ASSE Standard 1024. 
Fire line . A system of pipes and equipment used to supply water in an emergency for extinguishing fire. 
Interconnection . Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly to a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, heat exchanger, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewage or other waste or substance which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Isolation assembly . A backflow assembly required by the North Carolina Plumbing Code that is installed within a private plumbing or distribution system to isolate a localized hazard from the remainder of the private system. 
Moderate Hazard . A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable if introduced into the public water supply. 
Owner . Any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or inhabit, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is present. 
Public water supply . The water and waterworks system of the City of Raleigh and its customers outside the corporate limits, for general use as potable water and which is recognized as a public water supply by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources as system number 03-92-010. 
Reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention assembly (RPZ) . A type of backflow assembly manufactured pursuant to ASSE Standard 1013. 
Severe hazard . A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving any substance that could, if introduced into the public water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-874, §1, 9-18-18 )  
Sec. 8-2142. - COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW. 
The City of Raleigh will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, the North Carolina Drinking Water Act, and North Carolina State Building Code, which pertain to cross-connections, auxiliary intakes and interconnections, and establish an effective ongoing program to control potential sources of contamination of the public water supply . 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2143. - UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake , or interconnection to be made within the City's public water supply; or to allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2144. - INSPECTION OF PROPERTY. 
It shall be the duty, upon request of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, of the cross connection coordinator to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections shall be set by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2145. - RIGHT OF ACCESS. 
The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall have the right to enter, at reasonable times, any nonresidential property served by a connection to the Raleigh public water supply for the purpose of performing the duties of this article. In those cases in which the owner chooses not to provide such access, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may classify the location as a severe hazard in accordance with §8-2147. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2146. - EXISTING CONDITIONS. 
Any owner that is subject to the requirements of this article shall be allowed ninety (90) days to correct any cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, interconnections or other hazard as defined by §8-2147 or other connection as defined in §8-2148 of this Code in violation of the provisions of this article. The ninety (90) days will be from the date of receipt of the notification in accordance with §8-2151. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, if the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee determines that there is an imminent threat to the public water supply; water service may be discontinued until such violations are corrected. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2147. - SEVERE HAZARDS. 
(a)  The following shall be classified as severe hazards: 
(1)  Severe hazards include, but are not limited to: pumps, tanks or any other container for conveying, storing or otherwise handling sewage , radioactive, lethal, or toxic substances, boiler and steam connections, sewer waste lines, low inlets to receptacles containing toxic substances, coils or jackets used as heat exchangers, bacterial and viral materials, private wells or other private water supply, irrigation systems, water systems or hose connections, with booster pumps such as fire department connections (FDC) and private hydrants used in conjunction with FDC's, carbonation equipment, or similar severe hazard potential as determined by the cross connection coordinator . 
(2)  Any location at which the nature or mode of operation within a structure are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing or at which there is a likelihood in the determination of the cross connection coordinator that protective measures may be subverted, altered, or disconnected. 
(3)  Any structure which contains, but is not limited to, a bottling plant, cannery, five (5) or more building stories, battery manufacturer, exterminator, lawn care companies, greenhouse, chemical processing plant, dairy, dye works, film laboratory, car wash, hospital, other medical facilities including psychology and psychiatric offices that administer medications, commercial laboratory, laundries, tattoo parlor, metal fabricating operation, mortuary, swimming pool, morgue, x-ray equipment, medical office with laboratory, aspirator, medical washing equipment, packing house, plating plant, poultry house, power plant, nuclear reactor, those fire sprinkler systems equipped with facilities for introduction of freeze preventive chemicals or other substances other than water, dental office, any radioactive material, restaurant, shopping mall with a tenant conducting any activity listed in this section and sewage pump or treatment facilities. 
(b)  All installations classified as severe hazards pursuant to §8-2147(a) above must have a containment assembly in the form of a reduced pressure zone backflow assembly installed pursuant to §8-2149 of this Code. 
(c)  Exemption. The owner of a property that was developed before February 21, 2015 and that is approved for mixed uses but who agrees in writing to use the property only for uses that do not present a severe hazard may apply to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee for an exemption to install a reduced pressure zone backflow assembly as required by §8-2147(b) above. An application for an exemption shall be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . In the event that such exemption is approved, the owner shall install a containment assembly pursuant to the procedures established in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook and shall comply with all conditions of the approval of such exemption. Any exemption from the requirement to install a reduced pressure zone backflow assembly that is granted to an applicant shall be in effect only as long as the property is used for the purposes described in the application for exemption. If any conditions or uses of the property for which an exemption is granted change, the owner of the property shall re-apply for an exemption pursuant to this §8-2147(c). 
(d)  Any person who fills any tank or tanker from the public water supply shall have an approved reduced pressure backflow assembly properly installed on the tank or tanker and an air gap. Tank or tankers include but are not limited to the following : those containing pesticides, fertilizers, or other toxic chemicals or their residues, flush trucks, street sweepers, and nonpotable water tankers. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-874, §2, 9-18-18 )  
Sec. 8-2148. - ALL OTHER USES: RESIDENTIAL AND MODERATE HAZARD. 
(a)  Residential uses. 
Single service connections that serve no more than two dwelling units, not otherwise required by this Code to have other containment assemblies , shall have a containment device in the form of an approved dual check valve . Maintenance of dual check valve containment devices installed in accordance with this section shall be conducted by the Department of Public Utilities. 
(b)  Moderate Hazards. 
All other connections to the public water supply of the City of Raleigh not deemed a severe hazard under §8-2147 or addressed in §8-2148(a) shall be classified as moderate hazards and shall have containment assemblies in the form of a double check valve assembly installed pursuant to §8-2149 of this Code. This shall include water mains installed to City standards, and with City supervision, but which are not maintained by the City , pursuant to §8-2007, including but not limited to manufactured home developments, apartments and townhouses, group living developments, and other private distribution systems, or similar hazard potential as determined by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(c)  Exemption. 
(1)  Residential service line connections that (i) are 2" in diameter or smaller, (ii) are not otherwise required by this Code to have other containment assemblies, and (iii) were installed prior to February 21, 2015 are eligible for an exemption from the requirement to install a double check valve assembly as required by §8-2148(b) above. Property owners who meet the standards above may apply to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee for an exemption to install a double check valve assembly pursuant to the procedures established in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . If an exemption is approved, the owner shall install an approved dual check valve pursuant to the procedures established in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook and shall comply with all conditions of the approval of such exemption. Any exemption from the requirement to install a containment assembly that is granted to an owner shall be in effect only as long as the property is used for the purposes described in the application for exemption. If any conditions or uses of the property for which an exemption is granted change, the owner of the property shall re-apply for an exemption pursuant to this §8-2148(c). Following installation, maintenance of the dual check valve containment devices installed in accordance with this section will be the responsibility of the Department of Public Utilities. 
(2)  The owner of a commercial or institutional property that was approved for development before February 21, 2015 and that is supplied by only one service line connection for domestic purposes may apply to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee for an exemption to install a double check valve assembly as required in §8-2148(b) above pursuant to the procedures established in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . An application for an exemption shall be made pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . In the event that such exemption is approved, the owner shall install an approved dual check valve pursuant to the procedures established in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook and shall comply with all conditions of the approval of such exemption. Any exemption from the requirement to install a containment assembly that is granted to an applicant shall be in effect only as long as the property is used for the purposes described in the application for exemption. If any conditions or uses of the property for which an exemption is granted change, the owner of the property shall re-apply for an exemption pursuant to this §8-2148(c). 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-874, §3, 9-18-18 )  
Sec. 8-2149. - INSTALLATION OF CONTAINMENT ASSEMBLIES. 
(a)  Containment assemblies shall be installed pursuant to City standards as set forth in this Article, the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook , and the North Carolina Plumbing and Fire Codes. 
(b)  In those cases in which any containment assembly was installed by a prior owner , the City , or any other person, the responsibility for maintenance, testing, and replacement as applicable shall be with the current owner . 
(c)  The cost of any containment assembly, and any other plumbing modifications necessary and convenient to install a containment assembly, and the testing and maintenance thereof, shall be paid for by the owner. 
(d)  Any containment assembly that has not been installed prior to February 21, 2015 in accordance with this §8-2149 and whose location does not pose an imminent severe hazard to the public water supply shall be considered pre-existing and compliant with this Article. However, any pre-existing, compliant approved backflow assembly will be allowed to remain only in its original location and must be repaired with approved parts. If the containment assembly is removed or repaired with parts that are not approved, then such containment assembly shall no longer be considered pre-existing and compliant and shall be replaced with an containment assembly pursuant to this §8-2149. 
(e)  Private distribution systems shall have a master meter and a master backflow assembly at each connection to the public water supply. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-874, §5, 9-18-18 )  
Sec. 8-2150. - NEW CONSTRUCTION. 
All buildings proposing to connect to the public water system of the City of Raleigh receiving building permits, on or after the effective date of this article, shall be equipped with a containment assembly and tested as properly functioning as prescribed herein, prior to the issuance of a certificate of code compliance for that building. If a building permit was issued for the building prior to the original effective date, September 30, 1987, of the article, or a building permit was not required, the building shall be considered to be an existing building prior to the original effective date, in accordance with §8-2146 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-874, §6, 9-18-18 )  
Sec. 8-2151. - NOTIFICATION OF HAZARD. 
Upon identification of any hazard or hazard potential, as defined in §8-2147 through §8-2148 of this code, the cross connection coordinator shall notify the owner of the property on which the hazard exists, of the following : 
(a)  Location of hazard; 
(b)  Nature of hazard observed; 
(c)  Date hazard observed; 
(d)  Section of Code applicable; 
(e)  Requirements of Code. 
All notices required by this article shall be delivered by hand-delivery to the owner or by certified mail to the owner's last known address. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by regular U.S. Mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice sent by regular U.S. Mail is not returned by the U.S. Post office seven (7) days after mailing. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2152. - CHANGE IN NATURE OF USE. 
The Raleigh Department of Public Utilities shall be notified by the owner when the nature of use of the property changes so as to change the hazard classification of that property , as set forth in §8-2147 through §8-2148 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2153. - RESPONSIBILITIES. 
(a)  The owner shall, upon notification pursuant to §8-2151 of this article, install an containment assembly as required by this article within ninety (90) days from the date of notification except those owners of properties with a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, interconnection or severe hazard as defined by §8-2147 that poses an imminent health hazard shall install any required containment assembly immediately. 
(b)  If any required containment assembly has not been installed in conformance with standards set by this article and the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook and within the timeframe set forth in the notification issued pursuant to §8-2151 of this article, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may discontinue the public water service at that property, and service shall not be restored until any required containment assembly has been installed. Except at properties where there is an imminent health hazard, an owner may apply to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee for an extension of the time for compliance pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . In the event the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee grants an extension of the time to comply, the person who is granted the extension shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any harm or damages that may result from such person 's failure to install any required containment assembly as required by this article. 
(c)  The City shall bear no liability for direct or consequential damages proximately caused by the discontinuance of service pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Sec. 8-2154. - TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF ASSEMBLIES. 
(a)  The owner at a property where any containment assembly has been installed, except those with devices installed in accordance with §8-2148(a) of this Code, shall have each containment assembly tested by a certified tester and pursuant to the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook ; shall cause any routine maintenance to such containment assembly to be performed as recommended by the manufacturer; and shall cause a report regarding that operational test to be submitted to the City pursuant to §8-2154(b) no later than fifteen (15) days following any testing event. Testing must be performed with equipment approved by the City of Raleigh. The owner shall cause such maintenance or repairs to be made, rendering the containment assembly fully operational. Failure of the owner to perform that testing and maintenance shall be cause for the premises to be deemed an immediate public health hazard. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities may immediately thereafter discontinue public water supply service to that premises and service shall not be restored until all containment assemblies have been tested and the test demonstrates that the assemblies are fully operational. Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property , or equipment, duplicate containment assemblies shall be provided by the owner to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the containment assembly or assemblies. 
(b)  Any certified tester who performs an operational test on any containment assembly connected to the City's public water supply shall file a report regarding the results of that operational test using the City's designated electronic reporting system managed by the currently contracted vendor as published at www.raleighnc.gov. Certified testers shall supply all testing information required by the designated electronic reporting system to included but not limited to test values for containment assembly, size, make, model, serial number and location of containment assembly, name and address of owner as recorded on notice, premise number for fire services, meter number for domestic and irrigation services, and Wake County PIN number for containment assemblies on private distribution and fire sprinkler systems. The fee for any report filed using the electronic reporting system shall be ten dollars ($10.00). In addition, certified testers shall comply with all requirements of this code and the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . Failure to comply may result in revocation of certified tester status pursuant to the Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook . 
(c)  Records of any containment assembly inspection, test and maintenance shall be maintained on the owner's property for a minimum of three (3) years following the date of any inspection, test and maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-491, §1, 10-7-15, eff. 10-12-15 )  
Sec. 8-2155. - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Whenever the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this article or any permit, regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. If requested by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee within the time frame specified in the enforcement policy adopted in accordance with subsection (e) below. Submission of this plan does not relieve the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. In the event of an emergency that requires the City to take immediate action to correct the violation, the City is not required to provide an opportunity for the violator to correct the violations and may assess penalties and costs pursuant to this section without prior notice. 
(b)  Any person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, shall be subject to a civil penalty of: 
(1)  one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month per violation of any containment backflow testing requirement of this Code. 
(2)  one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per violation of any requirement of this Code. 
(3)  fifteen hundred dollars ($1500) per day per violation of any requirement of this Code that results in actual or potential harm to public health or safety. 
The notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable care the basis of the civil penalty and any administrative costs and the costs to the City of rectifying the noncompliance that are assessed. Any person violating any section of this article must pay to the City all expenses incurred by the City in repairing any damage to the utility system caused in whole or in part by such violation and any expense incurred by the City in investigating such violation. 
(c)  The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall maintain an enforcement policy to implement this section which shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. 
(d)  From and after the expiration of the time period specified in the notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (a) above of this section for correcting a violation of this article, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
(e)  Any appeal from a notice of violation or civil penalty assessment shall be made in writing to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of violation or civil penalty assessment issued pursuant to subsection (a) above of this Code. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall use all reasonable efforts to notify the appellant in writing of his or her decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal pursuant to the enforcement policy adopted pursuant to subsection (c) above of this section. 
(f)  All notices required by this subsection may be served by certified mail or hand-delivery to the violator; certified mail or hand-delivery to the owner of the property in violation; or posting the notice at the property in violation. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by First Class U.S. Mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice sent by First Class U.S. Mail is not returned by the U.S. Post office seven (7) days after mailing. 
(g)  If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached after thirty (30) days after demand for payment is first made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the general court of justice of Wake County for recovery of the penalty. If payment is not received or equitable settlement has not been reached within the specified time period, the City may interrupt water and sewer service to the property until such time that payment is received or equitable settlement has been reached. 
(h)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension or construction of the utility system or part thereof without first obtaining a permit or written permission or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment to the maximum number of days prescribed by law. 
(i)  Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate any of the provisions of this article, or any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or is undertaking or continuing any alteration, extension and construction of the utility system without first obtaining a permit or written permission, or is undertaking or continuing any alterations, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both, the City may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this subsection shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. The terms "undertakes" or "undertaking" as used in this section means the initiating of or continuing of or being financially responsible for any activity or phase of activity which results in the extension, construction, or alteration of any part of the utility system of the City . 
(j)  The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this article may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the penalties established by other sections of this Code and applicable ordinances. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-874, §4, 9-18-18 )  
Sec. 8-2156. - LIMITATION OF LIABILITY. 
The City shall not be held liable, for any cause, for failure to detect any containment assembly failing to operate adequately, or failure to identify any specific hazard, which may result in contamination of its public water supply , nor shall this article diminish the responsibility of any owner from whose property a contamination of the public water supply may originate. 
( Ord. No. 2015-397, §1, 2-16-15, eff. 2-21-15 )  
Secs. 8-2157—8-2160. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE E. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, adopted May 15, 2007, effective July 2, 2007, repealed the former Art. E, §§8-2161—8-2175, and enacted a new Art. F as set out herein. The former Art. F pertained to water conservation and derived from Ord. No. 2004-713, §1, adopted Sept. 21, 2004. 
 
Sec. 8-2161. - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to assure that available water resources are put to reasonable beneficial uses to avoid depletion of the City water supply during a water shortage and to ensure that demand does not exceed the City's capacity for water treatment and distribution. This article shall be liberally construed to implement such purpose and intent. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 8-2162. - OBJECTIVE. 
The objectives of the Water Conservation policy are to establish a program that will educate consumers of the importance of water conservation, set goals for reduction of water use on a day to day basis and during times of drought, and reduce per capita water consumption in a manner that is fair and equitable to all consumers /users. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 8-2163. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings provided in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Add-on device. A device utilized in combination with a programmable timer to measure local weather conditions such as rain, temperature, soil conditions and/or evapotranspiration, and will have the capability, at a minimum, to be installed as an interrupt-type device on the common and/or control wires for the controller. Such device will serve as a secondary shut-off device to assist in optimal watering conditions due to current climate conditions. 
Approved (or approval). Approved or approval means certified in writing by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities as an acceptable water conservation device , program or methodology for the purpose of water conservation. 
Audit results. Licensed irrigation contractors will use the Landscape Worksheet provided by the Irrigation Association and submit this documentation to the City of Raleigh within two weeks of the irrigation audit's completion. 
Available water supply. The total amount of water that is available to the City in the water supply pool(s). The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers will determine this amount for Falls Lake once the water level in Falls Lake drops below two hundred fifty-one and one-half (251.5) feet Mean Sea Level. 
Automatic spray irrigation system. Any installed irrigation system that can be programmed to operate during certain times and/or conditions and which is connect to the City's public water supply system. 
Best Management Practice (BMP). A management practice that is designed to reduce water usage and protect water quality. 
Certified conservation user. A certified conservation user is a consumer who complies with the City of Raleigh Water Conservation Program. 
City. City in this article means the City of Raleigh. 
City reuse water. Effluent water from City facilities, including the City E.M. Johnson Water Treatment Plant, Smith Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant, Little Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant and/or Neuse River Wastewater Treatment Plant, which meets or exceeds the minimum quality requirements of the current North Carolina Reuse and Reclaimed Water Quality Standards. 
Conservation (or conserve). Conservation or conserve means any beneficial reduction in water loss, waste, or use. 
Conservation device. An approved water conservation device, properly installed within a private plumbing or distribution system, to improve water use efficiency within the City water supply system. 
Conservation program. A program that identifies the uses of water within residential users, industry groups, commercial and/or industrial applications, which focuses on BMPs to reduce the consumption of water. The program will be submitted to Public Utilities for review and approval. Each conservation program should be updated as required by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities . All certified conservation users should be publicly recognized as water savers. 
Consumer. Any person, business, corporation, institution, resident or industry responsible for any property at which water from the City of Raleigh public water supply is received. In the absence of other parties or the failure of other parties to accept the responsibilities herein set forth, the owner of record of the real property shall be ultimately responsible. 
Distribution Uniformity (DU). A measurement to determine the performance of installed irrigation systems; expresses the uniformity of applied irrigation water over an irrigated zone; expressed as a ratio of the average of the lowest twenty-five (25) per cent of measurements to the overall average measurement, gathered through the use of catch cans, commonly used to evaluate the coverage of one or more sprinklers or drip systems. The equation is expressed by that of DU LQ :  
V LQ = average of the lowest twenty-five (25) per cent (lower quarter) of catch cans measurements, ml. 
V avg = average all catch cans, ml. 
Distribution uniformity as measured by the low quarter distribution (DULQ) is a common measurement of efficiency. This distribution uniformity is determined by the following : 
Evapotranspiration (ET) sensor. A sensor that reads current, local ET data from a server and then adjusts the irrigation system's run-times accordingly. 
Hand held hose. Any hose that is connected to the City's public water supply system and held in the hand during irrigation use. 
Hose end sprinkler. An irrigation device that is connected to the City's public water supply system and is not designed to be held in the hand during use. Examples are: single stream, multi-stream, and impact type sprinklers. 
Hydrant meter. A water meter specifically designed, fabricated and leased from the Raleigh Department of Public Utilities for consumers to purchase water from the City from fire hydrants in accordance with the City's Hydrant Meter Program. 
Irrigation audit. The licensed irrigation contractor will follow the guidelines set forth by the Irrigation Association's (IA) Irrigation Audit Guidelines (found in the Public Utilities Handbook ) to conduct an irrigation audit. The overall system must maintain a distribution uniformity (DU ) of no less than fifty (50) per cent, and the results of said audit must be submitted to the City for approval in the format provided by the Irrigation Association . The auditor should inspect the installation of the backflow prevention assembly, main line, laterals, valves, sprinkler heads, drip/micro-irrigation equipment, control wire, controller, rain sensor , timer or controller and any other water conserving devices, and should assure that the intent of the irrigation designer or consultant has been preserved. In addition, the audit shall also verify the installation of specified water management devices such as a rain shutoff device and/or soil moisture sensors . Finally, the irrigation schedule shall be evaluated to assure that the irrigation system meets the supplemental water needs of the plants without wasting water. Systems which fail to meet the standards of the audit will have a period of two (2) weeks to correct the problem or result in having their irrigation service interrupted. 
Irrigation system. Set of components which may include a hose, piping, fittings, sprinklers, drip tubing, valves, and control wiring connected to a water source or water distribution network which is used to apply water to residential or commercial lawns, landscapes or other areas. 
Licensed irrigation contractor. A licensed irrigation contractor is an irrigation professional, who has met a set of minimum standards specified by the North Carolina Irrigation Contractors' Licensing Board under Chapter 89G of the North Carolina General Statutes . 
Major water user. A water customer who uses one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day (GPD) or more per account as determined on either an annual or an average day during the City seasonal water demand period. 
Non-automatic spray irrigation system. Any installed irrigation system that is connected to the City's public water supply system and which is operated manually. 
On-site reuse water. On-site reuse water is effluent water from an individual on-site wastewater system which meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of the current North Carolina Reuse and Reclaimed Water Quality Standards. 
Potable water. Potable water is the water from the public water supply system of the City which meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of the current Federal and North Carolina Safe Drinking Water Act. 
Programmable timer. An automatic timing device, connected either wired or wireless to remotely control valves and irrigation heads according to a set irrigation schedule. An approved timer must: (a) have the ability to program mandatory watering restrictions to include days and times; (b) register run-times as low as one-minute increments; and (c) be connected to an approved water conservation add-on device which will block the operation of the system if irrigation is unnecessary. 
Projection period. The remaining number of days in the calendar year from the date of the water supply projection, plus sixty (60) days. 
Public water supply. The water supply of the City , and its customers for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply of the City by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
Rain sensor (RS) or rain shut-off device or rain switch. A device designed to interrupt an automatic irrigation system's cycle during periods of rain. Approved rain sensors, rain shut-off, or rain switch will be designed to shut off after one-fourth (¼) of an inch of rain has fallen, and be at least five (5) feet from a house or building. 
Reuse water. City reuse water and/or on-site reuse water. 
Root zone (RZ). The depth of the soil from which the crop roots extract water and nutrients. 
Run-times (RT). The operating time of an irrigation zone for a single irrigation cycle. 
Seasonal demand period. The period of time from April 1st through November 30th. 
Smart controller. Smart controllers estimate or measure the available soil moisture, rainfall, wind, slope, soil, plant type, temperature (and more) of local conditions to operate an irrigation system, replenishing water as needed while maximizing water efficiency. A properly programmed smart controller requires initial site specific set-up and will make irrigation schedule adjustments, including run times and required cycles, throughout the irrigation season without human intervention. Approved systems will include a programmable irrigation controller and a weather based controller. 
Soil moisture sensor (SMS). A device which is either wired or connecting to the program controller to override an irrigation system's cycle when there is a determined level of moisture within the soil. 
The Irrigation Association&reg; (IA). A specific non-profit organization established to improve the products and practices used to manage water resources and to help shape the worldwide business environment of the irrigation industry. The IA has developed irrigation certification, audit guidelines and audit result worksheets to facilitate sustainable water management. 
Water conservation device. An approved water conservation device, properly installed to improve water use efficiency within the irrigation system. These devices include: rain shutoff device, soil moisture sensors, weather stations, high-wind shutoff device, freeze protection devices, flow meter with totalizer, automated control system, matched precipitation rate nozzles, flow control nozzles, pressure regulators, multi-stream rotating nozzles, high flow shut-offs, and drip and micro- irrigation technologies. 
Water demand average. The average daily amount of water pumped from the City water plant(s) for the previous thirty (30) day period. 
Water shortage. A "water shortage" shall exist when the demands and requirements of water customers served by the City cannot be satisfied without depleting the water supply to or below a critical level, the level at which the continued availability of water for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection is jeopardized. 
Water Shortage Response Plan. A document which establishes authority for declaration of a water shortage, defines different stages of water shortage severity, and outlines appropriate responses for each stage. 
Weather-based sensor. A sensor that measures local weather conditions such as rain, temperature, soil conditions and/or evapotranspiration. The City Code requires each system to incorporate two (2) sensors, each monitoring a separate weather characteristic, to be used as an add-on device to suspend irrigation cycles when watering is deemed unnecessary by the conditions of the sensor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2010-704, §§1, 2, 2-16-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-982, §1, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 2014-262, §§40, 51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2164. - COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW. 
The City will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, the North Carolina Drinking Water Act, and North Carolina State Building Code, which pertain to water conservation and establish an effective on-going program to control use of public water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 8-2165. - UNLAWFUL WATER USES. 
It shall be unlawful for any for any person to use water in violation of this Article or any of the mandatory water use restriction ordinances approved by the Raleigh City Council. It shall also be unlawful for any person to use potable water from the public water system, if reuse water from the City reuse water supply system is equally available to the same location and the water use does not require potable water quality. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 8-2166. - INSPECTION OF PROPERTY. 
It shall be the duty, upon request of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities , for designated Public Utilities Department staff to observe and determine if the uses of water by Raleigh water supply system customers are compliant with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2167. - RIGHT OF ACCESS. 
The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities , or designated staff, shall have the right to enter, at a reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the City public water supply for the purpose of performing the duties of this article. In cases in which the property owner, managing agent, or tenant chooses not to provide such access, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or authorized staff may obtain a warrant an[d] inspect or may in accordance with applicable law interrupt water service to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2168. - WATER METERING AND WATER USE AUDITS. 
Water use restrictions shall apply to all City water supply system customers, including all City departments and City owned facilities. All permanent water service to customers shall be metered and billed based on the City's current water and sewer rate ordinance. All temporary water service to customers shall be provided through the City's hydrant meter program or other water accountability method approved by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities . Water use audits will be conducted by designated Public Utilities staff when determined to be necessary by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities on any water customer account to determine if water usage may be reduced by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2169. - LANDSCAPE WATER EFFICIENCY. 
Upon application of this Article [*] , all new permanent in-ground irrigation systems shall be individually metered. The irrigation systems shall be installed, maintained and operated according to the following design specifications. These systems must include: (1) A smart controller , which will consist of: (a) an approved programmable timer that must reflect mandatory watering restrictions to include days and times, and register run-times as low as one-minute increments, and (b) two (2) weather-based controllers , which will act as shut-off devices to assist in optimal watering conditions which will reflect current climate conditions; one (1) sensor will be a rain sensor , for automatic shut-off during rain events, and the second sensor will monitor one of the other weather characteristics such as temperature soil conditions and/or evapotranspiration, and listed on the IA's website as a common sensor type. 
These sensors will be installed as add-on devices serving to override the programmable timer's run-times in the event that irrigation is unnecessary or unlawful. 
Each irrigation system must be installed by a licensed irrigation contractor . following the installation of a new system, the licensed irrigation contractor will conduct a field performance irrigation audit following the Best Management Practices (BMPs) set forth within the Irrigation Association's (IA) Irrigation Audit Guidelines . The audit shall be scheduled within one (1) month following completion of the installation, and the overall system must maintain a distribution uniformity (DU) of no less than fifty (50) per cent. The licensed irrigation contractor will then submit the audit results to the City for approval, in the format provided by the Irrigation Association , within two (2) weeks of the initial irrigation audit's completion. Systems which fail to meet the standards of the audit will have a period of two (2) weeks from the date of the failing audit to correct the problem or result in having their irrigation service interrupted. 
The irrigation system shall be regularly maintained to preserve the integrity of the design and to sustain efficient operation. All controllers and sensors shall be installed according to manufacturer's instructions in a location that will provide full exposure to rainfall such that accuracy of operation is assured and shall be maintained in good working condition. No person shall , with the intent of circumventing the purpose of this section, adjust any components of said irrigation system so that the sensors are not able to override and turn off the irrigation system when unnecessary or unlawful. All automatic in-ground irrigation systems shall comply with the mandatory water conservation requirements of §8-2175(c). 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2010-704, §3, 2-16-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
[*] Editor's note: This regulation first became applicable to permanent in-ground irrigation systems installed on or after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 8-2170. - MAJOR WATER USERS. 
All major water users are required to develop a conservation program and an emergency water usage reduction plan to focus on reducing water consumption, to include BMPs or policy for their specific uses of water in their business/commercial applications or manufacturing processes. The program shall be designed to reduce water consumption when the City implements water conservation measures in Stage 1, Stage 2, and Stage 3. The conservation program shall be submitted to Public Utilities for review and approval within one hundred and eighty (180) days of notification by the City . Programs shall be implemented in accordance with the implementation of the City's water conservation ordinances. Each conservation program shall be updated by the major water user as required by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities . In addition, all major water users will conduct an American Water Works Association industrial water audit, or equal, upon request by the Public Utilities Department. This audit will be submitted to the Public Utilities Department, and subsequently updated every 5 years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2010-688, §1, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2171. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2011-982, §2, adopted Dec. 6, 2011, repealed §8-2171, which pertained to vehicle wash facilities and derived from Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, adopted May 15, 2007; Ord. No. 2010-688, §2, adopted Jan. 19, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-793, §2, adopted Oct. 19, 2010.  
Sec. 8-2172. - WATER USE MONITORING. 
The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities and designated staff are responsible for monitoring water usage from the public water system and the amount of public water supply that is available to the City on a continuous basis. In the event of an emergency water shortage, the City Manager may enact the Water Shortage Response Plan immediately. The City Manager will enact the Water Shortage Response Plan under this Article under the following conditions: 
(a)  Stage 1 mandatory water conservation measures if the available water supply reaches forty (40) per cent remaining between January 1 through January 31; fifty (50) per cent remaining between February 1 through February 29; sixty-five (65) per cent remaining between March 1 through March 31; eighty-five (85) per cent remaining between April 1 through April 30; seventy-five (75) per cent remaining between May 1 through May 31; sixty-five (65) per cent remaining June 1 through June 30; fifty-five (55) per cent remaining between July 1 through July 31; fifty (50) per cent remaining between August 1 through August 31; forty-five (45) per cent remaining between September 1 through September 29; forty (40) per cent remaining between October 1 through October 31; or thirty-five (35) per cent remaining between November 1 through December 31. 
(b)  Stage 2 mandatory water conservation measures if the available water supply reaches thirty (30) per cent remaining between January 1 through January 31; thirty-five (35) per cent remaining between February 1 through February 29; forty-five (45) per cent remaining between March 1 through March 31; sixty (60) per cent remaining between April 1 through April 30; fifty-five (55) per cent remaining between May 1 through May 31; forty-five (45) per cent remaining June 1 through July 31; forty (40) per cent remaining between August 1 through August 31; thirty-five (35) per cent remaining between September 1 through September 29; or thirty (30) per cent remaining between October 1 through December 31. 
(c)  Stage 3 mandatory water conservation measures if the available water supply reaches twenty-five (25) per cent remaining between January 1 through February 29; thirty (30) per cent remaining between March 1 through March 31; thirty-five (35) per cent remaining between April 1 through May 31; thirty (30) per cent remaining June 1 through June 30; or twenty-five (25) per cent remaining between July 1 through December 31. 
The City Manager will rescind the water use restriction stages under the following conditions: 
(a)  Stage 1 mandatory water conservation measures shall be rescinded if the available water supply reaches sixty (60) per cent remaining between January 1 through January 31; seventy (70) per cent remaining between February 1 through February 29; eighty-five (85) per cent remaining between March 1 through March 31; one hundred (100) per cent remaining between April 1 through April 30; ninety-five (95) per cent remaining between May 1 through May 31; eighty-five (85) per cent remaining June 1 through June 30; sixty-five (65) per cent remaining between July 1 through July 31; seventy (70) per cent remaining between August 1 through August 31; sixty-five (65) per cent remaining between September 1 through September 29; sixty (60) per cent remaining between October 1 through October 31; or fifty-five (55) per cent remaining between November 1 through December 31. 
(b)  Stage 2 mandatory water conservation measures shall be rescinded if the available water supply reaches fifty (50) per cent remaining between January 1 through January 31; fifty-five (55) per cent remaining between February 1 through February 29; sixty-five (65) per cent remaining between March 1 through March 31; eighty (80) per cent remaining between April 1 through April 30; seventy-five (75) per cent remaining between May 1 through May 31; sixty-five (65) per cent remaining June 1 through July 31; sixty (60) per cent remaining between August 1 through August 31; fifty-five (55) per cent remaining between September 1 through September 29; or fifty (50) per cent remaining between October 1 through December 31. 
(c)  Stage 3 mandatory water conservation measures shall be rescinded if the available water supply reaches forty-five (45) per cent remaining between January 1 through February 29; fifty (50) per cent remaining between March 1 through March 31; fifty-five (55) per cent remaining between April 1 through May 31; fifty (50) per cent remaining June 1 through June 30; or forty-five (45) per cent remaining between July 1 through December 31. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2009-609, §1, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 2011-982, §3, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-97, §1, 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2012-116, §1, 11-6-12; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2173. - EDUCATION. 
The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities and designated staff are responsible for developing and maintaining a comprehensive water conservation education program to implement voluntary adoption of City water conservation best management practices. The City of Raleigh Public Utilities Department Water Conservation Plan authorized under this article serves as the principal text for the water conservation education program. The Handbook shall include detailed descriptions of the Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditing Program, the Conservation Certification Program for the Professional Vehicle Wash Industry, the Water Wise Certification Program, the civil penalty matrix and the Major Water Users Conservation Program. The Handbook shall also include technical standards for the water conservation equipment and materials specified by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2010-793, §3, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2174. - CONSERVATION WATER RATE. 
The City water consumption rate ordinance will be annually reviewed by the Public Utilities staff to ensure that unit price values and the rate ordinance structure recommended to City Council provides an economic incentive for water conservation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 8-2175. - MANDATORY WATER USE RESTRICTIONS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the public water supply system of the City in violations of the following mandatory water conservation restrictions: 
(a)  All Stage 1 mandatory water conservation restrictions and rules as set forth by any ordinance adopted by the City Council. 
(b)  All Stage 2 mandatory water conservation restrictions and rules as set forth by any ordinance adopted by the City Council. 
(c)  All Stage 3 mandatory water conservation restrictions and rules as set forth by any ordinance adopted by the City Council . 
(d)  Every day mandatory water conservation restrictions: 
(1)  Water from the City of Raleigh public water supply shall not be served in a public restaurant for drinking water, except upon specific request by customers. Also, hotels/motels/bed and breakfast inns served by the City of Raleigh public water supply will ask guests spending more than one night to use their towels and bed linens more than once between laundering. 
(2)  Violations of §8-2175(c) may be punished by any of the means available to the City pursuant to N.C.G.S. 160A-175. A written warning will be issued for the first violation of §8-2175(c). A civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed for the second violation of §8-2175(c) and a third violation shall result in a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00). A fourth violation will result in interruption of water service to the offending customer. The City will issue written notification to the customer and occupant of intent to interrupt water service and twenty-four (24) hours later will interrupt water service. If water service has been interrupted due to repeat violation of §8-2175(c), service will not be re-instated until the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities has determined that the risk to the City water supply has been alleviated or the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities is otherwise assured of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2007-251, §1, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 2007-280, §1, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2008-458, §1, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2010-688, §3, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 2012-48, §1, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2176. - VOLUNTARY WATER USE MEASURES. 
All consumers are encouraged to adopt the following best management practices to conserve water : 
(a)  Outdoor Water Uses: 
1.  It is recommended that all irrigation systems which use water from the public water supply should be operated in the following manner: 
a.  Properties with ODD numbered addresses water lawns and landscapes on TUESDAY, THURSDAY and SATURDAY. 
b.  Properties with EVEN numbered addresses water lawns and landscapes on WEDNESDAY, FRIDAY and SUNDAY. 
Automatic or non-automatic irrigation systems should only be operated between the hours of 12:00:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and hose end sprinklers should be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and also 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. No automatic or non-automatic irrigation systems or hose end sprinklers should be operated on MONDAY. Automatic or non-automatic irrigation systems and hose end sprinklers should be operated in a manner to prevent water waste so as to avoid watering impervious surfaces such as streets , parking lots, driveways and sidewalks at all times. 
2.  Check for plumbing leaks. A single dripping faucet can waste hundreds, even thousands, of gallons per year. Most water leaks are easy to detect and repair with basic plumbing skills and a few simple tools. 
3.  Have soil tested by the North Carolina Department of Agronomy/Soil Testing Section. Most yards in this region are composed of granite soils. They need lime more than they need fertilizer. 
4.  Plant native trees and shrubs. The North Carolina State University Cooperative Extension Service has excellent suggestions for home gardeners. Use mulch around shrubs and garden plants to reduce evaporation. Mix the turf areas with shaded areas to reduce irrigation demands. 
5.  Let the grass grow taller in hot weather by raising your lawn mower cutting height. Longer grass blades help shade each other, reduce evaporation, and inhibit weed growth. 
6.  Water slowly and thoroughly during cool, windless hours to prevent water loss from evaporation. 
7.  Be attentive if using a hose and sprinkler, consider setting an alarm or the oven timer as a reminder to move the hose and sprinkler as needed. 
8.  Use a rain gauge. One (1) inch of water per week will keep lawns green throughout the summer. 
9.  Water should be applied slowly to achieve deep penetration and prevent water run-off. 
10.  Do not water impervious surfaces such as streets , parking lots, driveways and sidewalks. 
11.  Install a drip irrigation system for watering gardens, trees, and shrubs. Drip systems are very efficient because they provide a slow, steady trickle of water to plants at their roots through a network of hidden pipes and hoses. 
12.  Use properly treated reuse water for irrigation as an alternative water source. Raleigh's water conservation rules do not regulate the amount of reuse water and therefore any amount can be used during any mandatory water conservation stage. Contact the Raleigh Public Utilities Department for information regarding reuse water availability. 
13.  Capture rain water in cisterns and rain barrels. The average rainfall in the Raleigh area is about forty-eight (48) inches per year. Run-off from the roof of a typical two thousand five hundred (2,500) square foot home is about seventy-five thousand (75,000) gallons a year. Raleigh encourages customers to capture rainwater and use it on the landscape. 
14.  Consider the amount of water being used and look for ways to use less whenever possibly. Do not leave water running - use spring loaded or other automatic shut-off devices on hoses or outdoor faucets. 
15.  Use commercial vehicle washing facilities, especially those which have been certified by Raleigh as water conserving facilities, instead of washing vehicles at home. 
16.  Use a broom or blower to remove dust, dirt, leaves and other debris from sidewalks, driveways, porches and decks rather than water. 
(b)  Indoor Water Uses: 
1.  Thaw frozen food in your refrigerator or microwave instead of using running water. Wash fruits and vegetables with a vegetable brush in a basin or bowl instead of using running water. 
2.  Scrape or wipe, rather than rinse, dishes before loading into the dishwasher. Wash only full loads. Consider replacing old dishwasher with a water and energy saving model. 
3.  Wash only full loads of laundry or use the appropriate water level or load size selection on the washing machine. Presoak heavily soiled items. Use detergent sparingly in order to avoid rinsing more than normal cycle. Consider purchasing a high efficiency washing machine to save laundry water and energy. 
4.  Install low-flow toilets, faucet aerators, and low-flow showerheads. 
5.  Leaky toilet can waste two hundred (200) gallons of water per day. To detect leaks in a toilet, add a few drops of food coloring to the tank water. Do not flush. Wait a few minutes. The toilet is leaking if the colored water appears in the bowl. 
6.  Commercial and industrial customers not otherwise regulated as a major water user should review their water uses and should consider implementing industry specific best management water conservation practices. 
7.  Check for leaks in toilets, faucets, shower heads and any other plumbing fixtures and repair these leaks immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2010-793, §4, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2012-48, §2, 5-14-12)  
Sec. 8-2177. - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this article may subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the City in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within thirty (30) days after the assessment has become final by exhaustion of the appeal process established by this section, or by failure to appeal the assessment and will be subject to temporary water service interruption. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article and in mandatory water use restriction ordinances, the civil penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day of continuous violation, or a cumulative or single civil penalty of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The civil penalty for willful violation of any provision of this article shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each day of a continuous violation, or a cumulative or single civil penalty of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(b)  Assessment. 
Any civil penalty shall be assessed by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities , and shall be based upon the reasonable estimated cost of correcting the cited violation, the magnitude of the potential risk posed to the public health, safety and welfare by the violation, and the cost of the public safety or other emergency response caused by the violation. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall serve written notice of the civil penalty assessment on the offender and set out with reasonable care the basis of the amount so assessed. 
(c)  Equitable relief. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy, including a mandatory or prohibitory injunction, issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Enforcement option. 
The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this article may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the penalties established by other sections of this Code and applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-235, §1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2178. - RALEIGH WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PLAN. 
The Raleigh Water Shortage Response Plan, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein. A copy of the latest copy of the Raleigh Water Shortage Response Plan is on file in the City Clerk's Office and in the Public Utilities Department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-793, §5, 10-19-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-793, §5, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, repealed the former §8-2178, and enacted a new §8-2178 as set out herein. The former §8-2178 pertained to golf courses and derived from Ord. No. 2010-688, §4, adopted Jan. 19, 2010.  
Sec. 8-2179. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE F. - REUSE WATER REGULATION[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, adopted Sept. 19, 2006, amended Art. F in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. F, §8-2180, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-713, §1, adopted Sept. 21, 2004. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-2180. - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
This article sets forth the requirements for the Reuse Water System for the City of Raleigh, hereafter referred to as the City . The Reuse Water System provides an alternative water source for non-potable water demands. It is the City's policy to provide reuse water to the appropriate non-potable demands to limit the growth in potable water. 
The objectives of this article are: 
1.  To reduce the potable water demand and extend the life of the existing raw water supplies. 
2.  To protect the environment by reducing discharges to the Neuse River. 
3.  To help meet nitrogen reduction goals for the Neuse River. 
This article shall apply to users of the City's water and sewer system . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2181. - DEFINITIONS. 
[As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings provided in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Approval Authority shall mean the Director of the Division of Water Quality of the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources or his designee. 
Authorized representative of the reclaimed water user : 
(A)  If user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean the president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation, or 
(B)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(C)  If the user is a Federal, State or local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(D)  The entities described in subdivisions (A) through (B) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing , the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City . 
Cross-connection shall mean Any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such a manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
Consumer shall mean any person , firm, or corporation responsible for any property at which reuse water from the City of Raleigh public reuse water system is received. In the absence of other parties or the failure of other parties to accept the responsibilities herein set forth, the owner of record shall be ultimately responsible. 
Dedicators shall mean and include the person owning or constructing any private utility system being dedicated to the City . 
Major reuse water lines shall mean those reuse water lines which are twelve (12) inches in diameter or greater. 
NCAC Section 15A NCAC 02U.0100 shall mean the North Carolina Administrative Code, Section 15A, NCAC subchapter 02U, section .0100, as currently written and as may be rewritten from time to time. 
Permit shall mean an individual utilization permit issued by the City and in some cases, the North Carolina Division of Water Quality, to utilize reclaimed water only for the purposes identified in such utilization permit. 
Reclaimed water shall have the same meaning as reuse water. 
Reuse water shall mean wastewater that has been treated to water quality standards as defined by the applicable section of the North Carolina Administrative Code and is intended to be distributed for further use. 
Reuse water service stubs shall mean those portions of the reuse water service pipes that connect to the City 's reuse water mains and extend to the boundaries of public easements and rights-of-way. 
Tap size shall mean the nominal diameter of the connection of the reuse water line installed between a reuse water meter assembly and the reuse water main connected to the reuse water utility system of Raleigh without regard to the configuration of that reuse water assembly or ownership of the reuse water meter assembly or reuse water main. 
Waters of the State shall mean any stream, river, brook, swamp, lake, sound tidal estuary, bay, creek, reservoir, waterway or other body or accumulation of water, whether surface or underground, public or private, or natural or artificial, that is contained in, flows through, or borders upon any portion of the State of North Carolina. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §41, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2182. - ADOPTION OF NCAC SECTIONS 15A NCAC 02T AND 15A NCAC 02U AND PROVIDER PERMIT ISSUED BY DIVISION OF WATER QUALITY. 
Rules and regulations relating to waste not discharged to surface waters appearing in North Carolina Administrative Code Titles 15A NCAC 02U and 15A NCAC 02T and the City of Raleigh Provider Permit, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into the City Code as though fully set forth within this article and shall apply within the City of Raleigh as an ordinance. In the event of any variation between the provisions of the applicable North Carolina Administrative Code and/or the Provider Permit, and/or the provisions of this article, the more strict provision shall prevail. The violation of a provision of NCAC Section 15A NCAC 2T or 02U.0100 shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §42, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2183. - RECLAIMED WATER PERMIT. 
All reuse water users shall obtain a utilization permit prior to the commencement of reuse water use. Users shall make application for initial installation, use, change of use and change of property ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to or use reuse water without first obtaining a reuse water utilization permit . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §43, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2184. - ALLOWABLE USES OF REUSE WATER. 
Reuse water shall only be applied for approved uses. Where a use is not specifically indicated as being pre-approved, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall make a determination if the proposed use is acceptable. The following uses, unless otherwise prohibited, may be approved: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation. 
(2)  Agricultural irrigation for crops not intended for human consumption. 
(3)  Decorative ponds and fountains that do not drain to surface waters. 
(4)  Dust control. 
(5)  Soil compaction. 
(6)  Vehicle washing if the reuse water is either recaptured or is applied without runoff from the site. 
(7)  Street cleaning (vacuum-type cleaners only). 
(8)  Cooling tower and boiler makeup water. 
(9)  Urinal and toilet flushing. 
(10)  Any uses that are deemed permitted under the North Carolina Administrative Code regulating the use of reclaimed or reuse water. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §44, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2185. - MANDATORY USES OF REUSE WATER. 
Where reuse water is available to a property , all new non-potable uses, including but not limited to landscape irrigation systems, shall utilize reuse water to the extent permitted under State law unless the design and installation costs of a dual plumbing system exceed two and a half (2½) times the cost of a single plumbing system to serve the property . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §45, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2186. - PROHIBITED USES OF REUSE WATER. 
It shall be unlawful for reuse water to be used in the following applications: 
(1)  Human consumption. 
(2)  Irrigation of direct food chain crops unless expressly allowed under North Carolina rules and regulations. 
(3)  Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, or similar uses. 
(4)  Direct reuse as raw potable water supply. 
(5)  Any uses that are specifically prohibited under the North Carolina Administrative Code regulating the use of reclaimed or reuse water . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §46, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2187. - BUFFERS AND RUNOFF. 
Irrigation systems using reuse water shall be designed keep all spray on the property and to maintain the following buffers from the edge of the spray influence: 
(1)  Twenty-five (25) feet from surface waters including intermittent streams, perennial streams, perennial water bodies and wetlands. 
(2)  One hundred (100) feet from any well except monitoring wells. 
(3)  Fifty (50) feet between reuse water storage/irrigation ponds and property lines. 
Irrigation and other systems using reuse water shall not generate runoff that flows into the natural waterways or into the buffer areas. Runoff shall not enter a storm sewer or drainage ditch that connects to waters of the State . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2188. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROGRAMS. 
The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee shall have the authority to implement administrative programs that may be required to adhere to Federal or State law, adhere to the conditions of any permits from Federal or State agencies , or provide efficient operation of the reuse system. Such programs may include, but are not limited to, an application program to approve new users, a connection inspection program, follow-up inspection program, compliance and enforcement program, spill prevention, control, and notification program, and educational program to advise the public of the proper and safe use of reuse water . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §47, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2189. - NOTIFICATION. 
For areas accessible to the public, notification shall be provided to inform the public of the use of reuse water and that reuse water is not intended for drinking. Signs will be provided indicating "REUSE WATER: DO NOT DRINK". 
In industrial and commercial systems, notification shall be provided to inform employees that reuse water is being used and that it is not intended for drinking. Training on the proper handling of reuse water shall be provided to employees required to be in direct contact with reuse systems. Systems in areas of public access shall be marked to identify the source of the water as being reuse water . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2190. - LABELING AND COLOR-CODING. 
All reuse water valves, storage facilities and outlets shall be tagged or labeled to warn the public or employees that the water is not intended for drinking. 
All reuse water piping, valves, outlets and other appurtenances shall be color-coded, taped, or otherwise marked to identify the source of the water as being reuse water, as defined in the Public Utility Handbook. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2191. - HOSE BIBBS SPIGOTS OR OTHER HAND OPERATED CONNECTIONS. 
Above ground hose bibbs spigots or other hand operated connections are not allowed with reuse water systems. Hose bibbs spigots or other hand operated connections shall be installed in lockable below-grade vaults clearly labeled as reuse water . Alternatively, hose bibbs spigots or other hand operated connections that can only be operated by a special tool can be installed in non-lockable, below-grade service boxes clearly labeled as reuse water . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2192. - STORAGE CONTAINERS AND TANK TRUCKS. 
Storage containers, including tank trucks that come into contact with reuse water, shall not be used to store or transport potable water that is used for drinking or other potable purposes. The containers and trucks shall be clearly labeled "REUSE WATER - DO NOT DRINK". The containers shall not be filled through on-board piping or removable hoses that may subsequently be used to fill tanks with water from a potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2193. - CROSS-CONNECTION. 
There shall be no direct cross-connections between the reuse water system and any potable water system, unless specifically authorized by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. Where both potable and reuse water systems serve the same property , the potable water connection shall be provided with an approved backflow prevention assembly or an air gap separation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §48, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2194. - PAYMENT OF FEES AND CHARGES. 
Any person connecting, installing or using the reuse water system shall pay all required permits , fees, and charges as required by laws, ordinances, and resolutions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2195. - NEW OR REPLACEMENT REUSE WATER SYSTEMS TO BE FLOOD RESISTANT. 
Any and all new or replacement reuse water supply systems within flood-prone areas shall be designed and constructed to minimize and eliminate discharges from such systems into floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2196. - ACCESS TO AND OBSTRUCTIONS OF MANHOLES AND EASEMENTS. 
(a)  No person shall open, enter into, place, or allow anything to be placed in a manhole, vault, or valve box of the City 's reuse water system without written approval from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(b)  No person shall damage, obstruct, or cover a manhole, vault, or valve box of the City 's reuse water system. 
(c)  No person shall plant trees, shrubs, or other plants within a reuse water easement without prior written approval from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities. 
(d)  No person shall place any part of a structure or any permanent equipment within a reuse water easement without prior written approval from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities. Prohibited structures include buildings, houses, decks, garages, tool or storage sheds, swimming pools, walls, and fences. Prohibited permanent equipment includes air conditioning units and heat pumps. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §49, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2197. - INJURY TO SYSTEMS; REMOVING, DAMAGING, BREAKING, ETC. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage, or interfere with any reuse water pipes belonging to the City , or to remove, break, or injure any portion of any manhole, or any part of the reuse water of the utility system . Provided, it shall further be unlawful for any person to cut off or discontinue reuse water service to any part of the City system without the written consent of the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §49, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2198. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE. 
(a)  Whenever the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. If requested by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee within the timeframe specified in the enforcement policy adopted in accordance with subsection (e) below. Submission of this plan does not relieve the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. In the event of an emergency that requires the City to take immediate action to correct the violation, the City is not required to provide an opportunity for the violator to correct the violations and may assess penalties and costs pursuant to this section without prior notice. 
(b)  Any person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this article, any permit issued pursuant to this article, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this article, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  For a first-time violator where the violation was not committed willfully or intentionally and is not an actual or potential risk to public health or safety, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day per violation. 
(2)  For a first-time violator where the violation was not committed willfully or intentionally and is an actual or potential risk to public health or safety, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation. 
(3)  For a repeat violator where the violations was not committed willfully or intentionally and is not an actual or potential risk to public health or safety, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation. 
(4)  For a repeat violator where the violations was not committed willfully or intentionally and is an actual or potential risk to public health or safety, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. 
(5)  For a violator where the violation was committed willfully or intentionally, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per violation. 
The notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable care the basis of the civil penalty and any administrative costs and the costs to the City of rectifying the noncompliance that are assessed. 
(c)  Failure to obtain any permit required by this article or any other violation by any person authorized to perform work in or upon the utility system shall subject the violator to the following penalties: 
(1)  For the first violation, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable. 
(2)  For the second violation in a five-year period, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable. 
(3)  For the third violation in a five-year period, the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable, and for each subsequent violation the person shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus any permit fee, if applicable, up to the fifth violation. 
(4)  After the fifth violation in a five-year period, the privilege and right of the person to work in and/or upon the Raleigh water and sewer utility system shall be suspended for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the sixth violation. 
(d)  Any person violating any section of this article must pay to the City all expenses incurred by the City in repairing any damage to the utility system caused in whole or in part by such violation and any expense incurred by the City in investigating such violation. 
(e)  The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall maintain an enforcement policy to implement this section which shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. 
(f)  From and after the expiration of the time period specified in the notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (a) above of this section for correcting a violation of this article, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
(g)  Any appeal from a notice of violation or civil penalty assessment shall be made in writing to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of violation or civil penalty assessment issued pursuant to this section. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall use all reasonable efforts to notify the appellant in writing of his or her decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice of appeal pursuant to the enforcement policy adopted pursuant to subsection (e) above of this section. 
(h)  All notices required by this subsection may be served by certified mail or hand-delivery to the violator; certified mail or hand-delivery to the owner of the property in violation; or posting the notice at the property in violation. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by First Class U.S. Mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice sent by First Class U.S. Mail is not returned by the U.S. Post office seven (7) days after mailing. 
(i)  If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached after thirty (30) days after demand for payment is first made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the general court of justice of Wake County for recovery of the penalty. If payment is not received or equitable settlement has not been reached within the specified time period, the City may interrupt water and sewer service to the property until such time that payment is received or equitable settlement has been reached. 
(j)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension or construction of the utility system or part thereof without first obtaining a permit or written permission or who undertakes or continues any alteration, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment to the maximum number of days prescribed by law. 
(k)  Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate any of the provisions of this article, or any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or is undertaking or continuing any alteration, extension and construction of the utility system without first obtaining a permit or written permission, or is undertaking or continuing any alterations, extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of an approved application, plan, or both, the City may , either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this subsection shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. The terms "undertakes" or "undertaking" as used in this section means the initiating of or continuing of or being financially responsible for any activity or phase of activity which results in the extension, construction, or alteration of any part of the utility system of the City . 
(l)  The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this article may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the penalties established by other sections of this Code and applicable ordinances. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Raleigh Director of Public Utilities or his designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §50, 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2014-337, §9, 9-2-14, eff. 9-7-14) 
State law reference: Criminal offenses, G.S. 14-4; G.S. 143-215.6(b).  
Sec. 8-2199. - DUTY TO REPORT DAMAGE. 
Every person who observes damage to a manhole or to any other part of the reuse water system, public or private, has a duty to report the damage to the Public Utilities Department, and every permit holder whose reuse system is damaged shall take immediate actions to stop or as best practical mitigate the flow of the reuse water. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 8-2200. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION TO THE REUSE WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 8-2201. - CONNECTING WITH REUSE WATER PIPES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe or take by any means reuse water from or interfere with the pipes of the reuse water system of the City without authorization from the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities . In reviewing requests, the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall consider the appropriateness of the size, location, character, and quality of all materials and connections. It shall be unlawful for any person , except City forces as directed by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities , to operate any valve in the reuse water distribution system of the City . 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2202. - REPLACEMENT OF REUSE WATER SERVICE STUBS. 
In the event of the paving or widening of street s, or the raising or lowering of the grade of a street , or in the installation of curbs or gutters and/or sidewalks, or in the case of the installation of new reuse water lines initiated by the public, all reuse water service stubs may be replaced so as to meet the standards prescribed by the North Carolina Plumbing Code. There shall be no charge for such replacements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(2), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2203. - RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAKING CONNECTIONS. 
All reuse water services shall be installed, extended, replaced or repaired by City forces from the City 's main to the property line unless otherwise permitted by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities ; provided, no such permission shall be granted for work within the corporate limits in public street rights-of-way except by licensed utility contractors. All reuse water connections in new developments shall be the responsibility of the developer and at his expense in accordance with City standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2204. - METER REQUIREMENTS; PLACEMENT OF METERS. 
A separate reuse water meter connection is required for each lot at the time of connection with reuse water service. All such meters shall be placed in the street right-of-way or in a two-foot easement adjacent to the street right-of-way at such locations as the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities shall determine, provided that nothing herein shall authorize the placement of a water meter on the opposite side of the street right-of-way from the building being served. Reuse water meters shall be placed within five feet of the potable water meter serving the property . All meters shall conform to the standards and material specifications of the City . All reuse water meters shall be installed by City forces in accordance with the fee schedule found in Section 8-2005. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 ; Ord. No. 2019-968, §1, 6-10-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Secs. 8-2205—8-2210. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC EXTENSIONS OF REUSE WATER SYSTEM 
 
Secs. 8-2211—8-2220. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE EXTENSIONS OF REUSE WATER SYSTEM 
 
Secs. 8-2221—8-2240. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 5. - DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE 
 
Sec. 8-2241. - EMERGENCY DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE AND REPAIRS. 
The responsibility for maintaining and repairing reuse water service stubs shall be in accord with City Code, §10-6082. The repair of all pipes and fixtures on private property shall be the responsibility of the property owner or consumer. When a minor failure occurs in a pipe or fixture on private property , and such failure is not corrected within twelve (12) hours of notification by the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities to the owner or person in charge, the City , for the purpose of conserving reuse water and protecting the public, may discontinue service until the failure is corrected or enter the property and make the necessary repairs. When a major failure occurs in a line or fixture and creates the possibility of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the City may make the necessary repairs. The work done by the City shall be limited to the necessary line repair and such backfilling as needed to protect the pipe. The cost of any repairs performed by the City shall be charged to the property owner and included in his next regular periodic reuse water bill. Failure to pay the repair bill shall be considered as a regular reuse water bill delinquency and service may be discontinued until such amount is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2242. - SUSPENSION OF REUSE SERVICE. 
The City may suspend or terminate reuse water service at any time the reuse water at the terminal point of the City 's treatment plant does not meet the requirements of the governing regulatory agencies . In such a case, reuse water service may be restored when the City determines that permit user will comply with all the governing requirements. Within thirty (30) days following the suspension of reuse water service, the reuse water permit holder may in writing appeal the suspension to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities , who within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the appeal shall conduct a hearing. When reuse water is not available, the City may substitute potable water on a temporary basis at the discretion of the City . An approved air gap separation must be used in any connection for temporary potable water. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
Sec. 8-2243. - TERMINATION OF SERVICE FOR MISUSE. 
If any person violates any provisions of this article or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, the City may terminate water, sewer, and/or reuse water service to that property . Within thirty (30) days following the termination of reuse water service, the reuse water permit holder may in writing appeal the termination to the Raleigh Director of Public Utilities , who within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the appeal shall conduct a hearing. If service is terminated, the consumer shall bear the full responsibility of any costs or liabilities for reconnecting to the utilities. The City shall be indemnified by the violator or in the discretion of the City the permit user from all claims, damages, losses, or expenses, including Federal and State civil penalties imposed upon the City, caused by the failure to meet the requirements of the governing regulatory agencies concerning the use and operation of reuse water or from the termination of reuse water service. 
(Ord. No. 2006-100, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2014-262, §51(1), 1-21-14, eff. 1-26-14)  
PART 9 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS  
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State law reference: Parks and recreation, G.S. 160A-350 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE A. - THE DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 9-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Resources Department shall consist of a director, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council . 
(Ord. No. 2013-209, §1, 7-2-13) 
Charter reference: Creation of Parks and Recreation Department, §6.34.  
Sec. 9-1002. - DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION. 
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall consist of nine (9) divisions: 
(1)  Administration 
(2)  Parks 
(3)  Recreation 
(4)  Highways 
(5)  Cemeteries 
(6)  Greenways 
(7)  Urban Forestry 
(8)  Design Development 
(9)  Building Maintenance 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §14, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 9-1003. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall be to: 
(a)  Enhance the quality of life for the citizens of Raleigh by promoting the development and maintenance of a broad and comprehensive program of leisure recreational activities for all people; by developing and maintaining a system of parks and recreation facilities and open space areas; by establishing and maintaining a system of shade trees on City streets and boulevards, parks and public places; by establishing and maintaining the horticultural treatment of state streets within the City limits; by actively pursuing the conservation and protection of all natural resources; by promoting, developing, and maintaining a program of City -wide beautification; design, construction, maintenance, operation, and policing of the greenway system. 
(b)  Ensure the safety and well being of citizens using the City's park and recreation facilities. 
(c)  Maintain existing park areas and facilities, trees and shrubs on street rights-of-way and medians and develop and maintain new park areas as they are acquired. 
(d)  Operate and maintain the public areas of the three City owned cemeteries, City Cemetery, Mount Hope Cemetery, and Tarboro Road Cemetery. 
(e)  Provide space for the indoor programs, including such activities as slimnastics, ceramics, modern dance, cooking classes, karate, youth and adult basketball, cake decorating, dog obedience, guitar, gymnastics, macrame, senior citizens, tennis, and other areas of interest. 
(f)  Administer cultural programs in a variety of areas for youth and adults. 
(g)  Provide leisure wholesome activities for senior citizens. 
(h)  Provide the citizenry of the City with an opportunity to participate in a wide range of competitive athletic activities for the purpose of: Fostering the values of physical fitness; promoting clean sportsmanship and fair play; and good conduct. 
(i)  Provide students from the senior high schools in the Raleigh area with an opportunity to plan, organize, and direct civic interest programs which are aimed at meeting the needs of the local youth. 
(j)  Sponsor after school intramural programs at the City's high schools and junior high schools. 
(k)  Provide organized activities, including sponsorship of instructional classes, tournaments, leagues and special events for all age groups. 
(l)  Provide custodial service for the municipal building, the annex, and other City properties determined by the City Manager; maintaining physical plant operations in the municipal building, the annex, and other City properties determined by the City Manager; providing assistance for physical plant operations to City facilities such as fire stations, park and recreation buildings, water and sewer plants. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §13, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2019-970, §1, 6-18-19 )  
Secs. 9-1004 — 9-1010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - PARKS AND GREENWAY ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: Section 7 of Ord. No. 1985-595, adopted June 18, 1985, effective Sept. 1, 1985, repealed §§9-1011—9-1021, comprising Art. B, "Parks and Recreation Advisory Board," as derived from Code 1959 , §§16-6, 16-9 and 16-11. Sections 1—4 of Ord. No. 1985-595 have been included as a new Art. B, §§9-1011—9-1014, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 9-1011. - CREATED. 
There is hereby established a parks and greenway advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 1985-595, §1, 6-18-85)  
Sec. 9-1012. - MEMBERSHIP. 
The parks and greenway advisory board (hereinafter referred to as the board) shall be composed of fifteen (15) members. All current members of the Greenway Commission and the parks and recreation advisory board will be members of the parks and greenway advisory board until the expiration of their current terms. Thereafter, the City Council will select members to the board. No new appointments or reappointments will be made to the board until the board has fewer than fifteen (15) members. 
No member shall have a combined total of more than eight (8) years of service on this board, the parks and recreation advisory board, or the Greenway Commission. 
Up to five (5) members of the board may reside outside the City limits within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
In addition to the regular members of the board, there may be nonvoting ex-officio members as follows: one representative of the City Council, one representative of the Wake County School Board, one representative of the Planning Commission, and the City Manager or his representative. 
No new appointments or reappointments will be made to the initial board membership until the board has fewer than fifteen (15) members. Thereafter, appointments will be made in accordance with the provisions of §1-4002 et seq. of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1985-595, §2, 6-18-85)  
Sec. 9-1013. - ORGANIZATION. 
(a)  There shall be a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman of the board elected from the membership of the board for one- year terms. The Chairman shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive terms. An annual election shall be held by the board members and shall occur at a regular meeting in September. At the initial meeting of the board in September, 1985, the officers will assume office immediately. Thereafter, new officers shall officially take office at the subsequent regular meeting following their election. In the event an officer's appointment is terminated, a replacement shall be elected from its membership by the board at the meeting following the announcement of the termination. 
(b)  The board Chairman shall preside at all meetings and shall sign all documents relative to action taken by the board. The Chairman shall appoint committees, as he from time to time deems necessary. A nominating committee shall be appointed prior to the September meeting and shall prepare a slate of officers to serve the board for the following year. In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman. 
(c)  Secretary to the board. 
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall serve as secretary to the board. The director may share all or part of these duties with other staff members of the Parks and Recreation Department but shall be held responsible for secretarial duties. The secretary shall mail copies of the official minutes of all regular or special board meetings to board members prior to the next scheduled meeting. 
(d)  Meetings. 
Regular board meetings shall be held on a monthly basis. The Chairman, or, in his absence the Vice-Chairman, may call a special meeting of the board at any time by giving actual (oral or written ) notice to all members in advance in compliance with North Carolina General Statutes governing meetings. Special meetings shall be scheduled upon request of eight (8) or more board members. Notice of special meetings requested by board members shall comply with open meeting laws. 
(e)  Quorum. 
Eight (8) regular members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the board. 
(f)  Rules. 
Any question concerning parliamentary procedure at meetings of this board shall be determined by reference to Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 1985-595, §3, 6-18-85)  
Sec. 9-1014. - PURPOSES. 
This board shall serve as the citizen advisory board to the City Council, on issues related to parks and recreation policy matters (including greenway matters). This area of responsibility shall include advising on matters related to the funding of the parks and recreation capital program, parks and recreation program policies, facility planning, and the acquisition of lands related to the parks and recreation program. 
The responsibility of this board in considering parks and recreation policy matters are to include all programs of the department. Within the scope of its responsibilities, the board should work to continue the development of the greenway system and the urban tree program. This board shall serve as a liaison between the City and the citizens of the community and shall also work to promote all parks and recreation programs. 
(Ord. No. 1985-595, §4, 6-18-85)  
Secs. 9-1015 — 9-1030. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - YOUTH COUNCIL ON CIVIC AFFAIRS ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 9-1031. - CREATION; COMPOSITION; PURPOSE. 
There is hereby created an advisory board for the Youth Council on Civic Affairs to be composed of seven (7) members and such additional ex officio members, including the Director of Parks and Recreation and the youth counselor, as may be elected by the Council , such ex officio members to serve during the pleasure of the Council but shall have no vote. The board shall serve as advisors to the Youth Council of Civic Affairs heretofore organized in the City , and which has its own constitution and bylaws, in all matters relating to the activities of the Council , but shall act only in an advisory capacity. 
( Code 1959 , §3-29)  
Sec. 9-1032. - APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES. 
The members of the board shall be appointed and any vacancies, caused by the expiration of a term of office or otherwise, shall be filled by the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §3-30)  
Sec. 9-1033. - TERMS OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS. 
Each member of the board shall be appointed to the board for a period of two (2) years except that the Council , in naming the original members of the board, may appoint some members for a period of one year and some members for a period of two (2) years and shall thereafter fill vacancies which occur for terms of two (2) years . 
( Code 1959 , §3-31) 
Cross reference: Limitations on terms of board members, §1-4002.  
Sec. 9-1034. - ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. 
The original members of the board shall meet for the purpose of organization and shall elect their own Chairman, who shall preside over all meetings of the board. It shall also elect a Vice-Chairman, who shall act for the Chairman in the event of his absence. The youth counselor of the City shall act as secretary of the board and keep the minutes of the proceedings of the board. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected annually and shall serve until their successors are elected. 
( Code 1959 , §3-32)  
Sec. 9-1035. - MEETINGS. 
The board shall hold regular meetings not less often than every month at a time to be fixed by the board. Special meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman or any two (2) members of the board upon notice of ten (10) days to each member. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. No action may be taken in the absence of a quorum except that the members in attendance may adjourn the meeting from time to time until a quorum is present. Members of the board who miss three (3) consecutive meetings may be removed and replaced by the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §3-33)  
Sec. 9-1036. - DUTIES AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS. 
(a)  The sole duties of the board shall be to offer such advice and assistance to the Youth Council on Civic Affairs as it may desire and shall not control and shall not attempt to control the activities of the Youth Council or any of its members. 
(b)  The members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
( Code 1959 , §§3-34, 3-35)  
Sec. 9-1037. - CREATION OF DEBT. 
The board shall have no authority to create any debt against the City without prior approval of the Council , such approval to specify the amount and the purpose for which the debt may be created. 
( Code 1959 , §3-36)  
Sec. 9-1038. - YOUTH COUNSELOR; PROHIBITIONS; SUPERVISION. 
The youth counselor shall not directly or indirectly participate in any activity which has as its purpose the referral of persons for employment as yard workers, baby sitters or otherwise but shall leave such referral services exclusively to the members of the Youth Council. The youth counselor shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Director of Parks and Recreation of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §3-37)  
Sec. 9-1039. - HANDLING OF FUNDS; SPACE AND FACILITIES FOR BOARD AND COUNCIL. 
The youth counselor shall , only at the request of the Youth Council, handle any funds of the Youth Council by depositing the same in a special account to be withdrawn by check signed by the youth counselor and by the president or treasurer of the Youth Council. The youth counselor shall be bonded in an amount to be determined by the Youth Council and the accounts of funds coming into the counselor's possession shall be annually audited by the auditor of the City . The advisory board and the Youth Council may occupy such space and use such facilities of the City as may be from time to time prescribed by the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §3-38)  
CHAPTER 2. - PARKS  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9-2001. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1996-819, §1, adopted Feb. 6, 1996, repealed §9-2001, which pertained to sledding streets and derived from Code 1959 , §21-8.1; Ord. No. 1981-574, §1, adopted Feb. 3, 1981; Ord. No. 1982-827, §1, adopted Jan. 19, 1982; Ord. No. 1982-39, §1, adopted Dec. 21, 1982; and Ord. No. 1988-281, §1, adopted Dec. 13, 1988.  
Secs. 9-2002 — 9-2010. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - RULES GOVERNING OPERATION OF CITY PARKS 
 
Sec. 9-2011. - VEHICLES; USE OF ROADS ONLY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle or other power driven vehicle upon the grass or footways of the City parks or elsewhere other than on the public roads and streets . 
( Code 1959 , §16-17)  
Sec. 9-2012. - MAXIMUM SPEED. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour upon any of the streets or drives of any park; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be effective or applicable to any particular street or way in any such public park until appropriate signs shall have been erected along such street or way indicating the speed limits applicable thereto as herein prescribed. 
( Code 1959 , §16-18) 
Cross reference: Speed limits within the City generally, §§11-2091—11-2093. 
State law references: Municipal speed limits generally, G.S. 20-14(b); authority to regulate speed in parks, G.S. 20-169.  
Sec. 9-2013. - PARKING REGULATIONS. 
(a)  When official approval signs shall have been erected upon any street, way or other place within any public park of the City prohibiting parking within the specific areas designated by such signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, bicycle or other vehicle, or to allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or other vehicle to stand or park, in any such street, way or other place within any such public park. Upon the recommendation of the Director of Parks and Recreation, the Director of Transportation shall cause appropriate signs to be provided and erected at such places as designated by the Director of Parks and Recreation designating the areas within which such parking is prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on any of the streets within any of the public parks or play areas of the City for the purpose of vending goods, wares or merchandise. 
( Code 1959 , §16-19) 
Cross reference: Parking restrictions in City -owned parking areas, §11-2175.  
Sec. 9-2014. - PARKING PERMITS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN AREAS. 
Areas adjacent to the arts and crafts building at Pullen Park which have been set aside and designated by appropriate signs as parking areas for vehicles may be used only by those participants in the arts and crafts program who have been issued a permit by the Parks and Recreation Department authorizing them to use such areas for parking. Persons not so authorized who use this designated area for parking shall be deemed trespassers and may be prosecuted. It shall further be unlawful for any vehicle to park on any roadway or in any designated space of a City park except for the purpose of using the park, its facilities and programs. Parking at all City parks shall be for park patrons only. Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor and vehicles in violation may be towed pursuant to law. 
( Code 1959 , §16-19.1; Ord. No. 1989-350, §1, 4-18-89)  
Sec. 9-2015. - LITTERING IN PARKS PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any rubbish, stones or other debris, paper or trash of any kind into any lake or pond or within any park of the City . 
State law reference: Authority to prohibit littering, G.S. 160A-303.1.  
Sec. 9-2016. - BATHING IN LAKES, PONDS, ETC. 
Unless specifically authorized by Council , it shall be unlawful for any person to bathe, swim or wade in any City -owned or maintained lake, pond, fountain or other water feature. Violation of this section shall be punishable by any of the enforcement procedures outlined in G.S. 160A-175. 
(Ord. No. 1984-383, §1, 7-17-84)  
Sec. 9-2017. - SWINGING ON, OR CLIMBING TREES; DESTROYING BIRDS' NESTS; THROWING TRASH. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a swing to any tree, or to climb any tree; or to rob or break up and destroy any birds' nests or to foul in any manner any spring or branch within any park of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §16-22)  
Sec. 9-2018. - INJURING PLANTS PROHIBITED; PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCAVATE OR REMOVE EARTH/ARTIFACTS OR TO SCATTER CREMATED REMAINS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pull or forage any flowers or fruits, whether wild or cultivated, vegetable or plant life, cut down trees or saplings, break limbs or branches of trees or bark trees, or injure shrubbery or plants, or to girdle any tree within any of the City parks, City park facilities, City lakes and ponds, City cultural and historic resources, City cemeteries, or City greenways. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate any earth from any City park, City park facility, City lake or pond, City cultural and historic resource, City cemetery, or City greenways, or remove earth and artifacts therefrom, except by written authorization of the Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Resources Department Director or the Director's designee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter cremated remains on or within Parks System property, except by written authorization of the City Manager or the Manager's designee. 
( Code 1959 , §16-23; Ord. No. 2017-663, §1, 1-17-17 )  
Sec. 9-2019. - MAKING FIRES IN PARKS REGULATED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a fire for any purpose except at locations where facilities are provided on the grounds of any of the City parks.  
Sec. 9-2020. - SIGNS; UNLAWFUL USE OF FACILITIES. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to destroy or to take down, without permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation, any notice or sign displayed on any recreation or other park facility or area being permanently or temporarily used by the Parks and Recreation Department. It shall be unlawful for anyone to use or enter upon any recreational facility or area which they are temporarily or permanently prohibited from using by means of (1) any written or published notice, (2) signs made or caused to be made by the Parks and Recreation Department, or (3) verbal request that such facilities or areas are not to be used or entered upon, when such request is made by officially identified Parks and Recreation Department personnel. Any person or persons who are requested by Parks and Recreation Department personnel properly and officially identified as such to desist in the use of any park, or to leave a park or recreation facility or area, or any area or facility being used for parks and recreation purposes, shall do so without delay and without argument or physical, or other, resistance. 
( Code 1959 , §16-27)  
Sec. 9-2021. - WEAPONS PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to openly carry or possess on or about his person any deadly weapon including but not limited to any: bowie knife, dirk, dagger, sling-shot, loaded cane, metal knuckles, razor, stun gun, pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, or nightstick at any meeting, assemblage, or parade on any property, street , alley or other public way, park, greenway. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or carry a legally permitted concealed handgun on or at any City owned playground, athletic field, swimming pool, or athletic facility as defined in G.S. 14-415.23. 
This section shall not apply to law enforcement or other government personnel acting within the scope of their employment; nor shall this section apply to weapons used solely for instructional classes or for officially sanctioned ceremonial purposes. 
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment. In addition to said punishment, any person convicted under this section will be prohibited from entering on park property of the City or participating in Parks and Recreation activities for a period of up to one year . 
( Code 1959 , §16-29; Ord. No. 1992-39, §1, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 2011-989, §2, 12-6-11) 
Cross reference: Firearms; discharge within City, §13-2010.  
Sec. 9-2022. - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN USES OF PARKS. 
(a)  Required; scope. 
Any individual, organization, corporation, association, society, fraternity, club, order or group of whatever kind desiring the use of the public parks owned or controlled by the City as the location for a rally, demonstration, march, public speech, public meeting or other similar activity shall make written request therefor not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of the intended use. This section shall apply only to assemblages where the expected attendance will be more than one hundred (100) people. No such assemblage may be held except during daylight hours. 
(b)  Distribution of food prohibited. 
No individuals or group shall serve or distribute meals or food of any kind in or on any City park or greenway unless such distribution is pursuant to a permit issued by the Parks, Recreation and Greenway Director. 
(c)  Application; information. 
The application shall be submitted to the Chief of Police and shall state the name of the individual or organization and the name and address of its principal officers and of its directors or other governing body and shall also contain such other pertinent information as may be required by the Chief of Police in order to clearly identify the organization submitting the request and the individuals principally engaged in the conduct of its affairs. The request shall state the use to which the public property shall be put and the date and hour for which the use is requested and the expected duration of such use. 
(d)  Determination by Police Chief. 
If the Chief of Police shall conclude that the requested use will not hinder or impede any regularly established use of the parks and will not adversely affect their care, protection or maintenance or create a nuisance by such use, the Chief of Police shall grant permission for such use. If the Chief of Police shall determine otherwise, the request shall be denied. 
(e)  Weapons prohibited. 
No person shall openly carry or possess at any such meeting or assemblage any firearms or other deadly weapon as defined in §9-2021 herein. No person shall carry or possess a legally permitted concealed firearm at any such meeting or assemblage if the same is held at a playground, athletic field, swimming pool, or athletic facility as defined in G.S. 14-415.23. 
( Code 1959 , §16-29.01; Ord. No. 1998-440, §2, 10-21-98; Ord. No. 2011-989, §3, 12-6-11) 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1998-440, §2, adopted Oct. 21, 1998, provided for the relettering of the former subsection §9-2022(b) as (c) and added a new subsection (b) as set out herein. That addition necessitated the relettering of subsections (c) and (d) as (d) and (e).  
Sec. 9-2023. - COMMERCIAL USE OF PARKS AND GREENWAYS RESTRICTED; PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Amusement areas means the areas of Pullen Park and John Chavis Memorial Park containing carousels, paddle boats, trains, or other amusements. 
Commercial use means any activity conducted for pecuniary or commercial gain including private lessons, classes, or group activities where the lesson, class, or activity has a fee or other monetary barrier to entry. " Commercial use " also includes any lesson, class, or commercial activities taking place on park system property that is associated with any trade, occupation, profession, business, or franchise. " Commercial use " does not include activities conducted on the City 's behalf or in conjunction with the City . 
Designated areas means those portions of park system property designated by the Parks Director as appropriate for commercial use . Designated areas shall not include parks system property that is available for individual rental, such as picnic shelters and athletic fields. 
Parks Director means the Director of the Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Resources Department. 
Park system property means a City park, City park facility, or City greenway. 
(b)  Permit, Rental or Booking Agreement Required for Commercial Use. 
Commercial use of any park system property is unlawful without first obtaining a permit from the City authorizing the use or entering into a rental contract or booking agreement with the City authorizing use of a specific facility. 
Events permitted under the City Council's Special Event Policy may use park system property only as specifically authorized in the special event permit. Permits for any other commercial use of park system property are issued by the Parks Director or the Director's designee. 
(c)  Permit Standards; Fee. 
(1)  The Parks Director may issue a permit authorizing commercial use of designated areas at specific times and dates stated in the permit if the Director determines that: 
(a)  the use is a recreational program or recreation-related activity; 
(b)  the use will not restrict or impede access for the general public to the area used commercially; 
(c)  the use does not conflict with a recreational program offered by the City ; 
(d)  the use will not pose a safety risk to persons or property; 
(e)  the use will not create an undue burden on the park system property sought; and, 
(f)  within the prior twelve (12) months, the applicant has complied with all requirements of a previous commercial use permit. 
(2)  The Parks Director may impose reasonable conditions on any permit issued to protect the public, preserve park system property , and provide equitable use of public facilities. Conditions may include requirements for insurance, indemnity agreements, participant releases and waivers of liability, identification of responsible persons , reporting requirements, limits on the number of participants, limits on areas, days, or times of use, and any other condition or safeguard to lessen impacts that the commercial use may cause. The permit holder and all participants in the commercial use shall comply with all conditions on the permit and shall also comply with applicable Federal, State , and City laws. 
(3)  The Parks Director may charge an annual fee of up to $25.00 for each permit application submitted. One application may seek commercial use at up to four designated areas . 
(4)  A permit authorizes commercial use by the permit holder as described in the permit. Commercial use permits cannot be transferred to any other person . 
(d)  Permit Scope. 
A commercial use permit does not grant exclusive use of space. A permit provides the permit holder a license for the activity in the designated areas and is revocable at will. The permit holder and participants must share the designated areas with other users and cannot block public access. 
Permit holders shall make certain that the commercial use does not damage park system property . Permit holders shall not store equipment or apparatus within park system property , or create a hazard to other users of park system properties . 
(e)  Permit Duration; Suspending or Terminating Permits. 
Commercial use permits expire at the end of each calendar year. Commercial use permits are also revocable at any time in the City's sole discretion. 
The Parks Director or the Director's designee shall temporarily suspend a permit if the Director determines that City operations require it or if a conflicting special event will use the space. 
The Parks Director or the Director's designee shall terminate a commercial use permit if the commercial use damages park system property , injures or damages property of other persons using park system property , if a permit holder violates any condition of a permit, or if the commercial use conflicts with a City program. The Parks Director or the Director's designee may terminate a permit holder's commercial use at a specific designated area if the permittee repeatedly fails to use that area. 
A permit holder may appeal a decision to terminate a permit to the City Manager or the Manager's designee by filing a written notice with the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days after the decision is mailed to the permit holder. 
(f)  Producing Permit Upon Request. 
A permit holder shall ensure that the permit is present in the designated area during the commercial use . Upon request by any Raleigh Police Officer or any member of the Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Resources Department, a person engaged in commercial use of parks system property shall immediately produce the permit. 
(g)  Commercial Use Prohibited at Certain Facilities. 
The Parks Director shall not issue a permit under this section for commercial use of any City tennis court, City pool, or amusement areas . No person shall engage in commercial use at the City 's tennis courts, City pools, or amusement areas . 
(h)  Violations. 
A violation of this section is a misdemeanor and may also be enforced through injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of remedies. 
( Ord. No. 2015-439, §1, 5-19-15, eff. 5-24-15 )  
Sec. 9-2024. - HUNTING AND TAKING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to hunt, destroy, trap or otherwise capture or take any animal, wildlife, migratory birds or other fowl within a City park except when specifically authorized by the Council .  
Sec. 9-2025. - SLEEPING IN PARKS PROHIBITED. 
So long as either the City of Raleigh or Wake County shall operate a twenty-four-hour a day emergency homeless shelter, it shall be unlawful to camp or stay overnight in or on any City park, greenway, street , or any other City property without first receiving a permit from the Director of Parks, Recreation and Greenways. Camping shall include, but not be limited to, the erection or use of tents, shelters, huts and bedding, or the storage of personal belongings, or the building of fires for heating or cooking. No person shall camp, sleep, or rest in a prone position at Nash Square, Moore Square, the Transit Transfer Center, the Fayetteville Street Mall or the Upchurch Municipal Building Complex at any time of the day or night except by permit as a part of an approved the Parks, Recreation and Greenway Department program. 
(Ord. No. 1981-709, §1, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 1988-270, §1, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 1998-439, §1, 10-21-98; Ord. No. 1998-440, §1, 10-21-98; Ord. No. 2002-162, §1, 2-19-02)  
Sec. 9-2026. - REGULATION OF ACTIVITIES IN WALNUT CREEK PARK. 
In addition to the regulations set out in Article B of this chapter, §9-1011 et seq. , regulating activities in City parks, the following activities are specifically made unlawful in Walnut Creek Park and at the Walnut Creek Amphitheater: 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person , other than an agent or employee of an authorized lessee, while on park property , to offer for sale or sell tickets to any event appearing at the Walnut Creek Amphitheater on the day of the attempted sale or at any future performance date. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale or sell any merchandise of any kind in the Walnut Creek Park on the day of a performance at the Walnut Creek Amphitheater unless such sale is carried out by an agent or employee of an authorized lessee of the Walnut Creek Amphitheater. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a pyrotechnic display anywhere in the park without the express written consent of the City Manager. Before granting such consent, the Manager shall consider the duration of the display, its location, and the time at which the display is to occur. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in Walnut Creek Park unless such urination or defecation takes place in a designated indoor toilet facility. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any performance of any type at Walnut Creek Amphitheater to continue past 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1991-826, §1, 8-6-91)  
Sec. 9-2027. - REGULATION OF THE USE OF BICYCLES AND OTHER NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON THE GREENWAY SYSTEM. 
(a)  Definitions. 
As used in this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Bicycle . A non-motorized vehicle with two (2) or three (3) wheels tandem, a steering handle, one (1) or two (2) seats, and pedals by which the vehicle is propelled, and also bicycles with helper motor rated less than one (1) brake horsepower which produce only ordinary pedaling speed up to twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(2)  Skateboard . A non-motorized vehicle with two (2) pairs of wheels tandem mounted below a single horizontal board upon which the rider stands erect and is propelled by pushing off the travel surface with one (1) foot. Steering is achieved by shifting the body weight from one side to the other. 
(3)  Rollerskates . A non-motorized vehicle with two (2) pairs of wheels tandem mounted on shoes worn by the rollerskater. The rollerskater stands erect and is propelled by pushing off the travel surface with each foot. Steering is achieved by shifting the body weight from one side to the other. 
(4)  In-line skates . A non-motorized vehicle with three (3) to five (5) wheels mounted in-line on shoes worn by the skater. The skater stands erect and is propelled by pushing off the travel surface with each foot. Steering is achieved by shifting the body weight from one side to the other. 
(b)  Use of the Greenway System. 
Non-motorized vehicles as defined herein may use the system of Greenway trails designated as such by the City so long as any user of such a vehicle complies with all traffic regulations applicable and so long as the operator shall stop or otherwise yield the right-of-way to pedestrian traffic. No non-motorized vehicle shall exceed a speed of ten (10) miles per hour while being operated on the Greenway Trail system. 
(Ord. No. 1993-249, §1, 8-3-93)  
Sec. 9-2028. - REGULATION OF SKATEPARKS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Skatepark. A City- owned facility specifically designed, constructed and designated by on-site signage as an area in which persons may engage in skateboarding, in-line skating, and other allowed conveyances. Such facility may include obstacles such as ramps, "half-pipes", bowls and other structures which may be used in the course of such activities. 
(2)  The terms "bicycle," "skateboard," "rollerskates," and "In-line skates" shall have the same definition as set out in §9-2027 of the Code. 
(b)  Skateboards and In-line skates may be used within a Skatepark. 
It shall be unlawful to use any other conveyance of any type within a Skatepark, including but not limited to, bicycles or rollerskates, unless the Skatepark is specifically designed, constructed and designated by on-site signage with the approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation as an area for the use of other conveyances. 
(c)  [Protective helmet and pads.] 
Any person using or riding a skateboard, In-line skates, or other allowed conveyance, in a Skatepark or in any Parks and Recreation facility in which a Skatepark is located shall wear a protective helmet with the chin strap securely fastened under the chin, and protective elbow pads and kneepads. To meet the requirements of this section, the pads and helmet must be in good condition, and the helmet must meet the current standards of the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or SNELL. Any person using the Skatepark shall also wear closed-toe shoes while riding any allowed conveyance. 
(d)  [Violation by a minor.] 
It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any minor child to permit such minor child to use the Skatepark in violation of this section. 
(e)  [Waiver and indemnity agreement.] 
Prior to first using a Skatepark, all persons using or riding a skateboard, In-line skates, or other allowed conveyance shall sign a waiver of liability and indemnity agreement on a form furnished by the City. No person may use or ride a skateboard, In-line skates, or other allowed conveyance at a Skatepark without having the required waiver and indemnity agreement in force. If a participant is under eighteen (18) years of age, the required form shall be signed by a parent or legal guardian, and an additional form shall be signed by the participant upon reaching the age of eighteen (18). The form shall apply to each and every use of a Skatepark thereafter by the participant; provided that the City may, in its discretion, periodically require that a new waiver of liability or indemnity agreement be signed. 
(f)  [Rules and regulations.] 
Persons using a Skatepark shall comply with rules and regulations established by the Director of Parks and Recreation and maintained in the Director's Office. All persons at a Skatepark shall obey posted regulatory signs. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
Violations of this section shall be deemed infractions pursuant to G.S. 14-4, punishable by a fine of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) and any other costs as prescribed by law. In addition, violations may be addressed through administrative remedies imposed by rule enacted by the Director of Parks and Recreation, including expulsion from the Skatepark and the facility in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2009-564, §1, 4-7-09)  
Sec. 9-2029. - PROHIBITION OF DOGS IN PLAYGROUND AREAS. 
Dogs are hereby prohibited from being in any playground area in a City park or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources Department. A playground area is a fenced or unfenced area containing manufactured or naturally derived play equipment or elements used by children. It may also contain adult equipment or elements if developed as an intergenerational play space. Play equipment has prescribed use zones requiring safety surfacing to protect against impact injury. The area may have associated features such as a sand play area, play lawn, water play feature, as well as amenities such as benches, picnic tables, trash receptacles and signage. 
(Ord. No. 2014-282, §1, 4-1-14, eff. 5-1-14)  
CHAPTER 3. - RECREATION 
 
Sec. 9-3001. - DIVISION OBJECTIVES. 
The recreation division of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall have as its objectives the planning, administering and supervising of a wide variety of recreation program opportunities and the fulfilling of the leisure needs of all ages and skill levels including programs for youth, the elderly, the mentally retarded, and the physically and visually handicapped. 
The park ranger program shall also come under the jurisdiction of this division and shall be used for the creation and implementation of better public relations as well as the protection of park property and its users.  
CHAPTER 4. - CEMETERIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1991-736, adopted Feb. 19, 1991, repealed Ch. 4 of Pt. 9. Formerly, Ch. 4 consisted of §§9-4001—9-4015, which pertained to cemeteries and derived from the 1959 Code, §§8-2—8-17; Ord. No. 1978-737, §§1—3, adopted March 14, 1978; Ord. No. 1979-992, adopted Jan. 16, 1979; and Ord. No. 1985-522, §1, adopted March 19, 1985. §1 of Ord. No. 1991-736 provided for the addition of a new Ch. 4, §§9-4001—9-4019, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 9-4001. - SUPERINTENDENT; APPOINTMENT. 
There shall be appointed a superintendent to have charge of City cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4002. - PURCHASE OF LOTS; PRICES. 
(a)  Persons desiring to purchase lots in the City's cemeteries must apply to the Director of Finance or his appointed representative whose duty it shall be to execute the sale of lots and receive cash or to assess charges. All fees for lot purchases are to be paid or assessed as provided in §9-4010(d) prior to execution of deed. 
(b)  Prices for purchases of grave space in City cemeteries are set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule. Prices shall be seventy (70) per cent of the local prevailing market price, as determined by the superintendent and according to a schedule of charges approved annually by the City Manager. "Local prevailing market price" shall be the average fee charged by non-church-related, commercial cemeteries in the City as of July first of each year . 
(c)  A schedule of all cemetery charges (lot prices, inter and disinter fees, etc.) shall be available for inspection in the offices of the Cemeteries Supervisor and the Budget and Management Services Department. A schedule of all cemetery charges shall be made available to all funeral directors within the City . 
(d)  A person has the option of purchasing one, two (2), three (3), or four (4) lots. No more than four (4) lots will be sold to an individual. No lot or lots may be resold except back to the City at the original sale price to the owner . 
(e)  The superintendent may limit the sale of lots to one section at a time. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 2019-949, §§1(Att.), 7, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 9-4003. - SALE OF CEMETERY LOTS TO FUNERAL HOME BUSINESSES. 
Sales of cemetery lots will be made to funeral homes only for purposes of interment of a specific individual. Such sales are intended as a convenience to those persons and families suffering the death of a loved one and to allow funeral homes to make arrangements on their behalf. Though funeral home businesses will be responsible for making payment to the City for the purchase of lots under this section, all cemetery lot deeds will be issued in the name of the individual, and not in the name of the funeral home. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4004. - CERTIFICATES AND DEEDS. 
(a)  On payment of the sum required, the Finance Director or his appointed representative shall validate a receipt (certificate of purchase) and give to the purchaser of any lot, specifying the lot or lots and the price thereof. A copy of the receipt shall be used for the issuance of a deed which shall be properly recorded and indexed (both numerically as to receipt and alphabetically as to purchaser). The superintendent shall be notified of the sale of lots. 
(b)  A deed signed by the City Clerk and sealed with the legal seal of the City shall be executed and mailed or delivered to the address set forth on the receipt. 
(c)  In case of the loss or destruction of a deed as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the City Clerk, on proof satisfactory of such loss or destruction, shall have issued a new deed executed as hereinbefore set out to the original holder upon payment of the required fee as set forth in the schedule of all cemetery charges. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4005. - SUPERVISION OF INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS. 
(a)  The superintendent shall supervise the digging of all graves in the cemeteries and the exhuming of all bodies therein interred. The interment property is for burial of human remains only. 
(b)  No interments or disinterments shall be permitted on New Year's Day, Good Friday, Independence Day, Thanksgiving, or Christmas Day and all Sundays, hereafter referred to as excluded holidays. 
(c)  The cemetery supervisor shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to an interment. In the event of a Monday interment such notice must be given on the preceding regular City workday. 
(d)  The normal operating hours of the cemeteries are 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday of each week, except for the holidays noted above. 
(e)  Interment will be made on Saturday or nonexcluded holidays as observed by the City only upon assessment of an additional charge. All funeral processions entering the cemetery grounds after 4:00 p.m. on any normal work day will also be required to pay an additional charge. All additional charges are outlined in the schedule of cemetery charges. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4006. - DISINTERMENTS; APPLICATION AND APPROVAL REQUIRED. 
A person who desires to have removed from his or her lot or vault the remains of a person interred therein shall apply in writing addressed to the cemetery supervisor, setting forth in such application the name of the deceased, the date and cause of death, relationship of deceased to applicant, number of lot, vault, or space in which then interred, and the number of lot, vault, or space (or name of cemetery, if elsewhere) in which the remains are to be reinterred, and reason for removal. But no such permission for such disinterral shall be granted, nor shall such disinterment be made until the application has been approved by the Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4007. - REINTERMENT; REQUIREMENTS. 
Any person desiring to have reinterred the remains of a person brought from another cemetery or burial place shall furnish the cemetery supervisor with a certificate from the Health Department, setting forth, if possible, the name, age, sex, marital status, cause and date of death, and last residence of deceased, and name and location of former burial place. The cemetery supervisor, upon evidence of payment of charges as set forth in the schedule of all cemetery charges, shall have the remains properly reinterred in such place as may be selected by the person having charge of such remains. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4008. - ENFORCEMENT OF APPLICABLE LAW. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent to see that all laws concerning the cemeteries are duly observed and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4009. - MAINTENANCE AND CLEANLINESS SPECIFICATIONS FOR GRAVES AND MARKERS. 
(a)  The superintendent shall keep the cemeteries in a neat and clean condition. It shall be unlawful for any lot owner to plant any tree, flower, shrub or to sow seed of any kind or have such things planted or sown on his lot without the written approval of the Parks and Recreation Director or his designee. Any such planting or sowing done without permission will be immediately removed. It shall further be unlawful for any unauthorized person to trim, prune, or remove any branch from any plant or flower from any City owned cemetery property. 
(b)  All graves shall be at least five (5) feet deep. Two (2) infants or two (2) cremains may use one lot. 
(c)  All gravemarkers and monuments shall be set on foundations. All markers must be set even with the lawn, so that maintenance machines may pass over them safely without damage to the marker or machine. All markers installed after January 1, 1991, shall be size two (2) feet by one and one-half (1½) feet by four (4) inches. All gravemarkers placed on lots are to read over the ground toward front of lot. Only one marker will be permitted on each lot. 
(d)  Monuments will not be authorized in the southeast section of Mt. Hope Cemetery as bordered by Prospect Street and Fayetteville Street. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 2011-829, §1, 1-18-11)  
Sec. 9-4010. - WHO MAY INTER AND DISINTER; FEE. 
No person other than the regularly appointed superintendent's representative shall dig any grave or disinter any body in the cemeteries belonging to the City . Complete and accurate records are to be maintained on all interments. 
(a)  Charges for interments and disinterments of adults shall be based on actual costs as determined annually by the City Manager. For the purpose of this subsection, "actual costs" shall consist of charges for labor and the use of equipment. Records substantiating such actual costs shall be kept by the cemetery supervisor. All fees are to be paid at the office of the Finance Department or assessed, as provided in (d) below, prior to interment or disinterment. The cemetery supervisor shall be notified of payment of fees. 
(b)  Any charge based on actual cost shall be established by the City Manager within sixty (60) days following July first of each year . 
(c)  Interment or disinterment of infant or child cremains shall be fifty (50) per cent of the fee charged for adult interments as determined in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(d)  Payment shall be deemed satisfied either by the payment of cash by the purchaser or an extension of credit to a funeral director. Funeral establishments handling interments may be extended credit by the Finance Department. The use of such credit shall be deemed as assessment of charges. All credit transactions, billings, and collections shall be accomplished by the Finance Department. 
(e)  All burials on or after January 1, 1991, will be in a commercially procured graveliner or vault that has been approved by the superintendent. The minimum requirements for concrete liners shall be one and one-half-inch (1½) sidewall thickness, two-inch top thickness, two-inch bottom thickness, and three thousand (3,000) PSI. The minimum requirements for a steel vault shall be a twelve-gauge thickness top, sides, and bottom. Wooden or other shortterm liners are not allowed. No liners are required for cremations. 
(f)  Funerals starting after 4:00 p.m. on weekdays, or all day Saturday and nonexcluded holidays as observed by the City shall be charged an additional fifty (50) per cent for interments. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4011. - WORK ON PRIVATE LOTS; CONSENT THERETO. 
No person shall dig any grave, put any gravestone or board, or make any erections, or dig up any sod on any private burial lot, except under the direction or by consent of the owner thereof. The placing of headstones and grave markers over individual graves shall be permitted. The City shall bear no responsibility for the care, theft, or damage of and to any such headstones or grave markers. Headstones and grave markers may be installed between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Natural cut flowers, artificial flowers and potted plants may be placed in vases attached to headstones or on the grave at any time of the year. They will be removed when they become unsightly or interfere with cemetery operations. The City does not permit adornments that are considered offensive, inconsistent with the dignity of the cemetery, or dangerous to City personnel and these items will be removed at any time. The City of Raleigh shall provide for the continuing care, maintenance, operation, and improvements to the City cemeteries. In general, this shall include road maintenance, mowing, pruning, landscaping or removal of plant material, policing of the grounds, pest control, and such other maintenance as may be necessary to keep the cemeteries presentable. The Parks and Recreation Director or designee may enter upon any grave, mausoleum, memorial, or cremation location in order to correct conditions deemed detrimental, unsightly, or posing a threat to public safety, or rendering access to any lot inconvenient. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 2011-829, §2, 1-18-11)  
Sec. 9-4012. - REMOVING OR DEFACING MARKERS, ETC. 
No person shall willfully and unlawfully remove the stakes from a burial lot, or any board, gravestone, or other monument which may have been erected at any grave, or deface, injure, or destroy any such board, gravestone, or other monument in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4013. - INJURING TREES OR SHRUBBERY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, remove, or in any other manner injure or destroy any flower, either wild or cultivated, in the cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4014. - DEPOSITING FILTH OR RUBBISH. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any filth or unclean or offensive substance in a City cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4015. - EXCAVATING OR REMOVING EARTH. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate any earth in a City cemetery, or remove the same therefrom, except by the consent or under the direction of the superintendent, or of some other officer legally authorized. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4016. - USE AS PLAYGROUND. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the City cemeteries as a playground. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4017. - FENCES AROUND LOTS. 
There shall be no fence erected around any lot within the limits of City cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4018. - TRESPASSING ON LOTS. 
All persons are forbidden to trespass upon private lots or to go across lots, either private or belonging to the City , in the City cemeteries, except in case of a burial, visit to lot by owner , relative, or friend in the course of maintaining the grounds. All noncity employees driving automobiles in the cemeteries shall keep within drives. 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4019. - ABANDONED CEMETERY LOTS; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE AND REVERSION TO THE CITY. 
(a)  A cemetery lot may be determined to be abandoned by the superintendent according to the following standards and procedures: 
(1)  Upon investigation, the superintendent shall determine that there has been no interment in the lot for a period of fifty (50) years from the date of purchase; 
(2)  The superintendent shall conduct a reasonable effort to locate the listed owner , including the sending of certified mail inquiries to the owners ' last known address, and attempting to contact the owners ' immediate family by mail or telephone; and 
(3)  Upon making the investigations outlined above, and if no valid response(s) are recovered, the superintendent shall certify and report these efforts to the City Council and request the Council to publish notice of its intent to determine that the lot has been abandoned once a week for four (4) successive weeks in a newspaper published in the City , such notice requesting the purchaser, his or her heirs, or immediate family members to report to the City that the lot is intended to be used and has not in fact been abandoned. Upon receiving no valid responses to the published notice as described herein, the lot and all rights of burial thereon, shall revert to the City , which may then resell the lot in due course. In the event the original owner reappears after the resale of the lot or lots, a full refund of the original purchase price shall be made by the City . 
(b)  These provisions, or an accurate summary thereof, shall be included in the provisions of any deed to a cemetery lot sold by the City . 
(Ord. No. 1991-736, §1, 2-19-91)  
Sec. 9-4020. - CEMETERY HOURS AND ACCESS. 
(a)  The Parks and Recreation Director shall establish hours of operation and post the same at the entrances of City Cemetery, O'Rorke-Catholic Cemetery, and Mt. Hope Cemetery. It is unlawful for any person except a City employee or contractor to be on cemetery property outside the hours of operation without written permission from the Parks and Recreation Director. It is further prohibited for anyone to enter or leave the cemeteries other than by the established entrances and exits. 
(b)  Vehicular access and operation in the cemeteries shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  City Cemetery. No vehicles are permitted within City Cemetery except for vehicles associated with cemetery maintenance, scheduled contractual work, or visitors with physical disability. No vehicular access shall be permitted outside regular business hours except as approved by the Parks and Recreation Director or designee. Access on weekends and holidays must be arranged twenty-four (24) hours in advance through the cemetery director. 
(2)  O'Rorke-Catholic Cemetery. No vehicles are allowed within this cemetery except for vehicles associated with cemetery maintenance or scheduled contract work. 
(3)  Mt. Hope Cemetery. Vehicles are permitted so long as they do not exceed ten (10) miles per hour in speed, remain on roadways at all times when not involved in maintenance or grave preparation or closure, if parked do not obstruct other traffic. Any vehicle obstructing operations may be towed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-829, §3, 1-18-11)  
Sec. 9-4021. - PROHIBITIONS. 
(a)  Children under twelve (12) years of age unless accompanied by an adult assuming responsibility for the child. 
(b)  Delivery vehicles not on City business. 
(c)  Firearms unless carried by law enforcement officers or a military honor guard. 
(d)  Intoxicating beverages. 
(e)  Dogs except for service animals or law enforcement animals. 
(f)  Camping, hunting, playing, and loitering. Running is permitted on paved surfaces only. 
(g)  Cutting picking, pulling flowers or plants, gathering berries or fruits or nuts, breaking branches form any shrub or tree. 
(h)  Littering 
(i)  Sitting or climbing on a marker, monument, mausoleum or fixture of any kind. 
(j)  Peddling, begging, soliciting or collecting. 
(k)  Display or distribution of printed material relating to any commercial use without prior written approval of the Parks and Recreation Director or designee. 
(l)  Glass containers. 
(m)  Fishing or trapping of animals. 
(n)  Scattering of cremated remains on cemetery grounds. 
(o)  Taking etchings and rubbings of cemetery stones is prohibited unless approved by the Parks and Recreation Director or designee. 
(p)  Digging holes for the purpose of erecting a tent, stage, or other structure by anyone other than City staff without written permission from the Parks and Recreation Director. 
(q)  Injure, deface, break, destroy or remove any headstone, tombstone, bench, monument, grave decoration, tree, shrub, or any other cemetery property. 
(r)  No person shall engage in fighting or quarreling in a cemetery. No loud or boisterous music is allowed and no one shall interrupt or disturb any funeral or memorial service. 
(s)  No historical reenactments, fundraisers, or special events unless approved by the Parks and Recreation Director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-829, §4, 1-18-11)  
CHAPTER 5. - LAKES 
 
Sec. 9-5001. - GENERAL CONDITIONS. 
(a)  Duly appointed City lake wardens and watershed inspectors shall be the official custodians of the lakes owned by the City and the surrounding premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the park rangers, lake managers, wardens, and watershed inspectors to enforce all rules and regulations herein prescribed, and to insure that no indiscreet acts of any character are committed by any person upon the premises which would tend to result in the pollution or tend to affect the quality of the water supply. 
(c)  All duly appointed enforcement personnel, state or local, including wardens, watershed inspectors, park rangers or lake managers, or state wildlife protectors shall have the power and authority to summarily deny admission to the lakes to any person known to have violated the rules and regulations or ordinances governing fishing, boating, or other uses of lake premises. In addition, all enforcement personnel shall have the authority and power to require any such person or persons to leave the premises if discovered thereon. This authority to refuse admission or to eject persons shall also apply to any person or persons having intoxicating liquors, including wine or malt beverages, or drugs in their possession or who show evidence of being under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any intoxicating beverage including wine or malt beverage on or about City -owned lakes. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to spit in the lakes, to put his feet in the water, except under the conditions prescribed for wading or water skiing on or in Lake Wheeler, or to commit on the lakes or within two hundred (200) feet thereof, any nuisance or act which would tend to affect the quality of water in the lakes. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person , except duly authorized enforcement personnel, to possess a firearm or fireworks upon the premises or to discharge any firearm or fireworks from any boat on the lakes or on the shores of the lakes. Further, it shall be unlawful to hunt with dog, gun, or bow and arrow or other weapon on any lands owned or controlled by the City abutting the lakes. 
(g)  No picnics shall be allowed upon the grounds, structures, or waters of the lakes, except where areas for this activity are specifically designated. All persons using these areas shall be responsible for disposing of any trash or litter. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter upon the lakes or upon the property of the City abutting the lakes except during the times and upon the areas permitted under this chapter or by other regulation.  
Sec. 9-5002. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS. 
(a)  The days and hours of operation for each lake shall be established by the Department of Parks and Recreation in conjunction with the Department of Public Utilities and shall be posted upon the premises, except that in no event shall the public be allowed upon any lake for any activity except from dawn to dusk. 
(b)  The Department of Parks and Recreation, in conjunction with the Department of Public Utilities, shall establish all conditions for each concessionaire operating at any City lake and the rights and privileges of such concessionaire shall be expressly subordinate to and conditioned upon compliance with all such conditions and regulations. All concession contracts shall be approved by the Council before becoming effective. 
(c)  Any fees to be charged members of the public for use of any facility or activity on or about any City lake shall be prescribed by the City Council or be imposed pursuant to a properly approved concession agreement. A schedule of current fees shall be maintained in the Budget and Management Services Department, and is hereby incorporated by reference into this Code. 
(d)  The Department of Parks and Recreation is hereby empowered to establish regulations limiting the number of season passes for boating in addition to prescribing the number of daily passes which shall be available for various classes of boats, including but not limited to, the establishment of guidelines for the total number of boats or classes of boats which shall be allowed upon each lake at any given time. 
(e)  It is further provided that, in that the primary nature of the lakes herein regulated is the provision of a safe and adequate water supply for the City of Raleigh, the Director of Public Utilities is hereby empowered to close or to limit access to or the use of any lake facility where, in his discretion, such limitation is reasonably necessary to the proper protection of the water supply. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §15, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 9-5003. - GENERAL FISHING REGULATIONS. 
(a)  It is hereby provided that all laws of the State of North Carolina regulating or limiting the manner of taking, size, weight or number of fish taken and related matters shall be in full force and effect and shall be enforced by all wardens, park rangers and state wildlife protectors. 
(b)  In addition to all controls imposed by state game laws, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to take any fish by seining, trapping or by trotline. Further, fish may be taken only by a pole or rod and reel baited with natural or artificial bait. 
(c)  Except as provided under §9-5007, no bank fishing shall be permitted upon any lake owned or controlled by the City of Raleigh. Fishing shall be permitted only from a boat furnished or authorized by the proper authority or from a pier erected for that purpose. 
(d)  No person shall fish except upon those days and during those hours designated by the Department of Parks and Recreation in conjunction with the Director of Public Utilities. 
(e)  Wardens, park rangers and state wildlife protectors shall have the right upon request to inspect any catch and to make a proper record of the catch. 
(f)  All fishing concessions shall be governed by contract, awarded only after open competitive bids, following an invitation for bids published once in each of the daily newspapers published in the City at least ten (10) days before the bids are opened. All required contract provisions shall be established by the Department of Parks and Recreation in conjunction with the Director of Public Utilities. These provisions shall include, but are not limited to, a requirement that the successful bidder procure and maintain a liability insurance policy in an amount established by administration, that the contractor shall obey all state and local rules and regulations, and that the contract may be terminated upon breach of any condition of the contract. Any fishing, boating or other recreational activity may be terminated in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare in the discretion of the director of the Department of Public Utilities. The contractor shall have no cause of action against the City for any such suspension or termination.  
Sec. 9-5004. - GENERAL BOATING REGULATIONS. 
(a)  Except as to Lake Johnson as provided in this subsection and as to Lake Wheeler as provided in §9-5007 herein no private boat of any type shall be allowed upon any lake at any time, except upon the conditions and at the times designated in this section. Non-powered boats capable of being transported on the top of a full size passenger car or in the bed of a one (1) ton pickup truck may be launched at Lake Johnson at locations and times marked and published by the Park Manager. 
(b)  Except as provided in §9-5007 for Lake Wheeler, no private boat shall enter or leave any lake where boating is permitted except from ramps or docks provided by the City . Every boat used on every City owned lake shall have a U.S. Coast Guard approved life preserver for each occupant and no person shall use a boat on the lake unless it is so equipped. The life preserver requirement found in the previous sentence shall not apply during events and event practice sessions for events sanctioned by the City of Raleigh and U.S. Rowing or, at any other event specifically approved by the Raleigh City Council after making a finding that the public health and safety will not be endangered. 
(c)  Each boat shall be equipped with a pail, which shall be used for sanitary purposes. 
(d)  Except as provided in §9-5007 for Lake Wheeler, no gasoline, kerosene, or other petroleum-powered motors shall be permitted upon the lakes. Except as otherwise provided herein, all boats shall be propelled by means of oars, paddles or electric motors. Further, duly authorized wardens or park rangers may employ gasoline engines for emergency or enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-206, §§1, 2, 6-1-02; Ord. No. 2004-583, §1, 3-2-04)  
Sec. 9-5005. - LAKE RALEIGH; BEAVER DAM RESERVOIR. 
No recreational activities of any nature shall be permitted at any time or for any purpose upon Lake Raleigh or Beaver Dam Reservoir or its environs.  
Sec. 9-5006. - LAKE JOHNSON AND LAKE BENSON. 
(a)  All of the foregoing sections, to the extent applicable, shall be in full force and effect upon each lake and at all times. 
(b)  Fishing and boating shall be permitted upon the conditions set out in §§9-5003 and 9-5004. 
(c)  No more than sixty (60) boats shall be permitted at any time upon the surface of Lake Benson. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything else in this Part, the Raleigh Public Utility Department shall have jurisdiction and control over Lake Benson and shall be responsible for its care and operation both as water supply and a recreational facility. When the water supply function conflicts with the recreational function the water supply requirements shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1987-43, §1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 2014-284, §1, 4-15-14, eff. 6-15-14)  
Sec. 9-5007. - LAKE WHEELER. 
(a)  All of the foregoing general provisions, to the extent applicable, shall be in full force and effect upon Lake Wheeler at all times. 
(b)  Fishing and boating are permitted at Lake Wheeler under the foregoing rules and regulations. Provided further, private boats may also be placed upon Lake Wheeler upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Sailing craft may be moored on the lake during both day and night hours but no sailing of such craft shall be permitted during the hours from dusk to dawn nor shall any person remain on or about such craft during those hours. The charge shall be as provided by the Department of Parks and Recreation and under no circumstances shall any liquid petroleum product be used or stored on sailing craft. 
(2)  Boat traffic shall move around the lake in a general counterclockwise direction. Boats returning for downed skiers against traffic shall do so with caution. Sailing craft shall also move in the same general direction with traffic. 
(3)  Season permits may be issued to authorized boat dealers for use in instructing new boat owners in the operation of boats or demonstrating boats to prospective purchasers; provided, no boat dealer shall have more than one (1) boat on the premises or in the water at any one time and the season permit issued to boat dealers shall not be valid on Sundays or legal holidays. 
(4)  Season permits, other than those issued to boat dealers shall be conspicuously attached to the boat before entering into City property. In the event it becomes necessary to close the lake for a period exceeding 30 days, a pro rata credit for the time the lake is closed shall be allowed on the purchase of a season permit for the next season provided that evidence is furnished that a season permit was held at the time the lake was closed as herein provided for unless the Council shall otherwise provide. The permits herein provided shall not be transferable or assignable. 
(5)  Motors in excess of seven and one-half (7½) horsepower shall not be operated in the area upstream from Penny Road Bridge. 
(6)  The Parks and Recreation Department has the authority to limit the number of boats on the lake to insure safe operating conditions at all times. 
(7)  The speed limit for all boats shall be no more than forty (40) miles per hour, except pursuant to a special use agreement approved by the Council and the State . 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any power boat to be operated in a manner or at a speed which will produce a wake. This restriction shall apply on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays from the opening of the park until 11:00 a.m. The operation of power boats during these periods is not prohibited unless a wake is being produced. 
(c)  Fishing. Fishing will be permitted on any part of Lake Wheeler; however, bank fishing may be allowed only upon Simpkins Pond. Daily or season permits for launching private boats shall include the privilege of fishing by any occupant of the boat and the admission of a motor vehicle to Lake Wheeler but shall not include fishing in Simpkins Pond. 
(d)  Water skiing, swimming and wading. 
(1)  Swimming, except that which is incidental to skiing, will not be permitted. 
(2)  Each water skier shall wear a Coast Guard approved vest or belt life preserver. 
(3)  The Department of Parks and Recreation may provide for areas of Lake Wheeler where the water is not more than three (3) feet deep in which wading shall be permitted. Such areas shall be clearly designated and shall be fenced. No other ingress into the water from the banks shall be permitted. 
(e)  Personal watercraft. No person shall operate or place a personal watercraft on the waters of Lake Wheeler. For the purpose of this subsection, "operate" means to navigate or otherwise use or occupy a vessel and "personal watercraft" means a vessel which uses an outboard or propeller-driven motor, or inboard motor powering a water jet pump, as its primary source of motive power and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on, or being towed behind a vessel, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel. 
Editor's Note: The term "personal watercraft" used in this subsection is the same definition contained in G.S. 75A-13.3. 
(Ord. No. 2001-928, §1, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 2003-538, §1, 11-5-03) 
Editor's note: By Resolution No. 1978-755, adopted Nov. 7, 1978, the City Council applied to the Wildlife Resources Commission for special rules and regulations "establishing No Wake Zones 50 yards from the end of the docks at the main boat ramp area of Lake Wheeler." Pursuant to G.S. 75A-15.  
CHAPTER 6. - CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's Note: The title of Ch. 6 was changed from "Civic Center Complex" to "Convention Center Complex" by §16 of Ord. No. 1998-454, adopted Nov. 4, 1998. Section 16 of the same ordinance changed all references to the "Civic Center Complex" to the "Convention Center Complex" throughout the Code. 
 
Sec. 9-6001. - RALEIGH CONVENTION AND PERFORMING ARTS CENTERS AUTHORITY'S POWERS; APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER. 
(a)  The City Council hereby delegates to the Raleigh Convention and Performing Arts Centers Authority the power to establish rules and regulations concerning the conduct and operation of the complex, provided such rules and regulations are consistent with the scope of this chapter and the laws and policies of the City , the State , and the law of the United States. 
(b)  In preparing and promulgating their regulations, the authority shall be bound by the following guidelines: 
(1)  The authority shall have the power to acquire and dispose of real estate only upon the approval of the City Council and in accordance with any conditions prescribed by the City Council as to the price and method of acquiring or disposing of real estate. 
(2)  The authority shall comply with the requirements of North Carolina law relating to advertisement and competitive bidding for construction work and for the purpose of equipment, furnishings and other items of personal property , and upon receiving bids for such shall then make recommendations to the City Council for its approval prior to awarding bids. 
(3)  All revenues received in connection with the use of the convention center complex, or any part thereof shall be remitted to the City treasury and treated as are other general revenues of the City . All disbursements of public funds by the authority shall be in accordance with procedures established and approved by the City Manager and, to the extent appropriate, in the manner used for disbursement of other funds by the City for purposes of parks and recreation or other similar activities. 
(4)  The authority shall follow the procedure established by the City Manager and the Council for the preparation, submission, approval and use of an annual budget for purposes of funding the operations and activities of the convention center complex. 
(5)  All personnel employed by the Raleigh Convention and Performing Arts Centers Authority in connection with the operations and use of the convention center complex shall be employed in accordance with the personnel policies of the City , upon recommendation of the authority of the convention center director, and shall be subject to the final approval of the City Manager. 
(c)  The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall apply to the Raleigh Convention Center Complex as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 2015-386, §1, 1-6-15 )  
Sec. 9-6002. - RENTAL CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED; WAIVER. 
(a)  The City Manager or his duly authorized agent, who shall be known as the convention center director, is hereby authorized to make contracts on behalf of the City for the rental and use of the Raleigh Convention Center Complex (which shall include the convention center, memorial auditorium, surrounding parking lots and other areas within and without those buildings and facilities) in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and regulations of the Raleigh Convention and Performing Arts Centers Authority. It shall be unlawful to use any part of the complex for any purpose without a valid contract for the rental thereof or written permission from the City Manager or his agent. 
(b)  The City Manager or his duly authorized agent, is authorized to waive any requirements relating to formal contracts and the payment of fees pursuant to this chapter and convention center regulations. All waivers by the City Manager shall be extended to all other similarly situated lessees of the convention center complex according to uniform procedures. 
(c)  The City Manager or his duly authorized agent, is authorized to waive the requirements herein relating to formal contracts and the payment of fees with respect to City committees, commissions and boards desiring to use the complex for the purpose of holding public hearings and meeting the qualifications herein. 
(d)  Any such agency desiring to hold a public hearing shall use a City facility other than the auditorium when one is available. When no such other facility appears to be available, the agency may apply through the City Manager's office for adequate space. When no other space is available, the City Manager may authorize the use of the convention center complex by the agency for a public hearing and waive the customary requirement for a formal contract and for fees. The Manager shall report each action to the Council at its next regular meeting following the waiver decision. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 2015-386, §2, 1-6-15 )  
Sec. 9-6003. - AGREEMENT TO BE IN WRITING. 
No agreement purporting to rent or lease the complex shall be valid or effective until and unless it shall be in written or printed form, signed by an authorized official or employee of the City and by the party engaging the complex or his authorized agent. Signatures of lessor and lessee must be notarized. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6004. - WHO MAY EXECUTE AGREEMENT FOR CITY; TENTATIVE RESERVATION. 
The City Manager or his duly authorized agent may enter into a written contract renting the complex to any person complying with the conditions prescribed by this article and convention center regulations, or, pursuant to such regulations, may permit any person to make a tentative reservation of the complex, for any date which has not been previously rented and which is not being held under tentative reservation. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6005. - CASH DEPOSIT CONDITION PRECEDENT TO CONTRACT. 
At the time of executing a written contract for the rental of the complex, the person desiring to rent the complex shall , as a condition precedent to a valid rental contract, make a deposit with the City Manager or convention center director as prescribed in the convention center regulations. No contract for the rental of the complex shall be made or signed on behalf of the City unless and until the deposit shall have been received by the City . 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6006. - REPEATED USE; WAIVER OF DEPOSITS. 
Lessees contracting to use the complex repeatedly during any annual period may be classified and treated according to uniform convention center regulations with regard to waiver of deposits and any other items as appear in the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6007. - SCHEDULE OF CHARGES. 
Subject to the provisions of this code, all charges for use of the complex shall be as indicated on the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule , based on fees recommended by the Raleigh Convention and Performing Arts Centers Authority and approved by the City Council . 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 2015-386, §2, 1-6-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §8, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 9-6008. - INCOMPATIBLE USES RESOLUTION. 
The City Manager or his duly authorized agent, may , in his discretion, by refusal to rent, reservation, competitive bidding, or by other means, resolve any actual or potential incompatibility of any actual or proposed uses of the complex. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6009. - LESSEE'S LIABILITY. 
The lessee of the complex or any part thereof shall be responsible and liable for any and all injuries and damages to the complex buildings, fixtures, furnishings, or the land on which the buildings are located, during the period of their use under the rental contract. The lessee shall agree as a part of the rental contract to be so responsible and liable and to reimburse the City for any and all such damages and injuries. The lessee shall agree as a part of the consideration for the rental contract covering the use of the complex or any part thereof to save harmless the City for any and all accounts, bills, damages, suits, and claims in any way arising out of the use of the complex by the lessee pursuant to the written contract. The City Manager or his duly authorized agent may require the person renting the complex to furnish the City a bond or procure a public liability insurance policy in a satisfactory insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the State (in such amounts as considered advisable by the City Manager) to insure the City and the lessee from any and all damages, claims and suits on account of injuries and/or damages sustained by third persons , firms or corporations arising or resulting from the use of the complex during the period for which rented. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6010. - SPONSOR TO POST BOND, PROVIDE FOR MAINTENANCE OF ORDER. 
(a)  When required by the City Manager or his duly authorized agent, the sponsor of a commercial dance or a combination of stage show and commercial dance or the sponsor of any other performance or activity, shall post a bond or certified check in an amount to be determined by the City Manager or his duly authorized agent to guarantee the payment of all damages to the building, fixtures or premises as a result of its use by lessee. 
(b)  The sponsor shall likewise provide the number of police officers required to maintain order as may be determined by the Chief of Police of the City and the complex director. 
(c)  During commercial events, the lessee(s) shall not encourage or permit members of the audience on stage nor performers to visit the seating area of the complex, without prior approval of the City Manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6011. - WEAPONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have on or about his person, in the complex, any firearms or other weapons or articles, including but not being limited to: blackjacks; nightsticks; or flashlights, which, by their use, might constitute deadly weapons. This section shall not apply to peace officers assigned to duty in the complex, drill teams, honor guards, or items otherwise prohibited by this section of a collectible or antique nature that are being brought into the complex in association with an event or show within the complex in accordance with safety procedures and rules established by the Chief of Police of the City and the complex director. 
This section shall not apply to an exhibitor within an event under a contract with the City under §9-6003 if firearms are an integral part of its exhibit during the event, subject to the following requirements: the exhibitor must comply with all federal, state, and local laws governing the possession and sale of firearms; firearms may not be loaded or fired in the complex; firearms must be deactivated by removal of the firing pin, the bolt, or otherwise altered so that they are incapable of being fired; firearms and ammunition must be inspected by an authorized safety inspector approved by the complex director, utilizing standards established in consultation with the Chief of Police of the City or their designee; and the sale of firearms and ammunition is prohibited in the complex, though exhibitors may take orders for future delivery subject to applicable law. With the exception of firearms or bladed weapons, this section shall not apply to weapons brought into the complex in association with a sanctioned athletic competition held within the complex under a contract with the City under §9-6003. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 2009-595, §1, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 2014-371, §1, 12-2-14 )  
Sec. 9-6012. - CONCESSIONS, REGULATIONS GOVERNING OPERATION. 
Persons having concession rights in the complex shall abide by the convention center regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6013. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to consume any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage at any time or event in the complex except in connection with a dinner or banquet or any other activity at which food is served and then only with the consent and approval of the complex director. No such beverages shall be consumed on the convention center complex grounds at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6014. - HOURS OPEN. 
Hours of performances and charges for overtime use of the complex shall be governed by the convention center regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6015. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Former §9-6015, which concerned restrictions on smoking in the civic center complex, and derived from Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, adopted Jan. 4, 1977 and Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, adopted June 7, 1977, was repealed by Ord. No. 1988-167, §1, adopted May 3, 1988.  
Sec. 9-6016. - PARKING REGULATIONS IN THE COMPLEX PARKING LOT. 
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in the complex parking lots when appropriate signs are posted at the entrances and exits thereto prohibiting parking. A motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed from the parking lot for storage as provided in §11-2028 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6017. - PARKING LOT FEE. 
When the parking lots at the complex not operated by a private concessionaire are not reserved for patrons and participants at performances, entertainments or other functions at the complex, there shall be a charge of not more than fifty cents ($0.50) per day per vehicle for parking in the area reserved for parking on the lots. Collection thereof shall be made in such manner as may be determined by the City Manager. A vehicle parked in the area without the payment of the parking fee shall be subject to removal from the parking area for storage at a public garage and the cost of removal and storage shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle as a condition of its surrender to the owner . 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6018. - LOITERING PROHIBITED ON PREMISES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the complex buildings or on the grounds adjacent thereto. A loiterer is defined as a person who does not buy a ticket to a performance being conducted in the complex, or has no connection with the event in progress, or who does not plan to attend the event, or who does not have legitimate business with the management of the complex, or with performance being conducted at the complex, but it shall not include persons who may be waiting in the lobby or outside the complex for the purpose of meeting people who are attending the performance. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6019. - SKATING, DANCING; INFLAMMABLE DECORATIONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to skate on the floor of the complex; provided, however, this shall not be construed to prohibit the ice skating on platforms placed upon the floors in such manner as not to damage the floors. 
(b)  No crepe paper or other paper of flammable substances that might tend to create a fire hazard shall be used for decoration purposes in the complex. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6020. - ATTACHING SIGNS PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful to bring or post signs or decorations of any type in or on the building or grounds of the complex without prior approval of the complex director. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
Sec. 9-6021. - ANIMALS; NOT TO BE HOUSED; RESTRICTIONS ON BRINGING IN. 
It shall be unlawful to house animals in any part of the complex buildings, but animals may be permitted inside the buildings when they are engaged in performing as a part of any circus or show; provided, however, the City Manager may prohibit such use of the auditorium if necessary, in his opinion, for the protection of the building or any part thereof from damage or for the safety of persons attending the event. 
(Ord. No. 1977-419, §1, 1-4-77; Ord. No. 1977-547, §1, 6-7-77)  
CHAPTER 7. - PEDESTRIAN MALLS  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9-7001. - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide regulations for the operation and maintenance of the Pedestrian Malls and surrounding areas. 
( Code 1959 , §27-1; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 2019-970, §2, 6-18-19 )  
Sec. 9-7002. - DEFINITIONS. 
Pedestrian Malls as referenced in this Code shall include the following: 
(a)  City Plaza: 
All of that area to include the area shown as the City Plaza in the City Plaza Agreement as recorded in Book 13233, Page 1672, in the Wake County Register of Deeds, as amended by the First Amendment to the City Plaza Agreement recorded in Book 13885, Page 1656, in the Wake County Register of Deeds, and specifically excepting any Outdoor Seating Easement or Pavilion area as defined and described therein. 
(b)  Exchange Plaza: 
The area from a point at the southwest corner of Lot 5, Block A-48, Wake County Tax Map, 210.4 feet east to the southeast corner of Lot 22, Block A-48; thence 42.09 feet south along the Wilmington Street right-of-way line to a point at the northeast corner of Lot 28, Block A-48; thence 42.09 feet south along the Wilmington Street right-of-way line to a point at the northeast corner of Lot 28, Block A-48; thence west 210 feet to a point at the northwest corner of Lot 4, Block A-48; thence north 42.09 feet along the Fayetteville Street right-of-way line. 
(c)  Market Plaza: 
The area from a point at the southwest corner of Lot 4, Block A-48, Wake County Tax Map, 70 feet east; thence south 41.35 feet; thence west 70 feet to a point at the northwest corner of Lot 3, Block A-48; thence north 41.35 feet along the Fayetteville Street right-of-way line. 
(d)  Martin Street Plaza: 
The area from a point of beginning at the southwest corner of Moore Square; thence east along the southern property line of Moore Square to the southeast corner of Moore Square; thence south along the S. Person Street right-of-way line to the back of curb located on the northern side of East Martin Street; thence west along the curb frontage on East Martin Street to the South Blount Street right-of-way; thence north to the point of beginning. 
( Code 1959 , §27-2; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-700, §1, 7-7-81; Ord. No. 2015-479, §2, 8-4-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-970, §3, 6-18-19 )  
Sec. 9-7003. - PEDESTRIAN MALLS CLOSED TO VEHICULAR TRAFFIC; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any private motor vehicle, except any self-propelled wheelchairs or invalid tricycles operated by persons whose physical disabilities prohibit normal walking, on any pedestrian mall except by permit issued by the City Manager or his designee. 
(b)  Parking or operation of any motor vehicle, or of any self-propelled motorized equipment used for excavation, construction or related purposes, shall be punishable by a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each vehicle and piece of equipment for each offense, unless the vehicle or equipment displays a valid permit for this purpose. Such permit shall specifically identify the vehicle(s) and equipment authorized and the time, date(s) and portion of the malls allowed for parking or operation. Parking or operation of the vehicle or equipment at a time, date or place not authorized on the permit shall void the permit. 
( Code 1959 , §27-3; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1989-442, §1, 10-19-89)  
Sec. 9-7004. - SPECIAL EVENTS AT MALLS. 
(a)  Permit required. 
Any person or group, except those holding a valid City picketing permit issued pursuant to §12-1056 of this Code, or an outdoor restaurant dining permit issued pursuant to §9-7007 of this Code, presenting any concert, performance, exhibition, ceremony or other activity tending to create a public congregation shall require a special event permit. 
(b)  Permit procedure. 
An application for a special event permit shall be made in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time the event shall be scheduled to begin and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring the event; 
(2)  The area of the mall where this event is to take place; 
(3)  The date and hour for which the permit is sought; 
(4)  The person or persons in charge of the event and who will carry the permit at all times; 
(5)  A detailed description of the activities for which the permit is being requested; 
(6)  The expected number of participants in the event; and 
(7)  Any other information necessary to administer this chapter. 
The application shall be submitted to the City Manager or his designee who shall issue a special event permit if he finds that the nature, area, scope and size of the requested use will not hinder or impede any regularly established use of the mall and will not adversely affect its care, protection and maintenance. If it is determined otherwise, the permit will not be issued. The duration and number of special event permits which may be in effect at any one time, or the number of participants in any special event or show, may be limited so as not to hinder or impede the regularly established use of the malls; adversely affect their care, protection, and maintenance; or endanger persons thereon; and requests for permits shall be acted on in the same order in which completed requests are received. 
(c)  Fee schedule for special events. 
All applications for a special events permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee. The fees established herein partially defray the City's expense in keeping records relating to the application, verifying the application, monitoring the events, and performing other services required by statute or ordinance in processing the application to its conclusion. Special event fees shall be as indicated on the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
( Code 1959 , §27-4; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1980-393, §§1—4, 6-3-80; Ord. No. 1980-409, §2, 7-1-80; Ord. No. 1982-884A, §1, 4-6-82; Ord. No. 1983-98, §2, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 1990-673, §1, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2019-949, §9, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 9-7004.1. - NAME OF SPECIAL EVENTS SPONSOR TO BE DISPLAYED. 
Any person or group obtaining a special events permit shall , at the time and place of the special event, prominently and continuously display the name of the individual, group or organization sponsoring the event, as indicated on the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1980-488, §1, 10-7-80)  
Sec. 9-7005. - REVOCATION OF SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS. 
Falsification of a special events permit shall make it subject to revocation upon notice given to the permit holder by the City Manager or his designee. 
( Code 1959 , §27-5; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77)  
Sec. 9-7006. - CLEANING AND REPAIRING AFTER USE FOR SPECIAL EVENT; LIABILITY. 
Any person , firm or organization issued a special events permit under the provision of this chapter shall be responsible for any and all injuries, damages to the mall surface, fixtures or plantings, and for the removal of excess trash, litter and debris that may occur as a result of such use. All applicants shall agree, as a part of the consideration for a special event permit, to save harmless the City for any and all accounts, bills, damages, suits and claims in any way arising out of the use of the mall by the applicant. Applicants may be required to post with the City a bond or proof of liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business within the State of North Carolina, in an amount specified by the City , securing the City for property damage, personal injuries and wrongful deaths as a result of such use. 
( Code 1959 , §27-6; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77)  
Sec. 9-7007. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2015-519, §4, adopted Nov. 17, 2015 , repealed §9-7007, which pertained to outdoor seating and derived from Ord. No. 1983-98, §4, adopted April 19, 1983; Ord. No. 2015-479, §3, adopted August 4, 2015 . The user's attention is directed to §12-1041.  
Sec. 9-7008. - EXCAVATION. 
(a)  Excavation on the malls is prohibited without a permit issued by the Inspections Department. Excavation without such permit shall be punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the fees normally payable for such excavation. 
(b)  Excavation of brick pavers or other hard surfaces on the malls shall require a payment of twelve dollars ($12.00) per square foot for the area to be excavated. The fee shall be paid prior to excavation, based on the estimated area to be excavated. Where the actual size of the area excavated differs from the estimate, an additional payment or partial refund of excavation fees, as appropriate, shall be made. 
(c)  Should the party responsible for the excavation return the disturbed area to its original condition, as determined by the City , the excavation fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1989-442, §2, 10-19-89)  
Secs. 9-7009 — 9-7020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1981-559, adopted Jan. 6, 1981, repealed Art. B, "Advisory Commission," §§9-7021—9-7024, as derived from Code 1959 , §§27-7—27-10, as enacted by Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, adopted Aug. 16, 1977. §2 of Ord. No. 1981-559 then renumbered §§9-7031—9-7040, Art. C, as §§9-7021—9-7030, Art. B. 
 
Sec. 9-7021. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2002-218, §1, adopted June 4, 2002, set out provisions repealing §9-7021, which pertained to animals and derived from Code 1959 , §27-11; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, adopted Aug. 16, 1977; and Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, adopted Jan. 6, 1981.  
Sec. 9-7022. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2013-239, §1, adopted Nov. 5, 2013, repealed §9-7022, which pertained to bicycles and derived from Code 1959 , §27-12; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, adopted August 16, 1977; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, adopted Jan. 6, 1981; Ord. No. 1988-257, §1, adopted Oct. 18, 1988. The user's attention is directed to §11-3001 et seq.  
Sec. 9-7023. - FOUNTAINS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any part of his body, to wade, swim, or place any animal, trash, liquid or solid object other than domestic or foreign coins in any fountain or pond located on the mall. 
( Code 1959 , §27-13; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81)  
Sec. 9-7024. - LITTERING; REFUSE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit refuse, rubbish or litter anywhere on the mall surface except in containers provided for that purpose. 
( Code 1959 , §27-14; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81)  
Sec. 9-7025. - ROLLER SKATES. 
No person shall roller skate, ride on a skateboard or operate any similar device or toy having wheels or rollers on the mall. 
( Code 1959 , §27-15; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81; Ord. No. 1993-226, §1, 7-6-93)  
Sec. 9-7026. - SOUND AMPLIFICATION OR MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to use any electronic sound amplification or engage in the playing of any electronically amplified musical instrument upon the mall unless specifically authorized under the special events provisions of this chapter. This section shall not apply to emergency or other service vehicles or equipment operated under emergency conditions. 
( Code 1959 , §27-16; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81) 
Cross reference: Sound magnification, §12-5008.  
Sec. 9-7027. - VANDALISM. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb or ascend any statuary object, fountain or tree situated upon the mall except for duly authorized personnel engaged in the maintenance or repair of the mall. 
( Code 1959 , §27-17; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81)  
Sec. 9-7028. - EXISTING ORDINANCES. 
(a)  All applicable City ordinances now in effect shall apply to the mall areas unless said ordinance is superseded by one of the aforementioned rules or regulations. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to exclude any person , firm or corporation from the necessity of obtaining any applicable license, permit or approval as may be required by any other provision of this Code. 
( Code 1959 , §27-18; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81)  
Sec. 9-7029. - SEVERABILITY. 
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section or any part of this chapter shall , for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its operation to the part thereof directly involved in said judgment. If any part or clause of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional, and if such part so declared unconstitutional embraces subject matter controlled and provided for by any law, public or private, in effect at the time of the adoption of this chapter, such preexisting laws shall continue and remain in effect, notwithstanding any repealing clause contained herein. 
( Code 1959 , §27-19; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81)  
Sec. 9-7030. - PENALTIES. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and punishable by law. Each day's continuance of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
( Code 1959 , §27-20; Ord. No. 1977-598, §1, 8-16-77; Ord. No. 1981-559, §2, 1-6-81)  
CHAPTER 8. - TREES AND VEGETATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, adopted March 3, 2015, effective March 8, 2015 , repealed the former Ch. 8, §§9-8001—9-8014, and enacted a new Ch. 8 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959 , §§21A-1—21A-14. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 9-8001. - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter and the City Tree Manual, which is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference, is to regulate and control the planting of trees and vegetation, to encourage the protection of existing trees and vegetation on the streets and public and private grounds within the City , and to establish the standard arboricultural specifications and practices for existing and future trees and vegetation in the City and on City-owned property outside the corporate limits. 
(b)  The City acknowledges that trees provide environmental, aesthetic, social and economic benefits. Specifically, trees increase property values, provide aesthetic value, provide shade and cooling, reduce energy costs, decrease wind velocities, provide erosion control, conserve energy, reduce stormwater runoff, act as filters for airborne pollutants, reduce noise, provide privacy, provide wildlife habitat and food value, sequester carbon and release oxygen. By enacting these regulations, it is the intent of the City to prudently protect and manage the urban forest to secure these benefits. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8002. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Boundary tree. A tree which, when viewed in cross section at diameter at breast height (DBH) has any portion of its trunk located on a property line between private property and public property. A boundary tree is a City tree . 
Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk diameter measurement of nursery stock. Caliper is measured six (6) inches above grade for trees up to four (4) inches in diameter, and measured twelve (12) inches above grade for trees greater than four (4) inches in diameter. 
Certified arborist. A person who has successfully completed the requirements for certification set by the Arborist Certification Board of the International Society of Arboriculture, and maintains good standing in this organization. 
City-owned or City-controlled property. Property owned or leased by the City ; or for which the City has a vegetation easement or planting contract; or upon which the City has an easement for a street, sidewalk, greenway, park, alley, utility or to care out any other public purpose. 
City right-of-way. Land upon which the City has the right to construct a street, sidewalk, bicycle path, use for public utilities, landscape with plants or to carry out any other public purpose. 
City tree. A tree that has its trunk located entirely or in part on City-owned or City-controlled property including any boundary tree. 
Critical Root Zone or CRZ. A protected circular area to remain undisturbed around a tree with a radius equal to 1.25 feet per inch of tree DBH measured at 4.5 feet above grade with the tree trunk at the center of the circle. The main structural and functional portion of the root system. 
Diameter at breast height or DBH. The diameter of the tree trunk measured at 4.5 feet above the soil. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, institution, corporation, municipality and other political subdivision, and governmental agencies. 
Private Tree. A tree that has its trunk located entirely on private property excluding boundary trees. 
Remediation. The requirement by the Urban Forester to cause the restoration or replacement of an impacted City tree including but not limited to corrective pruning, supplemental mulch, water or nutrition and compaction mitigation. 
Root flare. The part of the tree near the base of a tree where the trunk transitions to root that may be visible for established trees and that must be visible at grade for new plantings. 
Shrub. Any woody perennial that attains an overall height of less than 20' at maturity, usually with multiple stems. 
Stump measurement. Average of two measurements taken at right angles on the cross section of stump as measured in inches, which is used to establish DBH in absence of a tree trunk . 
Tree disturbing activity. The movement of soil, compaction of soil, chemical or physical alteration of soil, or a change in the soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography within the critical root zone , including but not limited to chemical application, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation or stabilization of structures, and road or walkway construction; or 
Chemical or physical alteration of a tree in any way that diminishes its health and vigor, including but not limited to removal, cutting, root and branch pruning, topping, bark scraping, application of chemical or biological agents, and placing permanent or temporary fixtures (lights, signs, etc.); or 
The placement within the critical root zone of any permanent or temporary encroachment, including but not limited to application of impervious surfaces; storage of equipment, materials, or earth; parking; or circulation of vehicles or equipment. 
Tree impact permit or TIP. Consent given in writing by the Urban Forester or his designee to a person to undertake any tree-disturbing activity. 
Tree protection plan. A written document that must accompany any tree impact permit application to establish mechanisms for the protection of potentially impacted trees which are intended to remain on the property following the completion of the activity for which the permit request was made. 
Trunk. The main stem of a tree apart from limbs, roots and root flare . 
Urban Forestry. The management and maintenance of trees, including wooded areas, groups of trees, and individual trees, for their contribution to the environmental, sociological, and economic well-being of urban society. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8003. - CREATION OF POSITION OF THE URBAN FORESTER. 
(a)  The position of Urban Forester shall be created within the Department of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources. The Urban Forester, as the agent of the Department, shall direct, regulate and control the planting and management of trees on all City-owned or City-controlled property . 
(b)  For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Urban Forester shall have the authority, control, supervision and direction over all trees growing on City-owned or City-controlled street rights-of-way and the planting, removal, care, maintenance and protection thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8004. - DUTIES OF THE URBAN FORESTER. 
(a)  The Urban Forester shall direct, supervise, regulate and control the planting, maintenance and removal of all the trees growing now or hereafter on City-owned or City-controlled property . 
(b)  The Urban Forester shall have full power and authority to enforce the terms of this chapter. 
(c)  The Urban Forester shall have the authority to review all requests for permits for any activity impacting City trees including planting, removal and pruning on all City-owned or controlled property . The Urban Forester shall also have authority to attach reasonable conditions to these permits and to grant or deny them. 
(d)  The Urban Forester, under the supervision and direction of the Director of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources, shall prepare the City Tree Manual governing the planting and maintenance of City trees on City-owned or City-controlled property which should include: 
(1)  Planting and managing trees for their functional use as well as for the aesthetic qualities; 
(2)  Recycling trees and fiber; 
(3)  Suggested tree list for the City , with priorities, the purpose of which would be to guide the voluntary efforts of citizens in selecting trees for planting on private property or for donation to the City , such list to distinguish generally among the conditions or places of use; 
(4)  A tree education program for the public, including advisory guidelines, planting and maintenance details, costs and benefits of trees in the City ; 
(5)  A tree and landscape inventory and analysis; 
(6)  Standards and procedures for tree planting, pruning, removal, and protection, including specific procedure and criteria for utility companies and new development. 
(7)  Emergency response to provide clear and safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic including inclement weather and emergency events; and 
(8)  Procedures for the implementation of the Tree Impact Permit program authorized by §9-8005 of this Code, including any applicable fees. 
The City Tree Manual, and any changes to the same, must be approved by the Director of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources and the Parks, Recreation and Greenway Advisory Board before submission to the Raleigh City Council for its approval. 
(e)  The Urban Forester shall review and provide advice regarding all private and City -initiated development and re-development projects to plan for and manage the City's urban forest. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8005. - ACTIVITIES IMPACTING CITY TREES; TREE IMPACT PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  Any person desiring to undertake any City tree disturbing activity or any land disturbing activity within fifteen (15) feet of a City tree and that is on City property shall first obtain a written permit pursuant to procedures and standards set forth in the City Tree Manual, including the payment of any such fees required therein. 
(b)  Any work performed under such permit must be done in strict accordance with the conditions of the Tree Impact Permit , the provisions of this chapter and the City Tree Manual. Violation of or deviation from any element of a Tree Impact Permit or failure to obtain a Tree Impact Permit where required by this chapter shall be considered sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of the entire permit as well as grounds for immediate issuance of a Stop Work Order. Resumption of work shall be at the discretion of the Urban Forester or designee. 
(c)  Before a permit to plant trees will be issued, the applicant shall provide documentation of the approval of the planting plan from any other regulatory agency with approval authority over such plans. 
(d)  If a Tree Impact Permit is denied, the Urban Forester shall provide a written denial to the applicant including the reasons for such denial. A person who is denied a Tree Impact Permit may appeal such denial pursuant to §9-8013 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8006. - TREES TO BE MAINTAINED; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs standing in or upon any lot or land adjacent to any City-owned or City-controlled property and having branches, limbs, trunks , or other parts projecting into the public street or place shall be kept trimmed by the owner of the property on which such trees and shrubs originate so as not to interfere with the free and safe passage along the public way by pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(b)  If the owner of the property does not keep this growth or hazard from projecting into or on public ground, then the Urban Forester shall have the authority to order its removal. The order shall be acted upon within fifteen (15) business days from the time of the receipt of the notice. If, after fifteen (15) days, the owner has not responded or acted to remove the projecting growth or hazard from said trees, then the Urban Forester or any member of his/her staff shall have the authority to enter upon the owner's property to perform the work. The cost of such action shall be charged against the property owner pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Chapter 6 of Part 12 of this Code. 
(c)  The City , its agents and contractors are required to adhere to all regulations of this section in the same manner as private property owners. They may be challenged in the same manner by the Urban Forester or designee on the personal complaint of either, or by any citizen of Raleigh. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8007. - TREATMENT AND REMOVAL OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(a)  When necessary for the preservation of the public health or safety, the Urban Forester, under the power herein given, may cause or order the removal of any tree or part hereof on private ground which is in an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to the City's utility system or other public improvements, or which is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest which may spread to public or other private property. 
(b)  When not immediately necessary, but when still amounting to a public nuisance, unsafe trees as defined above may be removed, pruned or otherwise treated, and the cost of such action shall be charged against the subject property pursuant to the procedures set forth in Part 12, Chapter 6, of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8008. - UTILITY LINE CLEARANCE STANDARDS. 
(a)  No person shall engage in utility line clearance, new utility construction or installation on City-owned or City-controlled property without first obtaining a Tree Impact Permit pursuant to §9-8005 above. 
(b)  Utility line clearance practices shall conform to the standards in the most current edition of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 (Part 1) - Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices. Pruning for overhead utilities shall also adhere to standards outlined in the City Tree Manual. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8009. - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Whenever the Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources or his designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this chapter, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this chapter, the Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources or his designee may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation, any administrative fee assessed and if applicable, an assessment of any costs incurred by the City to remedy the violation and if applicable, a fee in lieu of replacement calculated in accordance with §9-8012 below. If requested by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources or his designee, a remediation plan shall be submitted to the Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources or his designee within fifteen (15) days. Submission of a remediation plan does not relieve the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. In the event of an emergency that requires the City to take immediate action to correct the violation, the City is not required to provide an opportunity for the violator to correct the violations and may assess penalties and costs pursuant to this section without prior notice. 
(b)  Any person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any regulation, standard, rule or order adopted in furtherance of this chapter, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first time violation. 
(2)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any repeat violation within the previous 12-months. 
The notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable care the basis of the civil penalty, any administrative fee assessed and the costs to the City of rectifying the noncompliance that are assessed. 
(c)  Any person violating any section of this chapter must pay to the City all expenses incurred by the City caused in whole or in part by such violation including the cost of labor, equipment, and materials based on current FEMA rates. 
(d)  Any person violating any section of this chapter and who receives a notice of violation pursuant to this section shall be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to any other charge authorized by this chapter. 
(e)  From and after the expiration of the time period specified in the notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (a) above of this section for correcting a violation of this chapter, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
(f)  Any appeal from a notice of violation, civil penalty assessment or permit denial shall be made in writing to the Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of violation or civil penalty assessment issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section or permit issued or denied pursuant to §9-8005 of this chapter. Any appeal of a permit decision shall include justification for the appeal and an independent report from a certified arborist to support the appeal if applicable. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources shall use all reasonable efforts to notify the appellant in writing of his or her decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(g)  All notices required by this subsection may be served by certified mail or hand-delivery to the violator; certified mail or hand-delivery to the owner of the property in violation; or posting the notice at the property in violation. When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by First Class U.S. Mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the notice sent by First Class U.S. Mail is not returned by the U.S. Post office seven (7) days after mailing. 
(h)  If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached after thirty (30) days after demand for payment is first made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the general court of justice of Wake County for recovery of fees, costs and/or penalties. 
(i)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this chapter, or who fails to obtain a permit or written permission as required by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment to the maximum number of days prescribed by law. 
(j)  Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, any permit, or any regulation, standard, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance of this chapter, the City may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this subsection shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. 
(k)  The penalties and enforcement provisions established by this chapter may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the penalties established by other sections of this Code and applicable ordinances. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources or his designee may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
Sec. 9-8010. - TREE REPLACEMENT; FEE IN LIEU OF TREE REPLACEMENT. 
(a)  Any person who destroys a City tree without a written permit shall replace such City tree at no cost to the City and accordance with the standards of this chapter and the City Tree Manual. The responsible party shall maintain the tree for two years following the installation date of the tree. If the tree fails to survive at any point during the two year period following the installation date of the tree, the responsible party shall replace the tree at no cost to the City and in accordance with the standards of this chapter and the City Tree Manual. 
(b)  A City tree requiring replacement shall be replaced on a one to one DBH basis or caliper basis, as appropriate. 
(c)  If any person is unable to replace a tree that such person destroyed, the person who destroyed the City tree shall pay a fee in lieu of replacement at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per inch of DBH . In the event the site is only able to accommodate a tree smaller than the City tree that was destroyed, the responsible party shall pay a fee in lieu equal to the DBH or caliper of the destroyed City tree measured in inches, minus the total DBH or caliper of the replaced tree(s) measured in inches multiplied by hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  A fee in lieu shall only be granted when the site does not accommodate required tree replacement and shall be granted at the discretion of the Urban Forester. 
( Ord. No. 2015-401, §1, 3-3-15, eff. 3-8-15 )  
CHAPTER 10. - ARTS COMMISSION[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1977-578, §§1—5, adopted July 5, 1977, has been included herein at the direction of the City as Part 9, Ch. 10. Assignment of section numbers was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9-10001. - COMMISSION CREATED. 
There is hereby established, pursuant to Raleigh City Charter §22 [§2.14] a Raleigh Arts Commission, as the official municipal advisory body on the arts broadly defined, which will promote, coordinate and strengthen public programs to further the cultural development of the City . 
(Ord. No. 1977-578, §1, 7-5-77)  
Sec. 9-10002. - MEMBERSHIP. 
The commission created herein shall consist of twelve (12) persons to be appointed by the City Council. Members shall reside in the City of Raleigh. No organization which is a potential recipient of City arts funding shall have on the commission more than one person who serves on its board or staff. 
Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years or until his successor is appointed and qualified, except that half of the original appointees to the Raleigh Arts Commission shall serve for a term of one year following the establishment of the commission. 
No member who has served three (3) consecutive three- year terms may be reappointed until he has not served for one year. A vacancy in mid-term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment to fill the unexpired term. All members of the commission shall serve without salary. 
(1977-578, §2, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 2009-597, §1, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 9-10003. - ORGANIZATION. 
(a)  The commission shall organize and adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purposes, and elect from its members a chairperson and such other officers as it shall deem necessary. 
(b)  All regular or special meetings of the commission shall be open to the public as governed by North Carolina General Statute §143-318.1, Meetings of Governmental Bodies. Any person shall be entitled and encouraged to appear and be heard on any matter pertaining to the arts before the commission. 
(c)  The commission shall have a director and suitable staff appointed by the City Manager and maintain an office properly equipped to discharge its functions. 
(Ord. No. 1977-578, §3, 7-5-77)  
Sec. 9-10004. - PURPOSES. 
The purpose of the commission shall be as follows: 
(a)  To advise the City Council on ways in which City government might best serve the public with regard to matters involving the arts. 
(b)  To encourage and aid the appreciation and awareness of, and participation in, the arts among all citizens of Raleigh. 
(c)  To encourage cooperation and coordination among individuals, organizations and institutions concerned with the arts in Raleigh. 
(d)  To promote and expand the cultural resources of Raleigh, thereby facilitating employment for artists and the development of self-sustaining arts programs. 
(e)  To formulate in cooperation with other City agencies a longrange plan for the development of a thriving cultural climate in Raleigh. 
(Ord. No. 1977-578, §4, 7-5-77)  
Sec. 9-10005. - ACTIVITIES. 
The activities of the commission shall include the following : 
(a)  To initiate, sponsor, conduct or support, alone or in cooperation with other public or private agencies , public programs in the arts. 
(b)  To serve as a clearinghouse for information about Raleigh artists, art programs, facilities, organizations and institutions and to actively encourage public awareness, utilization and support of such resources. 
(c)  To advise the City as to the availability and adequacy of facilities and space for the presentation of cultural activities. 
(d)  To review and advise on the aesthetic aspects of all works of art or designs or public monuments accepted or commissioned by the City . 
(e)  To prepare and submit budgetary recommendations to the City Council and Manager for annual expenditures necessary to the continuation and development of public programs furthering the arts. 
(f)  To review funding requests and recommend to the City Council the allocation of public monies to cultural organizations. 
(g)  To seek out and encourage contributions and grants to the arts from private and public sources and to receive and allocate such monies appropriated and/or granted and donated for such purposes. 
(h)  To initiate proposals for Federal and state assistance to the arts, and to review arts-related proposals and programs originating with other City agencies. 
(i)  To keep abreast of what other communities are doing to further the arts and to adapt their accomplishments to the needs of Raleigh. 
(j)  To prepare an annual report on the activities of the commission and the State of the Arts in Raleigh. 
(1977-578, §5, 7-5-77)  
ARTICLE B. - PUBLIC ART 
 
Sec. 9-10006. - PUBLIC ART AND DESIGN BOARD. 
The Chair of the Arts Commission shall, within thirty days of the enactment of this ordinance, appoint a Public Art and Design Board. The membership of the Board shall be seven (7) members. The members of the Board may be residents or nonresidents of the City and shall be appointed by the Arts Commission Chair. Subsequent members shall be appointed by the Chair of the Arts Commission and serve according to the time and term limits of Part One, Chapter 4 of the Raleigh City Code. The Public Art and Design Board shall develop a public art policy establishing guidelines for the Public Art Program and will forward the same to the City Council for approval. The City Manager shall review all eligible projects approved as a part of the annual Capital Improvement Program (CIP) and refer them to the Public Art and Design Board. The Public Art and Design Board may request the City Manager to review his recommendation if it feels that an eligible project was not forwarded for review. The Public Art and Design Board shall collect all available information about the project including budget, site, schedule and constituent interests. The Public Art and Design Board shall then determine the desirability of a call for artists and the nature and geographical extent of that call. Once the Public Art and Design Board has determined a project is appropriate for public art it shall appoint an Artist Selection Panel (ASP) ranging in size from three (3) to seven (7) members to serve in selecting art for the project. Before the appointment of the first ASP the Arts Commission shall establish written criteria to use in selecting art for public placement. At least one member of the ASP must be a member of the Public Art and Design Board. The other members may be an artist, an arts professional, a design professional, and a representative of the department or agency in whose building or on whose property the proposed work will be located. The members are not required to be members of the Arts Commission. The department or agency representative will be named by the City Manager. The ASP shall interview and select an artist for the project and forward that recommendation to the Public Art and Design Board which will approve or disapprove the recommendation. If the recommendation is approved it will be forwarded to the City Council as information. The City Manager will then negotiate a contract between the City and the artist. 
(Ord. No. 2009-563, §2, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2009-643, §1, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 2011-952, §1, 10-4-11)  
Sec. 9-10007. - ELIGIBLE PROJECTS. 
CIP projects which are required to be bid or otherwise contracted for pursuant to the provisions of N.C.G.S. 143-129 and provide significant general public access such as public safety centers, senior centers, parks and recreation buildings and community centers and streetscape projects as examples shall be eligible for funding. Streetscape projects shall include, but not be limited to, all roadway improvements for all Gateway arteries and thoroughfares. Streetscape projects shall not include general roadway landscape improvements, small intersection improvement projects, or traffic calming projects. The amount of funding for a project shall be one (1) per cent of the estimated construction costs of the bid or other price obtained under the above referenced statute. Land acquisition, professional services (architectural, engineering, surveying, etc.), furnishings and equipment and all other soft costs are not to be included in the amount subject to the one (1) per cent allocation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-563, §2, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2011-874, §1, 5-3-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2011-952, §2, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 2016-606, §1, 6-20-16, eff. 7-1-16 )  
Sec. 9-10008. - FUND MANAGEMENT. 
It is recognized that all projects otherwise eligible according to the provisions of §9-10007 are not necessarily suitable for the installation of public art. If it is determined that a project is not suitable for public art the one (1) per cent of its cost will be placed into an account for the maintenance and acquisition of public art. Money held in this account may only be appropriated upon recommendation from the Public Art and Design Board. Money from this fund may be used to maintain art, acquire art for public projects that do not qualify under §9-10007 or to supplement the one (1) per cent amount for an eligible project. The fund may be used for artist design services, acquisition of art, maquettes, shipping or other expenses, including administration of the program, required to obtain and place the art. It is permissible to spend more than one (1) per cent of the project cost on art for the project so long as the remainder of the cost is privately funded or paid for by an additional appropriation upon recommendation by the Public Art and Design Board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-563, §2, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2011-952, §3, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 2016-606, §2, 6-20-16, eff. 7-1-16 )  
Sec. 9-10009. - PROJECT COORDINATION. 
It is understood that coordination between the Public Art Program and City construction management is vital to achieve timely completion of CIP projects. In order to achieve this cooperation the chair of the ASP for a particular project shall make every effort to expedite the public art side of a project and the City construction management staff and arts staff shall cooperate fully with the project ASP. The City shall include in any professional service RFP or RFQ language that indicates one or more artists may be included on the design team and will be selected by an independent process. The project architect shall be informed during negotiations for the architect's professional services of the requirement for artist involvement in the process which may include the artist on the project design team. Any unresolved conflict shall be decided directly by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-563, §2, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09)  
Sec. 9-10010. - FORM AND MEDIUM. 
Any art acquired pursuant to this policy shall be designed and created by visual artists. In addition to the traditional forms of art such as sculpture, painting, fresco, glass, mosaic and others the public art requirement may also be met by incorporating artistic elements into the overall architectural design if created by a visual artist. Any art installed pursuant to this program shall become and remain the property of the City of Raleigh. 
(Ord. No. 2009-563, §2, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09)  
Sec. 9-10011. - ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION. 
Within sixty (60) days after the passage of this ordinance the City Manager shall cause to be created an administrative process to guide the various City contracting departments as to how each is to interact in the per cent for public art process. 
(Ord. No. 2009-563, §2, 3-17-09, eff. 7-1-09)  
PART 10 - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (UDO) 
Editor's note: The previous zoning code, known as Part 10 of the City Code, was repealed by Ordinance 2013-151-TC-357. This ordinance established the Part 10A Unified Development Ordinance with an effective date of September 1, 2013. The City of Raleigh Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) can be found here: https://www.municode.com/library/nc/raleigh/codes/unified_development_ordinance?nodeId=UNIFIED_DEVELOPMENT_ORDINANCE .  
PART 11 - TRANSPORTATION  
CHAPTER 1. - THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
 
Sec. 11-1001. - DIRECTOR, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
The Department of Transportation shall consist of a director of transportation, who shall be its administrative head, and such other officers and employees as deemed necessary by the Manager and Council and whose salaries shall be fixed by the Council .  
Sec. 11-1002. - DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION. 
The Department of Transportation shall consist of such divisions and organizations as deemed necessary by the director to carry out the functions and duties of the department herein prescribed.  
Sec. 11-1003. - FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 
The functions and duties of the department shall be developing and carrying out a broad program of transportation engineering and management, traffic engineering, including transit and transportation planning, the purpose of which is to provide for the safe, economical and efficient movement of persons and goods throughout the City . The functions shall include but not be limited to the following : 
(a)  Traffic engineering shall include the installation, operation, maintenance and repair of all official traffic-control devices authorized by law. 
(b)  The transit function shall include the complete planning and administration of the transit program of the City as further described in Chapter 4 hereof. 
(c)  The transportation planning function shall include the conduct of studies to determine proper application of official traffic-control devices for the purpose of improving the flow of traffic and increasing the safety of motorists and pedestrians. This function shall also include the conduct of a continuing transportation planning process to provide coordinated plans for all modes of transportation consistent with the requirements of the State and Federal departments of transportation. 
(d)  Maintaining City and state highway system streets within the City limits in a safe and usable condition in all weather conditions; maintaining and improving all City storm drainage systems; installing new storm drainage systems, and other new construction as directed by the Council ; and cleaning all City streets and removing trash and leaves from City streets. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §11, 11-4-98) 
Cross reference: Department of Public Works, street control and maintenance responsibilities, Part 7, Ch. 2.  
CHAPTER 2. - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11-2001. - DEFINITIONS. 
Whenever in this chapter the words hereinafter defined in this section are used they shall , unless the context requires otherwise, be deemed to have the following meanings: 
Authorized emergency vehicle. An authorized emergency vehicle is any vehicle owned by a Federal, state, County , or municipal law enforcement agency and operated by a member thereof, any vehicle owned and operated by a Fire Department or rescue squad, or any ambulance. 
Block. A block is the part of a street lying between the nearest intersecting streets on either side. 
Car sharing. Car sharing is a membership based service available to all qualified drivers in the community who choose to become members. Members must be offered access to a dispersed network of shared vehicles twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week at unattended self service locations. Car usage is provided without restriction at hourly or per mile rates that include fuel, insurance, and maintenance. Any car sharing service using a parking space reserved for car share vehicles must belong to an organization approved by the Raleigh Public Works Director or his designee. 
Crosswalk. A crosswalk is the part of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block, or any part of a roadway indicated for pedestrian crossing by official traffic-control devices. 
Driveway . A way leading from a public street to a place on private property suitable to and regularly used for the passage or standing of motor vehicles when passage to such area of private property is not permanently impeded by any wall, building, or other such structure. A driveway shall consist of a curb cut or other such modification and a regularly accessible suitable area of private property . A curb cut alone, without such area of private property or with access to such area of private property permanently obstructed, shall not constitute a driveway. 
Intersection. An intersection is the area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more highways which join one another at any angle whether or not one (1) such highway crosses the other. 
Lane. A lane is a section of roadway between marked lines or between a marked line and the edge of a roadway, which section is set aside for a single file of vehicular traffic, except a section reserved for parking. 
Median. A median is that portion of public right-of-way lying between two (2) roadways and used for the separation of vehicular traffic. A median may be paved or unpaved and may or may not have a raised curb. 
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle is a vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to run upon the highways, and every vehicle which is pulled by a self propelled vehicle. 
Official time standard . The hours designated in time limitations set by this chapter refer to eastern standard time or eastern daylight saving time as may be in current use within the City by the action of the governing body, the North Carolina General Assembly, or the Congress of the United States. 
Official traffic-control device. An official traffic-control device is a sign, signal, marking, or device, including a parking meter, placed by authority of the governing body of the City for the purpose of regulating vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including parking. 
Parking. Park or parking is the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, on a public highway or street , otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or in obedience to traffic regulations. 
Parking citation. A parking citation is a printed notice issued by authority of the governing body of this City , informing the individual designated that he or she has violated a provision of this chapter. 
Parking meter. A parking meter is a coin-operated mechanical device used in regulating parking. 
Private road or driveway. A private road or driveway is a road or driveway not open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
Roadway. A roadway is the part of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk. A sidewalk is the part of a street improved for pedestrian traffic. 
Stop line. A stop line is a line across a roadway or part of a roadway indicating the point behind which vehicles are required to stop in compliance with an official traffic-control device. 
Street or highway. A street or highway is the entire width between property or right-of-way lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic. 
Traffic schedule. A traffic schedule is a separate schedule which is incorporated into by reference and made a part of this chapter, and which designates certain streets , parts of streets , street areas, or times to which a provision of this chapter applies. 
Vehicle. A vehicle is a device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided, that for the purposes of this chapter bicycles shall be deemed vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2012-122, §1, 11-20-12, eff. 11-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-239, §2, 11-5-13)  
Sec. 11-2002. - DEFINITIONS SUPPLEMENTAL TO GENERAL STATUTES. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined in §11-2001 above shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by Chapter 20 of the General Statutes of North Carolina. 
(Code 1950, §29.1) 
State law reference: Definitions in state motor vehicle act, G.S. 20-4-01.  
Sec. 11-2003. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD. 
The provisions of G.S. 20-138 et seq. , which apply to the operation of vehicles and rules of the road shall be in full force and effect upon the streets and highways within the City and shall be enforced wherever applicable. 
State law references: Authority of cities to regulate traffic, G.S. 160A-300; restrictions on local authorities, G.S. 20-169; operation of motor vehicles and rules of the road, G.S. 20-138 et seq. ; motor vehicles generally, G.S. 20-1 et seq.  
Sec. 11-2004. - SCHEDULE OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS; INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE. 
(a)  Whenever the provisions of this chapter establish specific traffic and parking regulations and restrictions which are effective only upon certain streets , parts of streets or street areas which are not generally identifiable, or at certain times or for periods of time which are not generally applicable, such traffic and parking regulations, and the locations and/or times where and when the same are effective shall be set out upon official traffic schedules , as amended from time to time by the City Council , and retained permanently in the office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  All official traffic schedules adopted under the authority of this chapter are hereby incorporated by reference and shall be as effective as if set out in full herein. Such traffic schedules shall be deemed to be "technical ordinances" under the provisions of G.S. 160A-76(b).  
Sec. 11-2005. - PUBLIC EMPLOYEES. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this State , its counties or any political subdivision of this State , except persons and vehicles actually engaged in street surface work, including street cleaning, and in construction, repairs or maintenance, but not while traveling to or from such work. 
State law reference: Provisions as to liability for negligent operation of motor vehicles by City officers, employees or agents, G.S. §160A-185 et seq.  
Sec. 11-2006. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Former §11-2006, which pertained to exemptions from traffic regulations for authorized emergency vehicles and bore no history note, was repealed by Ord. No. 1988-271, §1, adopted Nov. 15, 1988.  
Sec. 11-2007. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1991-747, adopted March 19, 1991, repealed §11-2007 in its entirety. Formerly, §11-2007 pertained to obstruction on land constituting a traffic hazard and derived from the 1959 Code, §21-11.  
Sec. 11-2008. - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND ANIMALS. 
Every person riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle , or propelling a push cart upon a street , is subject to the provisions of the chapter, except those which are clearly inapplicable. 
Cross reference: Bicycles, §11-3001 et seq.  
Sec. 11-2009. - TERRITORIAL APPLICATION. 
The provisions of this chapter are in force everywhere within the corporate limits of the City , unless otherwise stated.  
Sec. 11-2010. - TIME OF APPLICATION. 
The provisions of this chapter are in force at all hours of the day or night, unless otherwise stated.  
Secs. 11-2011 — 11-2020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 11-2021. - IN GENERAL. 
It is the duty of the law enforcement officers of the City to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and all of the State motor vehicle laws. 
Cross reference: Motor vehicle registration and annual fees, §2-2071 et seq.  
Sec. 11-2022. - ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION. 
It is the duty of the law enforcement officers of the City to investigate traffic accidents and to obtain prosecution of those persons apparently guilty of violations of this chapter or state motor vehicle laws causing or contributing to those accidents. The owner or operator of any ambulance must arrange for the Wake County Emergency Communications Center to be notified before leaving to answer a call to the scene of a traffic accident.  
Sec. 11-2023. - TRAFFIC REGULATION AND PEDESTRIAN SAFETY. 
In the event that it becomes immediately necessary to protect the safety of motorists and pedestrians, the law enforcement officers of the City may direct traffic as required and may place temporary official traffic-control devices without regard to the other provisions of this chapter. No person may refuse to comply with a lawful order of a law enforcement officer when the order is given under the authority of this section.  
Sec. 11-2024. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1986-774, §1, adopted April 15, 1986, repealed §11-2024, concerning violation, penalties and summons issuance, as derived from §21-12 of the 1959 Code.  
Sec. 11-2025. - CIVIL PENALTIES. 
(a)  Violations of Articles J and K of this chapter shall subject the offender to the civil penalties hereinafter enumerated. Pursuant to G.S. 160A-175, all criminal penalties for these violations as set out in G.S. 14-4 are hereby removed. Civil penalties may be recovered by the City in a civil action in the nature of debt or may be collected in such other amounts as prescribed herein within the prescribed time following the issuance of notice or citation for the violation. 
(b)  Notice to be affixed. 
Whenever a member of the Police Department of the City or other person charged by ordinance or Charter with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter regulating the parking of vehicles shall find that any of those provisions are being, or have been, violated by the owner or operator of any vehicle , such officer or person shall notify the owner or operator of the vehicle of the violation by conspicuously attaching to the vehicle a parking violation notice or citation in such form as the Finance Director may direct. 
(c)  Same; contents. 
Such parking violation notice or citation shall , among other things, (i) state upon its face the amount of the penalty for the specific violation if the penalty is paid within twenty-one (21) days from and after the violation; (ii) notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within twenty-one (21) days from the violation shall subject the offender to an additional late penalty in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00); (iii) notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within one hundred eighty (180) days from the violation shall subject the offender to a late penalty in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00), in addition to the one imposed for failure to pay within twenty-one (21) days of the violation (iv) notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus an additional penalty in the amount of ninety-five dollars ($95.00), together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court; (v) further provide that the offender may answer the City parking citation by mailing the citation and the stated penalty to Citation Processing Center, P.O. Box 6649, Rockville, MD 20849-6649, or may pay the amount in person at 222 West Hargett Street, Revenue Service Lobby and that upon payment, the case or claim and right of action by the City will be deemed compromised and settled; (vi) that the penalty must be either paid or the failure to pay must be cleared within twenty-one (21) days of the issuance of the citation. The notice shall further state that if the parking violation citation is not cleared within twenty-one (21) days, court action by the filing of a civil complaint for collection of the penalty may be taken. As used upon the parking violation citation , the word "cleared" shall mean either (i) payment, (ii) arrangement for payment to be made, or (iii) a prima facie showing that the parking citation was received as a result of mistake, inadvertence or excusable neglect. 
(d)  Settlement of claim. 
The supervisor of the violations division is authorized to accept payments in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the City may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims, or right of action arising out of contended violations. 
(e)  Penalties. 
The following penalties shall be imposed for violations in those cases in which payment is made within the prescribed forty-eight-hour period: 
(1)  Parking , stopping or standing in certain places, designated in §11-2171, to-wit: 
a.  Obstructing traffic (11-2171(a)). 
b.  On a sidewalk (11-2171(b)(1)). 
c.  Within an intersection (11-2171(b)(2)). 
d.  Double stopping, standing or parking (11-2171(b)(9)). 
e.  Stopping, standing or parking in front of a fire hydrant or within a fire hydrant zone (11-2171(b)(10)). 
f.  Blocking, or parking within five (5) feet on either side of, a private road or driveway (11-2171(b)(11)). 
g.  Blocking or otherwise obstructing ingress to, egress from, or passage through City -owned, off-street parking areas for the general public, as provided in §11-2171(b)(12) (paragraph 2): $30.00. 
(2)  Parking in a "No parking zone," as provided in §11-2172: $30.00. 
(3)  Parking , standing, or stopping in a "No stopping or standing zone," as provided in §11-2173: $30.00. 
(4)  Unauthorized parking in municipal building parking areas as provided in §11-2175: $30.00. 
(5)  Unauthorized truck parking as provided in §11-2176: $30.00. 
(6)  Unauthorized parking in loading zones as provided in §11-2177: $30.00. 
(7)  Parking , standing or stopping in a "Bus Zone" as provided in §11-2178: $30.00. 
(8)  Improper parking in a valet zone as provided in §11-2186: $30.00. 
(9)  All other parking , standing or stopping violations established under Articles J and K of this chapter: $20.00. 
(f)  Additional penalties. 
(1)  A delinquent penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00), in addition to the one imposed for payment within forty-eight (48) hours, shall apply in those cases in which the penalties prescribed in subsection (e) above have not been paid within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the violation. 
(2)  A delinquent penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), in addition to the one imposed for failure to pay within twenty-one (21) days shall apply in those cases in which the penalties prescribed in subsection (e) above have not been paid within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the violation. 
(3)  A penalty of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), in addition to the one imposed for payment within forty-eight (48) hours and the delinquent penalties, shall apply in those cases in which the penalties set forth above in subsection (e) have not been paid within the prescribed period of time, and in which a civil action shall have been instituted. 
(g)  Penalties, to general fund. 
All penalties paid to the violations division or as may be recovered in a civil action in the nature of debt as herein provided shall be paid into the general fund of the City at such time and under such regulations as may be prescribed by the Finance Director. 
( Code 1959 , §21-12.1; Ord. No. 1986-774, §§2, 3, 4-15-86; Ord. No. 1989-456, §1, 11-7-89; Ord. No. 1990-477, §§1, 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 1991-873, §1, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1992-887, §§1—4, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 1994-436A, §1, 6-28-94; Ord. No. 2003-396, §1, 3-4-03; Ord. No. 2004-666A, §§1—8, 6-29-04; Ord. No. 2007-268, §§1—8, 7-24-07, eff. 10-1-07; Ord. No. 2010-724, §1, 4-20-10, eff. 6-1-10; Ord. No. 2012-3, §§1, 2, 1-17-12; Ord. No. 2012-57, §§1, 2, 6-5-12, eff. 10-1-12)  
Sec. 11-2026. - REMOVAL OF A TRAFFIC TICKET. 
It shall be unlawful to remove a traffic ticket from a vehicle or to permit it to be removed, except for the purpose of answering the charge for which it was issued.  
Sec. 11-2027. - ALTERATION OF A TRAFFIC TICKET. 
It shall be unlawful to alter a traffic ticket, and no person may have in his possession an unlawfully altered ticket.  
Secs. 11-2028 — 11-2029. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1984-294, adopted Feb. 21, 1984, repealed §§11-2028 and 11-2029 concerning removal of junked and abandoned motor vehicles and removal of impounded vehicles . Said §11-2028 derived from Code 1959 , §21-13 and Ord. No. 1977-637, adopted Oct. 18, 1977; §11-2029 bore no history note. See Ch. 7 of Part 12 for removal of abandoned vehicles .  
Secs. 11-2030 — 11-2050. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND SIGNS 
 
Sec. 11-2051. - AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION. 
The director of transportation shall be responsible for placing and maintaining official traffic-control signs, signals and devices , as defined in this chapter, pursuant to the direction of the City Council .  
Sec. 11-2052. - CONFORMANCE TO UNIFORM SIGNS MANUAL. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices of any kind whatsoever shall conform to the specifications approved by the State Department of Transportation in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Street and Highway," latest edition, and all signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City . All traffic-control devices so erected as hereinbefore set out and in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State and this Code shall be deemed to be official traffic-control devices .  
Sec. 11-2053. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES TO BE OBEYED. 
Subject to the exemptions granted under §§11-2005 (public employees) and 11-2006 (emergency vehicles ) of this chapter, the driver of every vehicle must obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device when placed in accordance with this chapter. Provided, however, a law enforcement officer may direct all vehicles , including authorized emergency vehicles , without regard to such devices when necessary for the public safety or the regulation of traffic, and it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey a law enforcement officer giving such directions. 
State law references: As to erection of local traffic-control signs by cities , G.S. 136-31; powers of local authorities generally to regulate traffic, G.S. 20-169.  
Sec. 11-2054. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES TO BE INCLUDED ON TRAFFIC SCHEDULES. 
The location of official traffic-control devices , and the regulations and restrictions imposed thereby, shall be as set out in the official traffic and parking schedules adopted and maintained under the provisions of this chapter. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2055. - UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. 
It shall be unlawful to display any unauthorized traffic-control device which directs or purports to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic.  
Sec. 11-2056. - TAMPERING WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. 
It shall be unlawful to alter, remove, or tamper with an official traffic-control device .  
Sec. 11-2057. - AVOIDANCE OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. 
It shall be unlawful to drive across a sidewalk or through the driveway of a gasoline filling station or other property for the purpose of avoiding an official traffic-control device ; further, when signs have been erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to drive across private property for the exclusive purpose of traveling from one public street to a second public street . 
(Ord. No. 1990-515, §1, 3-20-90)  
Sec. 11-2058. - SIGNALS OR FLAGMEN AT CROSSINGS. 
At all railroad grade crossings within the City where approved automatic electric signals have been installed, the railroad company or companies owning the railroad tracks shall at all times maintain said signals in good working order. If the signals are temporarily out-of-order, then the railroad company or companies shall within a reasonable time after such malfunction or immediately where notice of said malfunction has been communicated to the railroad companies have said crossing protected by a flagman who will give ample warning to persons using the street or highway of the approach of a train until such time the train has covered the crossing; provided, however, during hours of darkness, a flare shall be maintained at the crossing during the entire passage of the train. This practice will continue until the signal system is properly restored to service. 
( Code 1959 , §18-1; Ord. No. 1981-788, §1, 11-3-81)  
Secs. 11-2059 — 11-2070. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE D. - STOPS REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 11-2071. - ELECTRONIC TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS. 
(a)  Where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals installed as provided in this chapter, exhibiting different colored lights successively, the following colors, lights and arrows in lights indicate as follows: 
(1)  Green light. 
Vehicular traffic facing the signals may proceed straight through, or unless a sign prohibits such turn, may turn right or left. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Yellow or amber light, when appearing immediately after, or coincidentally with, a green light. 
Such yellow or amber light shall serve as a warning that a red light and the applicable stop restrictions shall be exhibited immediately following . 
(3)  Red light. 
Any person operating a vehicle facing such light shall bring the same to a stop before entering the nearest crosswalk or boundary of an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a limit line, and shall remain standing until a plain green light or green arrow is shown illuminated alone; provided, however, that a right turn may be made after bringing the vehicle to a complete stop and after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles , unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
(b)  The electronic traffic-control signals described in this section shall be located, and the regulations provided in this section shall be effective, as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 1, "Electronic Traffic Control Signals." 
Cross references: Right turns on red light prohibited, §11-2105, Traffic Schedule No. 1; pedestrian crossings at signalized intersections , §11-2153; schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004. 
State law reference: Vehicle control signs and signals, G.S. 20-158.  
Sec. 11-2072. - STOP INTERSECTIONS. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer , every driver of a vehicle approaching a designated stop intersection which shall be indicated by a stop sign or, in the discretion of the transportation director, a flashing red light, shall stop before entering the crosswalk , on the near side of the intersection , or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line , or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection . 
(b)  The driver having stopped in obedience to a stop sign or flashing red light at an intersection shall proceed cautiously, yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles not so obliged to stop which are approaching the intersection . 
(c)  Stop intersections and the location of signs or flashing red lights at those intersections shall be in accordance with official Traffic Schedule No. 2, Stop Intersections. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004. 
State law reference: Stop intersections, G.S. 20-158(a).  
Sec. 11-2073. - YIELD SIGNS. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign erected at designated locations, shall , and in obedience to the sign, slow down and yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in movement on the main traveled or through highway or street which is approaching so as to arrive at the intersection at approximately the same time as the vehicle entering the main traveled or through street or highway . 
(b)  The driver of the vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection ; or in the event there is no crosswalk , at a clearly marked stop line ; but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway . 
(c)  In accordance with the above, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles , when entering designated or main-traveled or through streets from intersecting streets in the direction or directions shown, shall yield the right-of-way to approaching pedestrians or vehicles . 
(d)  Yield signs shall be located, and the regulations applicable thereto shall be effective, as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 3, Yield Signs. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004. 
State law reference: Erection of yield signs, G.S. 20-158.1.  
Sec. 11-2074. - THROUGH STREETS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to stop at a stop sign or yield at a yield sign, as required by Chapters 20-158 and 20-158.1 of the General Statutes and §11-2072 and §11-2073 above, before entering any of the streets or parts of streets listed in official Traffic Schedule No. 4, Through Street; provided, if any such intersections are controlled by traffic signals, stop signs, yield signs, or other traffic-control devices as provided for in §11-2071, §11-2072 or §11-2073 of this Code, such controls shall take precedence over this section. Traffic stop or yield signs shall be erected at all streets intersecting the through streets designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 4 unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2075. - EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway , or building shall stop that vehicle immediately prior to driving on to a sidewalk or into a sidewalk area across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway . 
( Code 1959 , §21-18)  
Sec. 11-2076. - STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED. 
It shall be unlawful for a driver to enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
( Code 1959 , §21-43)  
Secs. 11-2077 — 11-2090. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE E. - SPEED REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference: Speed limit in park, §9-2012. 
 
Sec. 11-2091. - GENERAL. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour inside the corporate limits. 
State law reference: Speed limits generally, municipal authority, G.S. 20-141.  
Sec. 11-2092. - EXCEPTIONS. 
When proper signs have been erected giving notice of speed limits which are other than the generally applicable thirty-five (35) miles per hour limit, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such speeds upon the streets or portions of streets listed in official Traffic Schedule No. 5, Speed Limits other than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004; speed limit policy for residential streets, Resolution No. (1990)-633.  
Sec. 11-2093. - EXCEPTIONS DURING SPECIFIED TIMES. 
When proper signs have been erected giving notice of the appropriate speed regulations, it shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in excess of the speed limits which are made effective on specified streets or portions of streets during particular hours of the day or night, as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 5, Speed Limits. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Secs. 11-2094 — 11-2100. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE F. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-2101. - TURNING MARKERS. 
When authorized signs, markers, buttons, or other indicators are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indicators. 
State law reference: Turning at intersections, G.S. 20-153.  
Sec. 11-2102. - TURNING AT CHANNELIZED INTERSECTIONS. 
Upon a street at any intersection where the proper respective lane or lanes for right or left turns or straight ahead movement have been designated by signs, arrows or markers on, above or beside the street , drivers of vehicles , in preparation for a right or left turn or straight ahead movement, shall with proper regard for the safety of others, move into the proper allocated lane at least fifty (50) feet before reaching the intersection and shall make no turn to either right or left or proceed straight ahead unless within a lane in which that turn or straight ahead movement is permitted. Lane allocations at intersections shall be as designated on official Traffic Schedule No. 6, Restricted Turns at Channelized Intersections. 
( Code 1959 , §21-28) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2103. - U-TURNS PROHIBITED. 
When signs have been erected giving notice thereof, no driver of a vehicle shall make a U-turn at locations where U-turns are prohibited, as specified in official Traffic Schedule No. 7, U-Turns Prohibited. 
( Code 1959 , §21-15) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2104. - TURNING AT OR BETWEEN INTERSECTIONS. 
After authorized signs have been erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to make a left turn, right turn, or a straight-through movement, respectively, at the locations set out in official Traffic Schedule No. 8, Restricted turns at or between intersections . 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2105. - RIGHT TURNS ON RED TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LIGHTS PROHIBITED. 
After authorized signs have been erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to proceed to turn right while facing a red traffic light at those locations specified in official Traffic Schedule No. 1, Electronic traffic control signals. 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Secs. 11-2106 — 11-2110. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE G. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 11-2111. - ONE-WAY STREETS. 
Upon those streets designated as one-way streets , vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. Designated one-way streets shall be as specified in official Traffic Schedule No. 9, One-way streets . 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004. 
State law reference: One-way traffic, G.S. §20-165.1.  
Secs. 11-2112 — 11-2120. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE H. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Sec. 11-2121. - DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS. 
The driver of a motorized vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary driveway . 
( Code 1959 , §21-19; Ord. No. 1988-103, §1, 1-5-88)  
Sec. 11-2122. - CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway . 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride the running board, fenders or bumpers of any vehicle except on slow moving vehicles in a parade. 
( Code 1959 , §21-20)  
Sec. 11-2123. - USE OF ROADWAY BY NONMOTORIZED OR TOY VEHICLES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any roadway while moving or riding in or by means of roller skates, coaster, sled or any other nonmotorized or toy vehicle or other similar device; except, while crossing a street at a crosswalk , upon streets and portions thereof properly designated as play or sledding streets , or when such vehicle is a bicycle. 
( Code 1959 , §21-21) 
Cross reference: Sledding streets listed, §9-2001.  
Sec. 11-2124. - DRIVING ON BARRICADED STREET. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive along or across any street upon or across which any barrier shall have been erected. 
( Code 1959 , §21-32.1)  
Sec. 11-2125. - DRIVING UNDER HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon public streets on which there is an accumulation of ice or snow unless the vehicle is equipped adequately to insure the continued, controlled mobility of the vehicle under the existing conditions; provided, the failure of an operator to maintain the continued, controlled mobility of his vehicle under the above conditions or the abandonment of a motor vehicle under §11-2028 under the above conditions, shall be deemed to be a failure to properly equip such vehicle as required by this section. It shall be unlawful to allow or cause a motor vehicle to stand or remain standing on the main traveled way of a street or highway in the City in violation of §11-2171 or otherwise. 
( Code 1959 , §21-33.1)  
Sec. 11-2126. - MOTOR OR OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM DRIVING OVER A MEDIAN STRIP OR FRESHLY PAINTED TRAFFIC DIRECTION SIGNS PAINTED ON THE CITY STREETS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor or other vehicles over a median strip or any freshly painted line, arrow, crosswalk lines, or other traffic direction sign painted on the streets of the City when signs, flags, marking cones, or other devices are placed adjacent thereto giving notice of the existence thereof. 
( Code 1959 , §21-33.1)  
Sec. 11-2127. - LIMITATION ON BACKING. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an intersection or over a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety. 
( Code 1959 , §21-24)  
Sec. 11-2128. - OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM. 
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons over three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or side of the vehicle , or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle . 
( Code 1959 , §21-25) 
State law reference: Overloaded or overcrowded vehicles, G.S. 20-140.2.  
Sec. 11-2129. - CROSSING FIRE HOSE. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any street or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command. 
( Code 1959 , §21-26)  
Sec. 11-2130. - PROCESSIONS—DRIVING THROUGH. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §21-26)  
Sec. 11-2131. - SAME—DRIVING IN FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS. 
(a)  A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by burning lights on the cars in the procession while proceeding to the cemetery. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as closely as practical and safe. 
( Code 1959 , §21-30)  
Sec. 11-2132. - TRUCK ROUTES. 
(a)  Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Trucks. 
The word truck or trucks shall mean any motor vehicle used or designed to be used for the transportation of cargo or passengers, including but not limited to the following : Trucks; intercity buses; truck-drawn trailers when the truck is equipped with dual rear wheels. The following motor vehicles are excluded from this meaning: Passenger automobiles; pickup trucks; vehicles not having dual rear wheels; motorcycles; motor scooters; school buses; charter buses; and other nonscheduled buses. 
(2)  Through truck. 
The term through truck shall mean any truck having three (3) or more axles or any two-axle truck with dual rear wheels towing a trailer which passes through the City without stopping for the purpose of either collecting or discharging cargo or for the purpose of either collecting or discharging passengers. 
(3)  Cargo. 
The word cargo shall mean any property transported by truck. 
(4)  Operator. 
The word operator shall mean the person physically operating a truck or a person therein and directing its operation. 
(5)  Intersection of routes. 
The term intersection of routes shall mean the point reached on a highway within the City at which a direction sign indicates that a turn should be made from one route to another. 
(6)  Direction sign. 
The term direction sign shall mean the customary highway marker designating the highway route number or that a certain direction should be followed to reach a given destination. 
(7)  Local truck. 
The term local truck shall mean any truck having three (3) or more axles or any two-axle truck with dual rear wheels towing a trailer and which enters, leaves or operates within the City for the purpose of either collecting or discharging cargo, or for the purpose of either collecting or discharging passengers within the City . 
(8)  Through truck route. 
The term through truck route shall mean those routes or streets established in subsection (b) and designated by signs as numbered Interstate, U.S., or N.C. routes and Wade Avenue Extension from I-40 to the Raleigh Beltline (I-440). Provided that all U.S. and N.C. numbered routes inside the Raleigh Beltline (I-440) shall remain "local truck routes." The above provision allows through trucks to use Wade Avenue Extension between I-40 and the Beltline. This expressway type facility is suitable for the through truck network. The provision also provides that through trucks must only use I-440 to pass Raleigh. 
(9)  Local truck route. 
The term local truck route shall mean those routes or streets established in subsection (d) and designated by signs as local truck routes. 
(10)  Passenger. 
The word passenger shall mean any person transported by truck. 
(11)  Visiting truck. 
The term visiting truck shall mean any truck having three (3) or more axles or any two-axle truck with dual rear wheels towing a trailer which passes through the City for the purpose of collecting or discharging cargo at a single trip origin or destination. 
(b)  Through truck routes. 
Through truck routes as defined herein are established for the passage of through trucks as defined herein, over the streets and highways within the City , according to the map entitled "Official Traffic Schedule No. 10, Through Truck Routes." 
(c)  Through trucks to use through truck routes. 
(1)  The operator of a through truck entering the City on any through trucking route shall proceed exclusively on a through truck route until he leaves the City . 
(2)  The operator of a through truck entering the City by way of a route not a through truck route or local truck route shall , upon entering the City , proceed to the nearest through truck or local truck route , whichever is nearer. Upon reaching a local truck route , the operator of a through truck shall proceed along such local truck route or routes to the nearest through truck route . Upon reaching the through truck route , the operator of a through truck shall proceed exclusively upon a through truck route until he leaves the City . 
(d)  Local truck routes. 
(1)  Local trucks may travel over any street or highway within the area bounded by the following streets : Wade Avenue from West Street to Downtown Boulevard; Downtown Boulevard from Wade Avenue to Peace Street; Peace Street from Downtown Boulevard to Person Street; Person Street from Peace Street to Edenton Street; Edenton Street from Person Street to East Street; East Street from Edenton Street to South Street; South Street from East Street to Boylan Avenue; Boylan Avenue from South Street to Peace Street; Peace Street from Boylan Avenue to West Street; West Street from Peace Street to Wade Avenue. 
(2)  Designated streets are hereby established as local truck routes for the passage of local trucks over the streets and highways within the City , according to official Traffic Schedule No. 11, "Local Truck Routes." 
(e)  Local trucks to use special truck routes. 
(1)  The operator of a local truck shall , upon leaving the origin of his trip, proceed by the shortest route to the nearest through truck route or local truck route . 
(2)  The operator of a local truck proceeding on a local truck route or a through route shall proceed exclusively on such truck route or routes until he reaches a point on that route which allows him to proceed by the shortest route to his destination. 
(3)  The operator of a local truck entering the City on a route other than a through truck route or local truck route shall , upon entering the City , proceed by the shortest route to the nearest local truck route or through truck route and shall proceed on such route until the point on such route nearest his destination is reached. 
(4)  When the shortest route between the origin and the destination of a local truck is less than the distance between the origin and the nearest truck route, the operator of such local truck shall not be required to proceed to a through truck route or a local truck route before proceeding to his destination. 
(5)  When the shortest route between the origin and destination of a local truck is less than the shortest route between the destination and the nearest local truck route or through truck route , the operator of a local truck shall not be required to proceed to the nearest local truck route or through truck route before proceeding to his destination. 
(6)  When the shortest route between the point of entry into the City and the destination of a local truck is less than the shortest route from the point of entry into the City to the nearest through truck route , or local truck route , the operator of a local truck , upon entering the City , shall not be required to proceed to the nearest through truck route or local truck route before proceeding to his destination. 
(f)  Visiting trucks to use through truck routes: 
(1)  The operator of a visiting truck entering and passing through the City shall proceed exclusively on a through truck route or routes until he reaches a point on such route which allows him to proceed by the shortest route to his destination. 
(2)  The operator of a visiting truck leaving the City shall proceed by the shortest route to a through truck route and shall proceed exclusively on such through truck route or routes until he leaves the City . 
(g)  Provisions mandatory; noncompliance declared unlawful. 
The provisions of this section and every subsection hereof are mandatory and not merely directory, and failure to comply with the provisions of this section or any subsection hereof is hereby declared to be unlawful and punishable as provided by law. 
( Code 1959 , §21-22; Ord. No. 1980-526, §1, 11-18-80; Ord. No. 1981-717, §1, 8-4-81; Ord. No. 1984-261, §1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 1986-734, §§1—3, 2-18-86; Ord. No. 1988-182, §§1, 2, 6-7-88; Ord. No. 1991-825, §1, 7-16-91) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2133. - REGULATION OF VEHICLES AND LOADS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be moved or driven on any street within the corporate limits any vehicle or vehicles of a size exceeding the limitations stated in this section, provided that the prohibition and limitations of this section shall only apply on the days of the week of Monday through Friday inclusive and shall only apply during the periods between 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  The total outside width of any vehicle or the load thereon shall not exceed ten and one-half (10½) feet. 
(c)  No vehicle , unladen or with load, shall exceed a height of thirteen (13) feet, six (6) inches. 
(d)  A vehicle having two (2) axles shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in length of extreme overall dimensions inclusive of front and rear bumpers. A vehicle having three (3) axles shall not exceed forty (40) feet in length of overall dimensions inclusive of front and rear bumpers. A truck-tractor and semitrailer shall be regarded as two (2) vehicles for the purpose of determining lawful length. 
(e)  No combination of vehicles coupled together shall exceed a total length of fifty-five (55) feet inclusive of front and rear bumpers. 
( Code 1959 , §21-53)  
Sec. 11-2134. - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Traffic-control photographic system. 
An electronic system consisting of photographic, video or electronic camera and vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with and official traffic control and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control. 
(b)  In operation. 
In good working order. 
(c)  System location. 
The approach to an intersection toward which a traffic control photographic system is directed and in operation. 
(d)  Vehicle owner. 
The person identified by the N.C. Department of Motor Vehicles as the registered owner of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2001-108, §1, 11-7-01)  
Sec. 11-2135. - GENERAL. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a system location when the traffic signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red light, or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulations specified in G.S. 20-158. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for a violation under this section, except when the owner can provide evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of another person at the time of the violation as described in (c). 
(c)  Notwithstanding (b) above, the owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if no more than thirty (30) days after notification of the violation he furnishes any of the following to the City: 
(1)  An affidavit stating the name and address of the person or entity who had the care, custody or control of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(2)  An affidavit by the owner stating that at the time of the violation the vehicle involved was stolen. The affidavit must include supporting evidence, such as insurance or police report information. 
(3)  An affidavit that the person who received the citation is not the owner of the vehicle and was not the driver of it, or a notarized statement that the person who received the citation was not driving any vehicle at the time and place designated in the citation. 
(d)  The Raleigh Transportation Department shall administer the traffic-control photographic system and program and shall maintain a list of system locations and shall see that all locations are marked as required by c.286, s.l.2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-108, §2, 11-7-01; ; Ord. No. 2003-434, §1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2003-497, §1, 9-2-03)  
Sec. 11-2136. - PENALTY AND APPEAL. 
(a)  Any violation of this section shall be deemed a non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed. The violation shall not be assessed any points pursuant to G.S. 20-16(c) or G.S. 58-36-65. Notice of the violation shall be forwarded to the owner by personal service or first class mail to the address given on the motor vehicle registration. The owner shall have thirty (30) days to respond to the notice of violation. If the owner fails to pay the civil penalty or to respond to the notice of violation within the time period specified on the citation, the owner shall have waived the right to contest responsibility for the violation and shall be subject to an additional penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). The City may establish procedures for the collection of these penalties and may enforce the penalties by civil action in the nature of debt. 
(b)  A notice of appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after receiving notification of the violation. Failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the citation. Appeals shall be heard by an administrative process established by the City and set out on each citation. Anyone desiring an appeal must post a bond equal in amount to the civil penalty for the violation before an appeal hearing will be scheduled. A member of the appeals panel may waive or reduce the bond upon receipt of sworn evidence that the appealing party is unable to pay the full amount of the bond. Sworn evidence must be submitted within seven (7) calendar days after a notice of appeal has been filed. Appeals from a decision of the appeals panel shall be by certiorari to the Superior Court of Wake County. 
(Ord. No. 2001-108, §3, 11-7-01; Ord. No. 2003-434, §§2, 3, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 2003-497, §§2, 3, 9-2-03)  
Sec. 11-2137. - LIMITATION ON OPENING MOTOR VEHICLE DOORS INTO TRAFFIC. 
It shall be unlawful to open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving motor vehicle or bicycle traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §4, 11-5-13)  
Secs. 11-2138 — 11-2150. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE I. - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES 
 
Sec. 11-2151. - PEDESTRIAN STREETS. 
The following streets shall be used for pedestrian traffic only, and it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle over or along such streets except ambulance, rescue squad, Police or Fire Department vehicles being operated on an emergency mission, or other vehicles pursuant to a permit issued under Part 9, Chapter 7 of the Code. 
(a)  Exchange Street from Fayetteville Street to South Wilmington Street. 
(b)  Fayetteville Street, from its intersection with the southern boundary of Morgan Street to its intersection with the northern boundary of Davie Street, but excluding the intersections of Martin Street and Hargett Street. 
Cross reference: Pedestrian malls generally, Part 9, Chapter 7.  
Sec. 11-2152. - PEDESTRIAN CROSSING PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cross a street , on foot or by any other means, at a point and in a manner prohibited by this section and where a sign, barricade or other notice indicates that such crossing is prohibited. Locations where pedestrian crossing is so prohibited shall be as designated in Traffic Schedule No. 12, "Pedestrian Crossing Prohibited." 
( Code 1959 , §21-17.2) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2153. - ELECTRONIC TRAFFIC AND PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS. 
(a)  Pedestrians crossing roadways at intersections where electronic traffic-control signals are located which are regulated by separate electronic pedestrian signals must obey the instructions of the pedestrian signals. 
(b)  Pedestrians who are lawfully in a roadway when the pedestrian signal changes should proceed across the roadway . 
(c)  Pedestrians crossing roadways at signalized intersections which are not regulated by separate electronic pedestrian signals must obey the instructions of the traffic-control signal facing vehicular traffic moving in the same direction as such pedestrians. 
(d)  Pedestrians crossing roadways at signalized intersections which are not regulated by separate pedestrian signals must not start to cross when a yellow light is exhibited to vehicles . 
(e)  The electronic traffic and pedestrian control signals described in this section shall be located, and the regulations provided in this section shall be effective, as designed in official Traffic Schedule No. 1, "Electronic Traffic Control Signals." 
Cross reference: Electronic traffic-control signals, §11-2071.  
Secs. 11-2154 — 11-2169. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE J. - PARKING AND STANDING 
 
Sec. 11-2170. - PENALTIES. 
All offenses set out in Article J of this chapter shall be punished as civil offenses pursuant to G.S. 160A-175. Violations shall not be misdemeanors or infractions pursuant to G.S. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 1986-774, §4, 4-15-86)  
Sec. 11-2171. - PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES. 
(a)  Obstructing traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle upon a street , or alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to obstruct the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual unloading of passengers or when necessary to obey traffic regulations or signs or signals, or signals of a police officer . 
(b)  Designated places. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle (attended or unattended) except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk , in the area between the roadway and the sidewalk , in the area between the right-of-way line and the roadway or in the median area of a divided roadway . 
(2)  On or within twelve (12) feet of a crosswalk . 
(3)  Within an intersection . 
(4)  Within twenty-five (25) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway . 
(5)  Underpass approaches. No motor vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching a railroad underpass or overhead bridge within fifty (50) feet in any direction of the outer edge of such underpass or overhead bridge. 
(6)  Grade crossing approaches. No vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching a grade crossing within fifty (50) feet of the closest rail; provided, that where existing permanent structures are located along the street and closer than fifty (50) feet, parking may be permitted in front of such structures, unless otherwise prohibited, if the parking does not interfere with the view in either direction of an approaching locomotive or train. 
(7)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(8)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass structure. 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge or curb of a street . 
(10)  Within fifteen (15) feet in either direction of a fire hydrant, unless a greater or lesser distance is designated by action of the Council and appropriate signs or markings are displayed. 
(11)  Within five (5) feet on either side from a private road or driveway , or in such a manner to block the passage of vehicles to or from such road or driveway . 
(12)  City -owned parking areas. It shall be unlawful in any off-street lot or area owned by the City and provided for general public parking to park a motor vehicle , or for the registered owner of a motor vehicle to allow such vehicle to be parked , in any manner other than within properly designated parking spaces. 
Further, in any such off-street parking lot or area owned by the City and provided for general public parking , it shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or for the registered owner of a motor vehicle to allow such vehicle to be parked , in such a manner as would block or otherwise obstruct the reasonable ingress to or egress from such parking area or lot by other motor vehicles , or as would block or obstruct the passage of emergency vehicles through such parking area or lot. 
(13)  In any parking place designated as a car share space unless the vehicle belongs to a car sharing agency or company approved by and listed with the City of Raleigh pursuant to §11-2001 of this Code. 
(14)  No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any motor vehicle except a motorcycle in a parking space designated for the parking of motorcycles. "Motorcycle" shall mean any motorized vehicle designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground and that has a saddle for the use of the rider, but shall exclude a motor-assisted bicycle. 
( Code 1959 , §21-34(a); Ord. No. 1982-821, §1, 1-5-82; Ord. No. 1982-933, §1, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 1990-591, §1, 6-5-90; Ord. No. 2012-122, §2, 11-20-12, eff. 11-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-239, §2, 11-5-13; Ord. No. 2016-613, §2, 6-21-16, eff. 6-26-16 ) 
Cross reference: Parking restrictions in City -owned parks, Part 9, Ch. 2, Art. B. 
State law reference: Stopping on highway prohibited, G.S. 20-161.  
Sec. 11-2172. - NO PARKING ZONES. 
When signs are erected or painted on the street giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time, except during church services on Sundays, or other times designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 13, park any vehicle within the areas designated as "no parking" zones; provided, use of such areas for church services on Sunday shall not be construed to permit parking where parking is otherwise prohibited by this article. The Transportation Department shall erect or paint signs at locations designated as "no parking" zones. Locations designed as "no parking" zones shall be as set out in official Traffic Schedule No. 13, "No Parking Zones." 
( Code 1959 , §21-34(e)) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2173. - NO STOPPING OR STANDING ZONES. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle with the areas designated as "no stopping or standing" zones. Stopping or standing shall be unlawful in such zones, as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 14, "No Stopping or Standing Zones." 
( Code 1959 , §21-34(g)) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2174. - PARKING TIME LIMITED IN DESIGNATED PLACES. 
(a)  When signs are erected adjacent to parking spaces in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a motor vehicle for longer than the limits stated in the signs, as the same are set out in official Traffic Schedule No. 15, "Parking Time Limits." In the Downtown Area as defined in §10-2081(c)(3) herein, the vehicle may park in a timed zone more than once during a day, provided the vehicle is moved prior to the expiration of the time which is legally allowed, and provided that the vehicle does not return to the same numbered zone for a minimum of thirty (30) minutes. "Parking Time Limited" zones are to be enforced from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. These parking time limits shall not be applicable in the following cases: 
(1)  On Saturdays, Sundays, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(2)  At the main post office, where parking is restricted in accordance with other provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  At locations specified in §11-2172, §11-2178, §11-2179, or Article K of this chapter. 
(b)  Each interval of time, equal to the legally allowable parking time in any particular zone, by which a vehicle remains beyond the legal time, shall be a separate violation. For example, each hour or part thereof a vehicle remains past the first hour in a one-hour parking zone shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  The City Council may designate certain parking spaces on City streets at or near electric charging stations for use only by electric vehicles. An electric vehicle is one that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off grid source, that is stored on board for motive purpose. An electric charging station is equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy to a battery or other energy storage device on an electric vehicle. 
Spaces designated as reserved for electric vehicles shall be clearly marked as such. When a space has been so marked no person shall park or stand any nonelectric vehicle in that space. If an electric vehicle is parked in such a designated space but is not attached to the charging station it is in violation of this ordinance. Any nonelectric vehicle so parked is subject to civil fine or removal. The fine for violation of this ordinance is fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be collected in the same manner and with the same penalties for late payment as other on street parking violations. Any vehicle parked in such a space must make the appropriate payment for the space and observe the time limit for the underlying parking zone. 
( Code 1959 , §21-37; Ord. No. 1981-691, §2, 6-16-81; Ord. No. 1997-76, §1, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 2006-998, §1, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 2012-35, §1, 4-3-12, eff. 4-10-12; Ord. No. 2013-239, §2, 11-5-13) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2175. - PARKING LIMITATIONS ON CITY-OWNED FACILITIES. 
(a)  Parking of vehicles on the lot owned by the City and located along the west side of McDowell Street and along the north side of Hargett Street shall be limited to vehicles owned by the City, vehicles operated by members of the City Council , and vehicles operated by City employees and used by them officially and regularly in connection with the performance of their duties in their employment by the City . 
(b)  Except as expressly provided and permitted by this paragraph, in order to make available adequate parking facilities for the vehicles being used by City employees and officials in the prosecution of the City's business, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle on such lot and it shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle to suffer or permit any vehicle owned by him to be parked on such lot. The City Manager is authorized and directed to cause the parking spaces within such lot to be appropriately designated and to assign specific spaces for the exclusive use of specific officials or employees or of specific department or divisions, and not more than eight (8) spaces for the use of members of the City Council ; and when so designated and properly marked by appropriate signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to park within any space not designated and authorized for his use in accordance with this paragraph. 
(c)  If at any time the City Manager shall determine that the parking space is not needed for the parking of City vehicles and vehicles being used on official City business the City Manager is authorized to properly designate and make the parking space available for general public use or for reserved public parking . Such spaces may be designated by parking meters, signs, striping or any other method selected by the City Manager. Any vehicle parked in violation of the rules establishing such public or reserved spaces shall be an offense and the violation may be enforced by any lawful method, including towing, by which any other violation of City parking regulations may be enforced. 
(d)  The City Manager is authorized and directed to cause driveways to be designated and marked on the lot for the purpose of ingress and egress to and from the parking spaces, and when so designated, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within any driveway or to permit, or to allow any vehicle owned by him to be parked therein. It shall be unlawful for any person to park at any time or at any place within the lot so as to block the passage to or from any parking space or to prevent the use of any parking spaces by the person for whom the parking space has been designated in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph. 
(e)  The City Manager is authorized and directed, in his discretion, to cause parking spaces, traffic lanes , including one-way lanes , and loading zones, to be designated and marked on the municipal auditorium parking lot and on the service drive adjacent to the Sheraton Capital Center Hotel and connecting Cabarrus Street with Salisbury Street. 
(f)  The City Manager is authorized and directed in his discretion, to cause parking spaces, time limit parking spaces, metered parking spaces, loading zones, no parking zones, handicap spaces and traffic lanes, including one-way lanes to be designated and marked on all City properties. 
Such spaces shall be subject to the same enforcement provisions and practices afforded such spaces on public streets. The City Manager shall have authority to establish time limits and parking meter rates identified in §§11-2174, 11-2205 and 11-2206. In addition, he shall be authorized to increase rates and vary time limits as he deems appropriate for such spaces. 
( Code 1959 , §21-34(b)—(d); Ord. No. 1982-876, §1, 3-23-82; Ord. No. 1993-151, §1, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 1998-454, §17, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2008-434, §§1, 2, 8-5-08) 
Cross reference: Parking areas in parks, §§9-2013, 9-2014.  
Sec. 11-2176. - TRUCK PARKING. 
All motor truck carriers operating as either common or contract carriers over regular or irregular routes, all passenger bus carriers, and all other owners of motor trucks or trailers of any kind, including house trailers, whose trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, semi-trailers, house trailers or buses at any time are operated into, out of, through, or within the corporate limits of the City and the drivers and operators of any such vehicles shall use private property for parking and storing those vehicles within the corporate limits, and they are hereby prohibited from using the public streets of the City except for the purposes of travel and transporting, loading and unloading passengers and except for temporary parking in cases of emergency involving a mechanical breakdown necessitating repairs to any such vehicle . Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to mass transit buses owned by the City , trucks of three-fourths-ton capacity or less, nor shall it apply to school buses parked in conformity with permits issued by the Police Department. 
( Code 1959 , §21-36; Ord. No. 1977-420, §1, 1-4-77)  
Sec. 11-2177. - STANDING FOR LOADING ONLY. 
(a)  Passenger loading and unloading. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading and unloading zone during the hours when the regulations applicable to such zones or stops are effective, and then for a period not to exceed ten (10) minutes. Passenger loading and unloading zones and the regulations applicable thereto, shall be as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 16, "Passenger Loading and Unloading Zones. 
(b)  Materials loading and unloading. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery, or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading and unloading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed sixty (60) minutes. Unless otherwise stated these loading zones shall be in effect from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Materials loading and unloading zones and the regulations applicable thereto shall be as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 17, "Materials Loading and Unloading Zones." 
(c)  Exemption for television transmission. 
Notwithstanding provisions of this section to the contrary, and for the sole purpose of television signal transmission, it shall be lawful for a vehicle containing mobile television transmission equipment to park in a space designated as a passenger loading zone or a loading zone. Provided, however, that such vehicle shall only remain in the space for the minimum period of time required to prepare for the transmission of live television signals, and in no event for longer than one (1) hour. 
(d)  Truck loading zones. 
Truck loading zones shall be established as provided in this subsection. "Truck loading" shall mean the stopping or standing of any type of truck for the exclusive purpose of loading or unloading merchandise. For the purpose of definition in this section, a truck shall be classified as a vehicle designed to be used for the transportation of cargo including tractor trailer units, single-unit trucks, vans displaying a North Carolina commercial license plate (two (2) alphabetical characters followed by four (4) numeric characters), and pickup trucks; but excluding vehicles not principally designed for the transportation or cargo, such as motorcycles, passenger cars with or without trailers, station wagons or other noncargo vehicles . It shall be unlawful for trucks to park in official truck loading zones except for the exclusive purpose of loading or unloading merchandise. Truck loading zones and the regulations applicable thereto, shall be as designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 18, "Truck Loading Zones." 
(e)  Commercial vehicle only loading zone. 
(i)  Definition . For purposes of this section, "commercial vehicle " shall mean a truck or other vehicle upon which the name, logo, or other designation of the person owning or operating the vehicle is painted or otherwise permanently affixed to the vehicle in letters or markings at least two inches in height, or which displays a valid North Carolina commercial license plate. 
(ii)  Use, generally . It shall be unlawful for any person to either (1) park any vehicle, other than a commercial vehicle, in any commercial loading zone as designated by the City in official Traffic Schedule No. 24, or (2) during the enforcement hours described in Traffic Schedule No. 24, "Commercial Loading Zones," to utilize a commercial loading zone for any purpose other than expeditiously loading or unloading property , goods or merchandise from a commercial vehicle. In addition to any applicable fine or penalty, any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be subject to being ticketed or cited at the discretion of any law enforcement officer or parking enforcement officer. 
(iii)  Area affected . This section shall apply only within the downtown business district bounded by East Street on the East, West Street and Glenwood Avenue on the West, Peace Street on the North and South Street to the South. Commercial loading zones and the regulations applicable thereto, shall be designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 24, "Commercial Loading Zones." 
(f)  Musician loading and unloading zone. 
(i)  Area affected. This section shall apply only within the downtown business district bounded by Peace Street on the North, South Street on the South, East Street on the East, West Street northward to Hillsborough Street on the West, and Glenwood Avenue from Hillsborough Street to Peace Street also on the West. Musician loading zones and the regulations applicable thereto, shall be designated in official Traffic Schedule No. 27, "Musician Loading Zones." 
(ii)  Use, generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to either (1) park any vehicle , other than an authorized musician loading vehicle , in any musician loading and unloading zone as designated by the City in official Traffic Schedule No. 27, or (2) during the enforcement hours described in Traffic Schedule No. 27, "Musician Loading Zones", to utilize such zone for any purpose other than expeditiously loading or unloading musical instruments and other related equipment. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be subject to being ticketed with a violation notice with the applicable fine or penalty at the discretion of any law enforcement officer or parking enforcement officer. 
(iii)  Definition. For purposes of this section, "musician loading vehicle" shall mean any vehicle displaying a valid musician loading permit issued by the City of Raleigh and parked with the emergency flashers activated for the purpose of expeditious loading and unloading of musical instruments and/or other equipment used in the performance of music. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading exceed thirty (30) minutes. Unless otherwise indicated, musician loading and unloading zones shall be in effect 5:00 p.m. to 3:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday. 
( Code 1959 , §21-28; Ord. No. 2006-990, §§1, 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2006-67, §§1, 2, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 2015-525, 12-1-15 ) 
Cross reference: Schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2178. - BUS STOPS. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus zone. Bus zones shall be used for the exclusive purpose of loading and unloading passengers to and from the bus. The driver of a bus shall not park a bus or permit a bus to stand in the City at any place other than at a bus zone or bus stop except that the provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers, provided it shall not be unlawful for any vehicle to park within areas marked as bus zones or bus stops between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:30 a.m. Bus zones shall be located as provided in official Traffic Schedule No. 19, "Bus Zones." 
( Code 1959 , §21-39) 
Cross references: Public transit services generally, Part 9, Chapter 4; schedules incorporated by reference, §11-2004.  
Sec. 11-2179. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park in a roadway upon which the boundaries of individual parking spaces are marked on the pavement other than parallel with the front of the curb or edge of the roadway , headed in the direction of traffic and completely within the boundaries of the delineated parking space. When no parking space boundaries are marked on the roadway the vehicle shall be parked as above except that it may not be farther than twelve (12) inches from the curb or edge of the roadway if there is no curb. On streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs. The requirement that the vehicle be headed in the direction of traffic is not applicable if the parking space in question is on a street of two (2) lanes or less, without a marked center line, and located in a residentially zoned area. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section "front of the curb" shall mean the roadside of the curb that is raised above and perpendicular to the gutter. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section "edge of the roadway" shall mean the portion of the right-of-way where the improved area designed and ordinarily used for vehicular traffic meets the unimproved area not designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1995-607, §1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 2010-705, §1, 2-16-10)  
Sec. 11-2180. - UNLAWFUL PURPOSES FOR PARKING. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle , except repairs necessitated by emergency. 
( Code 1959 , §21-41)  
Sec. 11-2181. - TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS BY CHIEF OF POLICE. 
(a)  The Chief of the Police Department, or his duly appointed representative, is authorized to prohibit on a temporary basis the parking of vehicles under the following circumstances; provided, however, that this authorization shall apply only to areas not having parking meters except as set out below: 
(1)  Along parade routes permitted by the Police Department of the City for a period of two (2) hours before a parade begins until one (1) hour after the end thereof along streets having parking meters or any other streets within the City . 
(2)  Adjacent to curbs where street or public utility repairs are being made or are to be made if the parking at those curbs would interfere with the repair work. 
(3), (4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Adjacent to the curb where parking would interfere with special events which may be lawfully conducted on the streets or sidewalks of the City . 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in the prohibited areas after signs, traffic cones, or other devices have been conspicuously placed to give notice that parking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1984-452, §4, 12-4-84) 
Cross references: Parade regulations generally, §12-1051 et seq. ; parking meter zones and restrictions applicable thereto, §11-2200 et seq. ; reservation or encumbrance of parking spaces, §11-2207. 
Annotation: Traffic schedules for residential parking access are found in Traffic Schedule 21.  
Sec. 11-2182. - CONTROLLED PARKING RESIDENTIAL AREA. 
(a)  Definitions. 
As used in this subsection the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Controlled parking residential area shall mean an area designated herein for restricted residential parking pursuant to criteria established in this section. 
(2)  Director shall mean the City's Transportation Director or the Director's designee. 
(3)  Residential parking permit decal shall mean a special permit issued hereunder by the City and authorizing the vehicle bearing such permit to be parked for a period in excess of posted limits in a controlled parking residential area . 
(4)  Storage shall mean any vehicle that has been parked on a street within a residential zoning district in the same block for seven (7) days or longer. 
(b)  Study. 
Upon citizen request or on its own initiative, the City may study the feasibility and desirability of establishing or eliminating one or more controlled parking residential areas . A study shall consider, among other things: 
(1)  The effect on the safety of residents of the area under consideration from intensive use by nonresidents for parking of vehicles, including the storage of vehicles. 
(2)  The need of the residents of the area to obtain adequate on-street parking adjacent to or close by their places of residence. 
(3)  The difficulty or inability of residents of the area to secure adequate on-street parking adjacent to or close by their places of residence because of widespread use of available parking spaces in that area by nonresident transient motorists. 
(4)  The impact of major public facilities and programs on the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the area and any unreasonable burdens placed on those residents in securing adequate on-street parking and gaining access to their places of residence by virtue of such facilities and programs. 
(5)  The likelihood of alleviating, by use of a parking permit system, any problem of unavailability of residential parking spaces. 
(6)  The desire of the residents in the area for the institution of a parking permit system and the willingness of those residents to bear the administrative costs incidental to the issuance of permits authorized by this section. 
(7)  The need for all residential permit spaces to be available in the area under consideration for use by visitors and the general public for at least sixteen (16) hours, with or without time restriction. 
(8)  Such other factors as the Director shall deem relevant. 
(c)  Petition and designation. 
Procedures for submitting a petition and designation of the controlled parking residential area are as follows: 
(1)  Petitions shall be on forms prepared and promulgated by the City . The petition shall identify the boundaries of and streets within the proposed controlled parking residential area and shall be signed by an adult resident from at least seventy (70) per cent of the living units contained in each block of the proposed controlled parking residential area or by an authorized representative of these residents. The Director shall determine the showing necessary to establish a representative's authority. Completed petitions shall be submitted to the Director who shall determine their sufficiency. Any insufficient petition shall be remanded to the individual submitting it, with instructions for correction of deficiencies. 
(2)  If the Director proposes to establish a controlled parking residential area , residents within the area proposed for the designation may petition for the establishment of the area. 
(3)  A controlled parking residential area must contain either at least eight (8) contiguous block faces abutted by property primarily in residential zoning districts or must be a contiguous expansion of an existing controlled parking residential area and the area is abutted by property primarily in residential zoning districts. A block face as used herein shall mean one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets . 
(4)  No controlled parking residential area shall be established unless at least 70 percent of the households within the proposed area have properly signed a petition in favor of the proposed restrictions. 
(5)  Upon establishment of a controlled parking residential area and in accordance with the Council's directions, the Director shall cause to be posted parking signs in the area, which signs shall prescribe times, locations and conditions under which parking may be by permit only. 
(6)  The Council may enact a temporary controlled parking residential area for a period of up to one year only. In light of its temporary nature, the Council may apply special provisions to this temporary controlled parking residential area including provisions relating to permit fees. No temporary controlled parking residential area may operate longer than one year. After the one-year temporary period expires, unless the Council provides otherwise, the controlled parking residential area will continue in place and all provisions applicable to a regular controlled parking residential area will apply. 
(d)  Permit decal display. 
The residential parking permit decal shall be attached to the left rear bumper of the vehicle for which it is issued and shall contain the vehicle license number, year of issue, and the identification number of the controlled parking residential area for which issued. 
(e)  Eligibility for permit decal. 
A resident of a controlled parking residential area is eligible to receive one (1) residential parking permit decal for each vehicle which is principally operated by the resident. The Director shall verify the residence address of persons obtaining such decals and shall record on the face of the decal the license number of the vehicle and the letter designation of the controlled parking residential area for which it is issued. As proof of residency, the Director may require utility bills, notarized affidavits of the landlord, auto registration cards and other documentation deemed necessary naming the permittee and showing an address within the controlled parking residential area . Residential parking permit decals issued for vehicles used by nonresidents of the controlled parking residential area or used for purposes of daily commuting to the area or for purposes of storage of a nonresident's vehicle are void. 
Any health care provider who provides regular medical or health services for more than two (2) continuous hours to persons residing in a controlled parking residential area may also apply to the Director . Such persons may receive a residential parking removable dashboard parking placard. When the placard is properly displayed, all parking rights and privileges extended to vehicles displaying a residential parking permit decal shall apply. The Director shall periodically verify the delivery of medical and health services of persons requesting a placard. As proof, the Director may require a medical doctor's certification that regular care is needed for persons residing in a controlled parking residential area. 
(f)  Permit issuance fee. 
The City shall issue residential parking permit decals for an annual administrative fee established by the Council . The fee shall not be prorated for partial years . No residential parking permit decal shall be transferred to another vehicle . The charge for replacement of damaged or faded permit decals shall be established by the Council except that a replacement decal shall be issued without cost if an individual returns a current used decal, or scrapings from the decal, and shows proof of purchase to the Director or if an individual shows proof to the Director of change in registration number for the vehicle . Residential parking permit decals shall be issued on a calendar year basis, and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year . Provided it shall not be unlawful to continue to park an authorized vehicle in a controlled parking residential area during the period between December 31 and February 14 inclusive, if a residential parking permit decal for the vehicle was issued for the previous immediate calendar year . 
(g)  Restrictions. 
(1)  No person shall display a residential parking permit decal on a vehicle unless such vehicle displays the same vehicle license number as shown on the residential parking permit decal ; and any such use or display except as authorized herein shall constitute a violation of this Code by the permittee and by the person who so used or displayed the residential parking permit decal . 
(2)  It shall constitute a violation of this Code for any person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit decal or to furnish any false information in an application to the City in order to obtain a residential parking permit decal . 
(3)  The Director is authorized to revoke the residential parking permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this section, and, upon written notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender such permit to the Director . Failure, when so requested, to surrender a residential parking permit , so revoked, shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(h)  Compliance with signs. 
The Council may establish parking restrictions that apply within a controlled parking residential area . When signs are erected adjacent to streets in a controlled parking residential area , no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the posted time, unless such vehicle has a properly displayed residential parking permit decal for the area in which parked provided that these provisions shall not apply to locations specified in §11-2172 (no parking zones), §11-2171 (places no-parking), §11-2173 (no stopping or standing) §11-2174 (time limited parking), §11-2177 (loading zones), §11-2178 (bus zones), and §11-2202 (meter zones). A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated controlled parking residential area . 
(Ord. No. 1979-8, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 1981-657A, §1, 5-5-81; Ord. No. 1982-834, §1, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 1996-820, §1, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 2007-182, §1, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 2018-817, §1, 4-17-18 ) 
Editor's note: It should be noted that, with the adoption of Ord. No. 1981-735, on Sept. 1, 1981, §11-2182 was amended "to reflect the addition of the following entry in Residential Area A, Controlled Parking: 
Chamberlain Street, both sides, Hillsborough Street to Stafford Street." 
Annotation: The U.S. Supreme Court, in County Board of Arlington County, Virginia v. Richards, 54 L.Ed. 2d 4 (1977) upheld the constitutional validity of controlled parking in residential areas.  
Sec. 11-2183. - PARKING, OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED AT MOORE SQUARE TRANSIT TRANSFER FACILITY. 
After appropriate signs have been erected or affixed giving notice of these regulations, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, stand, or park any motor vehicles or to allow other physical obstructions by equipment, structures, or other means in those areas of the Moore Square transit transfer facility designated and intended for the passage of buses or for pedestrians, except by a permit issued under applicable City policies and in compliance with any and all conditions of such permit; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to City of Raleigh transit vehicles , police, fire or other emergency vehicles , or privately owned motorized equipment such as wheelchairs or prosthetic equipment providing transport to the physically handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 1987-912, §1, 2-3-87) 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1987-912, §1, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, codification as §11-2183 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 11-2184. - TAXI ZONES. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except officially licensed taxis in taxi zones described in official Traffic Schedule No. 22. Taxi operators may park in such zones while waiting for riders provided that they remain within five feet of their cab at all times unless expeditiously assisting a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 1989-467, §1, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 2003-390, §1, 2-18-03)  
Sec. 11-2185. - POLICE VEHICLE PARKING ZONE. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle except official law enforcement vehicles in any area described as a police vehicle parking zone in official Traffic Schedule No. 23. A police vehicle includes but is not limited to any car, truck, trailer, motorcycle, van or any combination of the above used for the purpose of enforcing the laws, ordinances and regulations of the City of Raleigh. 
(Ord. No. 2001-973, §1, 4-3-01)  
Sec. 11-2186. - VALET PARKING. 
(a)  [Valet parking.] 
Valet parking means the business of using the streets for the purposes of loading and unloading passengers to and from vehicles and for the parking of those vehicles. Valet parking shall only be operated in connection with a designated valet parking zone. 
(b)  [Permit required.] 
No person shall engage in the business of operating valet parking service in the City without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this section. The operator shall also be required to obtain a valid privilege license from the City but the Revenue Collector cannot issue such privilege license until the valet parking permit has been obtained. 
(c)  [Permit application.] 
Any person desiring to operate a valet parking business shall make an application for the permit to the Public Works Director or his designee. The application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by the City Council : 
(1)  The name, age, business address and residence of the applicant if a natural person ; if a corporation, its name, address of its principal office, and the names of its principal officers together with their respective addresses; if a partnership, association, or other unincorporated entity, the names of the partners, or the names of those comprising the association or company with the address of each. 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the provision of such services and whether any similar permit in any jurisdiction has ever been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of such revocation. 
(3)  The uniform or insignia to be used to designate the applicant's employees. 
(4)  The street and sidewalk locations and the times during which applicant intends to provide valet service. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any of its principal officers or employees has ever been convicted of a felony or a violation of any narcotic law, or a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  Such other information that the Public Works Director or his designee believes necessary to assure that the public streets can meet their main purpose of carrying motor vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Insurance. 
No permit shall be issued or continued in operation, and no person shall operate a valet parking service unless and until there is in full force and effect a motor vehicle liability insurance policy insuring such owner and each employee thereof, and unless and until such owner shall file with the City Clerk a written certificate of insurance showing that the policy or policies are in effect and that they cannot be cancelled without thirty (30) days written notice to the City Clerk. The policies shall have coverage limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for death or injury in any one occurrence, and property damage coverage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). In addition, the owner shall also furnish the insurance coverage required by §11-6001(b) herein. 
(e)  Issuance. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and fee, the Public Works Director or his designee shall conduct any investigation deemed appropriate to determine whether a permit should issue. In making the determination, the number of services already operating in an area, the number of zones already in the area requested, the hours of operation being proposed, and the probable effect of the service of local traffic conditions. 
(f)  Authority of the City . 
The City reserves the right to determine and designate appropriate street locations and times for the operation of valet parking services. Once the City has determined and designated appropriate street locations and times for the operating of valet services, the service shall be limited to parking or unloading vehicles only at those street locations and times. No cars will be parked in on street parking areas. The City reserves the right to add, modify or eliminate street locations and times at any time in order to protect pedestrian traffic and improve conditions for the flow of motor vehicular traffic. 
(g)  Suspension and revocation. 
Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked for any reason that would justify a refusal to issue the permit originally or by reason of any failure by the permitee to comply with the provisions of this code, or any condition imposed by the Public Works Director or his designee upon issuance of the permit. The permit may be suspended if the sidewalk or street area is needed for parades, festivals or other such special events. Except for temporary suspensions for special events as set out above, the permittee is entitled to prompt notice of the City's intent to suspend or revoke and is entitled to a hearing before the Public Works Director or his designee. The permittee may appeal the decision of the Public Works Director or his designee to the City Council. 
(h)  Penalties. 
Violations of the permit requirements are a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and by any civil remedy available under North Carolina law, G.S. 160A-75. Violations are also grounds for the revocations of the required business privilege license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-159, §1, 1-23-07)  
Sec. 11-2187. - NO PARKING TOW AWAY ZONE. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a No Parking Tow Away Zone. All such zones shall be clearly marked as such by uniform signage. Parking in such a zone will subject the vehicle to being immediately towed. The owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the tow pursuant to the provisions for post towing remedies found in G.S. 20, Article 7A. The City Council shall designate each zone and the designated zones will be placed into the Official Traffic Schedule and will be denominated as such. 
(Ord. No. 2007-179, §1, 3-6-07)  
Sec. 11-2188. - EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT EVENTS. 
The City Manager shall have the authority to suspend parking regulations and to reserve on street parking spaces in certain situations. Any individual or business may apply to the City Manager for a reserved spot on one of the City streets set out below. The application shall be submitted at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time desired for the reservation. The fee for a reserved space on the street will be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . It is the sole discretion of the City Manager as to what vehicles are appropriate for on street parking and his decision is final. Before granting such a permit the City Manager shall find that the event is of such a spontaneous nature and parking impact that special parking should be provided to facilitate public safety and optimum traffic flow. No permit granted under this ordinance shall extend more than five (5) calendar days. At the expiration of the five (5) day period the applicant may reapply or seek a longer waiver from the City Council. Nothing herein shall allow parking on sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2007-240, §1, 6-5-07; Ord. No. 2014-343, §1, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §10, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 11-2189. - MOTORCYCLE PARKING. 
The Council may designate certain parking spaces on City streets for use only by motorcycles. For purposes of this section "motorcycle" shall mean any motorized vehicle designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground and that has a saddle for the use of the rider, but shall exclude a motor-assisted bicycle. Spaces designated for motorcycles only shall be clearly marked. No more than one motorcycle may be parked in a single motorcycle-only parking space at one time. 
( Ord. No. 2016-613, §1, 6-21-16, eff. 6-26-16 )  
Secs. 11-2190—11-2199. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE K. - PARKING METERS 
 
Sec. 11-2200. - PENALTIES. 
All offenses set out in Article K of this chapter shall be punished as civil offenses pursuant to G.S. 160A-175. Violations shall not be misdemeanors or infractions pursuant to G.S. 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 1986-774, §5, 4-15-86)  
Sec. 11-2201. - DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  Operator. 
The word operator as used in this article, shall mean and include every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner , or is in actual physical control of a vehicle . 
(b)  Park, parking. 
The word park or parking , as used in this article, shall mean the standing of a vehicle , whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle . 
(c)  Parking meter. 
The word parking meter , as used in this article, shall mean and include any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this chapter. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the City and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking . 
(d)  Parking meter zone. 
The words parking meter zone , as used in this article, shall mean and include any restricted street upon which parking meters are installed and in operation. 
(e)  Parking meter space. 
The words parking meter space , as used in this article, shall mean any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters. 
( Code 1959 , §21-44) 
Annotation: Metered parking is permissible, if for a regulatory, rather than revenue-earning purpose. State v. Scoggin, 236 NC 1, 72 S.E. 2d 97 (1952).  
Sec. 11-2202. - PARKING METER ZONES. 
The named and described areas, streets , or portions of streets designated by official Traffic Schedule No. 20, "Parking Meter Zones," hereby incorporated by reference into this Code, shall comprise the parking meter zones of the City . The installation and operation of parking meters , the enforcement of parking time limits, and other provisions of this article shall be in accordance with Traffic Schedule No. 20, "Parking Meter Zones."  
Sec. 11-2203. - INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS. 
In the parking meter zones the transportation director shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking spaces provided in §11-2212, and the transportation director shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking meters . Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by this article. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator, owner , possessor or Manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
( Code 1959 , §21-46)  
Sec. 11-2204. - OPERATION OF PARKING METERS. 
(a)  Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall , upon entering the parking meter space , immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in that meter such proper coin of the United States of America as is required for the parking meter and as is designated by proper directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, the operator of the vehicle , after the deposit of the proper coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism of the meter in accordance with directions properly appearing thereon, and failure to deposit the proper coin, and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Upon the deposit of a coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so required) the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which the parking space is located, provided that any person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by a previous occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy of the space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the parking time limit set for the parking space, and if the meter shall indicate illegal parking , then, and in that event the vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
( Code 1959 , §21-47)  
Sec. 11-2205. - PARKING TIME LIMITS. 
(a)  Fifteen-minute parking meter zones. 
Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a fifteen-minute parking zone as provided in Traffic Schedule No. 20, parking meter zones, shall be lawful for fifteen (15) minutes upon deposit of fifty cents ($0.50) in coins of the United States of America. 
(b)  Thirty-minute parking meter zones. 
Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a thirty-minute parking meter zone as provided by official Traffic Schedule No. 20, parking meter zones , shall be lawful for thirty (30) minutes upon deposit of fifty cents ($0.50) in coins of the United States of America. 
(c)  One-hour parking meter zones. 
Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a one-hour parking meter zone as provided by official Traffic Schedule No. 20, shall be lawful for one (1) hour upon deposit of fifty cents ($0.50) in coins of the United States of America. 
(d)  Two-hour parking meter zones. 
Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a two-hour parking meter zone , as provided by official Traffic Schedule No. 20, shall be lawful for two (2) hours upon deposit of fifty cents ($0.50) in coins of the United States of America. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48(a)—(d); Ord. No. 1989-427, §1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2004-666A, §§9—12, 6-29-04)  
Sec. 11-2206. - METER ZONES; PERIOD OF OPERATION. 
Parking meters shall be operated in parking meter zones every day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except Saturday, Sunday, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Martin Luther King, Jr., Day (third Monday in January), and Christmas Day, and except at the central post office where parking shall be restricted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and except on such other days and times excepted from time to time by the City Council , and noted on official Traffic Schedule No. 20; provided that the exceptions shall not apply to the fifteen-minute parking meter zone around the post office building. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48(f); Ord. No. 1987-954, §1, 4-7-87; Ord. No. 2006-998, §2, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 11-2207. - EXCEPTIONS TO PARKING TIME LIMITATIONS AND TO REQUIRED ACTIVATION OF PARKING METERS BY DEPOSIT OF COINS; PARKING SPACE ENCUMBRANCE. 
(a)  When parking or loading on the streets of the City is prohibited for longer than the time limits stated in this chapter and/or when parking is permitted in metered parking spaces only when the operator of a vehicle , upon entering the parking meter space , immediately activates or causes to be activated the timing mechanism on the meter in accordance with this chapter, the operator of a motor vehicle or other person may park on or otherwise encumber the parking areas or metered spaces or loading zones on the streets of the City for periods of time longer than otherwise permitted by this chapter and without activating any parking meter or meters when the following conditions have been satisfied and when a permit has been issued for the encumbrance of a parking area. 
(b)  Upon application to and approval of the City Manager , any of the following persons may obtain a permit at no charge for the encumbrance of a parking space or spaces by the placement of standard traffic type signs, barricades, or cones in metered or unmetered spaces: 
(1)  Persons requiring temporary parking space immediately adjacent to residential, commercial or industrial buildings for loading or unloading of building or office equipment or personal property and who satisfy the review agent that the use of the parking spaces is necessary in order to move the equipment or property . 
(2)  Persons having a permit from the Director of the Department of City Planning or his designee in connection with any building construction or demolition project that will take thirty (30) or fewer calendar days to complete and who satisfy the review agent that the use of the parking spaces is necessary to the completion of the project. Projects that will take longer than thirty (30) calendar days to complete may be allocated street space provided that a permit is procured for the space or spaces needed. The per space per day fee for any such permit shall be set by the City Manager and shall be an amount equal to the highest daily parking rate for all City parking decks, garages, and surface lots. The fee shall be paid in advance for the estimated time for the completion of the work. Any work done beyond the initial estimate will be paid for at the completion of the project. The City reserves the right to rescind any such permit and will refund any overpayment of the fee if the permit is rescinded. 
(3)  Persons having a permit from the Inspections Department to perform any plumbing, electrical, heating, sign-hanging or other project in any public way or on premises adjacent to any street , alley, or sidewalk , and who satisfy the review agent that the use of the parking space(s) is necessary to facilitate the project. 
(4)  Persons engaged in any public improvement under contract with the City or engaged in any work under the supervision of the City Engineer, who have a certification from the City Manager or designee that the use of the parking spaces is necessary to facilitate the project. 
(5)  Representatives of the Wake County Board of Elections, upon request that additional parking is required on an election day at one (1) or more polling places to accommodate voters. 
(6)  Persons who are operating civic or convention centers as defined in §10-2002 of this Code. The City Manager or designee may set aside parking for such a facility pursuant to this standard on any block face adjoining the facility or on any block face adjoining the block faces immediately adjoining the facility. No such reservation shall be for a period of more than three (3) consecutive days, and any such reservation shall not include existing loading zones within the reserved area. 
(7)  Persons who are operating hotels, motels, or other places of assembly in the downtown exempt parking area as defined in §10-2061(k)(2) may request the reservation of on-street spaces adjoining their facility when the facility is hosting a conference or other meeting which will create a demand for parking which cannot be satisfied by the facility's existing off-street parking . No such reservation shall be effective for more than three (3) consecutive days, and any such reservation shall not include existing loading zones within the reserved area. 
(8)  The City Manager or designee may at any time authorize the reservation of metered or unmetered parking spaces for the purpose of loading and unloading passenger buses. No such reservation shall exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
(9)  Contractors engaged in the servicing of building equipment limited to electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fire alarm, fire pump, and building elevator contractors may apply for a one-day renewable permit to perform such work. There shall be an administrative fee assessed for each permit equal to nine (9) times the current parking meter hourly rate. This permit shall be available only in the areas delineated in §10-2081(c) and §10A-2061(k)(2) of this Code. 
(10)  Movers engaged in moving the contents of a home, office, industrial or other commercial site from one location to another for the continued use of the same party may apply for a one-day renewable permit to encumber one (1) or more parking spaces while completing the work. The fee for this permit shall be the same as the fee for the permit described in subsection (9) above. 
(11)  The City Manager or designee may at any time authorize the reservation of metered or unmetered parking spaces for any event covered under the City Council's Special Event Policy in accordance with the standards set out in those policies. 
(c)  Exemptions: 
(1)  Persons licensed as funeral directors and holding services in any funeral home or church shall be exempted from making application and receiving permits provided for by this section so long as suitable markings are used to indicate to the public that a funeral is in progress. 
(2)  Public utilities engaging in construction and maintenance work in/or adjacent to any public way that have a right-of-way permit for such work shall be exempted from making application and receiving permits provided for by this section so long as suitable markings are used to indicate to the public that such work is being undertaken. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48.1; Ord. No. 1984-452, §1, 12-4-84; Ord. No. 1989-424, §§1—3, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 1992-988, §1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2001-56, §1, 7-17-01; Ord. No. 2011-914, §1, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 2014-343, §§2—5, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 ) 
Cross reference: Temporary parking restrictions by the Chief of Police, §11-2181.  
Sec. 11-2208. - PARKING EXCEPTIONS AND SPACE RESERVATIONS AUTHORIZED BY CITY MANAGER. 
The City Manager or designee shall authorize reservation of parking spaces, but shall not waive the prescribed fees, in circumstances not covered in §11-2207 upon evidence and findings by the Manager or designee that: 
(a)  The proposed use and necessity of reservation of spaces is of a temporary and not regularly occurring nature; 
(b)  The proposed use and necessity of reservation of spaces is for a lawful purpose; 
(c)  The reservation of spaces will not significantly impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(d)  The proposed use will not endanger pedestrians, motorists, or occupants of adjacent buildings; 
(e)  The purpose of which reservation of spaces is requested cannot be accomplished otherwise without risk of personal injury or property damage, or without excessive expense; and 
(f)  The proposed use and reservation of spaces will not be injurious to the public peace, health, safety, and welfare. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48.1; Ord. No. 1983-83, §1, 3-15-83; Ord. No. 2014-343, §6, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 )  
Sec. 11-2209. - CONTENTS OF APPLICATION; FORM. 
The following rules and regulations shall govern the making of the application or the issuance of any permit hereinbefore authorized: 
(a)  Written authorization. 
The application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the Inspections Department. The application will show the name of the business or applicant's name; the reason for the encumbrance of the parking space or spaces; any certification required by this section; and the location of the proposed activity and the number of spaces desired to be encumbered and the day or dates needed and such other information as may be required by the Police Department. 
(b)  Exhibit of permit. 
In all cases, any permit issued hereunder shall be displayed by the permittee (or his agent) at the location of the parking spaces authorized to be encumbered and shall be exhibited to any officer or employee of the City upon demand. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48.1; Ord. No. 1984-452, §2, 12-4-84)  
Sec. 11-2210. - ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. 
When the application has been approved by the Inspections Department, a permit will be issued for the date or dates requested; provided, however, that no permit issued hereunder shall be for a period in excess of thirty (30) days, and provided further, nothing herein contained shall prohibit the reapplication and reissuance of permits for successive periods not to exceed thirty (30) days each. The holder of the permit shall be authorized to place traffic type signs, barricades, or cones at the metered or unmetered parking spaces to secure or maintain these spaces during the term of the permit. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48.1; Ord. No. 1984-452, §3, 12-4-84)  
Sec. 11-2211. - UNLAWFUL ACTS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person having a valid permit issued under authority of §§11-2207 through 11-2210, his authorized agents, employees or servants to park or stand any vehicle in the street parking space adjacent to any parking meter covered or hooded or in a street parking space in which a traffic cone has been placed; provided that employees of the City Traffic Engineering Department shall be authorized to encumber any area described in §11-2207 for the purpose of the installation or maintenance of any traffic-control devices, such encumbrance to be accomplished by the placement of traffic cones or barricades in such area. 
(b)  It shall be further unlawful for any unauthorized person to cover or hood any parking meter , or to place a traffic cone in any parking space, or to remove, damage or destroy any official parking meter cover, hood or traffic cone of the City , or for any unauthorized person to have in his possession any official parking meter hood or cover, traffic cone, or any other device designed for the encumbrance of parking spaces contrary to the provisions of §§11-2207 through 11-2210. 
( Code 1959 , §21-48.1)  
Sec. 11-2212. - VIOLATIONS. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any person : 
(a)  To cause, allow, permit, or suffer a vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by that person , to be stopped, left standing or parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking zone. 
(b)  To cause or allow a vehicle to be stopped, left standing, or parked in a parking meter space while the parking meter for such space is displaying a signal indicating that the meter is not active. 
(c)  To stop, leave standing or park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(d)  To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs, device, or metal substance, or other substitute for lawful coins. 
(f)  Each interval of time, equal to the legally allowable parking time in any particular zone, by which a vehicle remains beyond the legal time shall be a separate violation. For example, each hour or part thereof a vehicle remains past the first hour in a one-hour parking zone shall constitute a separate violation. 
( Code 1959 , §21-49; Ord. No. 1981-691, §3, 6-16-81)  
Sec. 11-2213. - ENFORCEMENT. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and officials of the violations division of the Department of Finance to enforce the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 11-2214. - USE OF PROCEEDS. 
The proceeds derived from the use of such parking meters shall be used exclusively for the purpose of making such regulation effective and for the expenses incurred by the City in the regulation and limitation of vehicular parking , and traffic relating to such parking , on the streets of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §21-51)  
Sec. 11-2215. - RESERVATION OF POWERS. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the City from providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands and other matters of similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial vehicles . 
( Code 1959 , §21-52)  
Sec. 11-2216. - IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES. 
(a)  The City Manager or his designee may immobilize by the use of wheel locks and tow and impound any vehicle which is illegally parked in violation of article J or article K of Part 11 of this Code, and for which there are three (3) or more outstanding, unpaid, and overdue parking tickets for a period of ninety (90) days. For the purpose of determining whether an illegally parked vehicle has had issued against it three (3) or more outstanding, unpaid, and overdue parking tickets for a period of ninety (90) days, it shall be sufficient if the license plate number of the illegally parked vehicle and the license number of the vehicle having received the tickets are the same. 
(b)  If a wheel lock is attached to a vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the windshield or other part of the vehicle so as to be readily visible. The notice shall warn that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle. The City of Raleigh shall not be responsible for any damage to an immobilized illegally parked vehicle resulting from unauthorized attempts to free or move the vehicle. An immobilization fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for the removal of the wheel lock. The notice shall also state the total amount of civil penalties due for parking tickets which are overdue and unpaid and attributable to such vehicle, and the immobilization fee to be charged. The address and telephone number to be contacted to pay the charges to have the wheel lock removed shall also be listed. 
(c)  If civil penalties due and an immobilization fee as herein provided are not paid, or satisfactory arrangements in lieu of payment are not made, within twenty-four (24) hours of the attachment of the wheel lock, such vehicle may be towed and impounded to any public or private impoundment lot. If a private contractor tows and stores the vehicle he may impose against the vehicle his customary fees and charges for such services. 
Once a vehicle has been impounded, the Finance Director or his designee, shall mail a notice of impoundment to the registered owner and lienholders, if any are known, at the address or addresses reported to the City by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(d)  Upon payment of all civil penalties and overdue and unpaid parking tickets issued for the vehicle and of all other charges authorized by this section, including immobilization, towing, and impoundment fees, the vehicle shall be released to the owner or any other person legally entitled to claim possession of the vehicle. 
(f)  The owner or other person entitled to possession of the vehicle which has been immobilized pursuant to this section may submit a request for hearing to the Finance Director by certified mail or personal delivery within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice provided for in subsection (c) hereinabove. If a hearing is requested, a statement shall be sent to the requesting party to inform him of the time and place of the hearing, of the basis of the vehicles immobilization and impoundment, of the rules governing conduct of the hearing, of the right to present evidence as to why the vehicle should not have been immobilized or towed, and of the right to be represented by counsel. The hearing officer shall prepare a written report of his findings within three (3) days of the hearing. The report shall state his conclusion as to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized and towed, and the reasons underlying his conclusion. If it is concluded that the vehicle was improperly immobilized or towed, then any improper charges shall be canceled, or if paid, rebated. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove from a vehicle a wheel lock placed thereon pursuant to this section or to remove from impoundment any vehicle placed therein pursuant to this section without all civil penalties and applicable charges having first been paid or an approved payment plan having been made. 
(h)  The City Manager is authorized to establish guidelines to adjust the amount of civil penalties imposed pursuant to this section to promote the resolution of any claim against persons with ten (10) or more outstanding delinquent parking tickets. 
(Ord. No. 1995-714, §1, 9-5-95)  
Secs. 11-2217—11-2230. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE L. - SIGNING AND TRAFFIC ROUTING IN THE EVENT OF STREET OBSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 11-2231. - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words as used in the provisions of this article shall have the following meanings: 
Street shall mean any paved portion, including curbing and gutters, located on any right-of-way conveyed to, dedicated to, or purchased by the State of North Carolina or the City , and which paved portion is used by the public for the passage of motor vehicle, vehicle , and pedestrian traffic. "Street" as herein defined shall not include any portion of a sidewalk . 
Obstruction shall mean any object, hole, excavation, spoil from an excavation, stored building material, or other condition which renders any portion of a street impassable to motor vehicle, vehicle or pedestrian traffic; or, which creates the threat of imminent danger to the health, safety or property of any person using the street for the purpose of motor vehicle, vehicle or pedestrian traffic; or, which creates the threat of imminent danger to the health, safety or property of any person using the street for the purpose of motor vehicle, vehicle or pedestrian traffic passage; provided that traffic cones or other devices used to protect wet pavement marking shall not be considered as obstructions. 
Manual shall mean the "Traffic Control Manual for Construction and Maintenance, City of Raleigh." This manual shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the City Clerk. 
Emergency situation . An "emergency situation" exists when the obstruction results from or is caused by any unanticipated event or happening which endangers the health or safety of persons using or desiring to use the obstructed street . Such emergency situation continues for the reasonable length of time necessary for the person , persons , firm or corporation working to remove the obstruction to comply with the requirements of this article in a manner consistent with providing protection for the health, safety and property of persons using or desiring to use the obstructed street . 
( Code 1959 , §19-33) 
Cross reference: Street responsibilities of the Department of Public Works, Part 7, Chs. 1, 2.  
Sec. 11-2232. - CERTAIN OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS. 
(a)  Obstruction of any portion of the following streets shall be prohibited at the time mentioned unless the person , persons , agency or corporation obstructing the street shall first obtain a special permit: 
(1)  Any street within the City having a marked centerline, or having marked lanes , between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  All streets with five (5) or more traffic lanes at the point of work, all streets with two (2) traffic lanes in each direction divided by a median, and all streets within the "Central Business District" (CBD), the area bounded by East Street, West Street, South Street and Peace Street, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(3)  Any street which is totally closed to through traffic. 
(b)  Special permission to obstruct a portion of the above specified streets shall be obtained by having the transportation director or his agent endorse the work permit for working within the street right-of-way issued by the Department of Public Works pursuant to §7-2001. This permit shall be maintained at the work site at all times while work is being performed. 
(c)  Special permission to obstruct a lane may be revoked if permittee continues to violate any portion of this article. Permittee must reapply for permission to obstruct a lane if original endorsement is revoked. 
(d)  Work planned by City employees or City contractors which conflicts with the prohibitions of subsection (a) shall be authorized in advance by the department head or next official in authority in the department whose employees are doing the work. The department head or next official in authority in that department who authorized the work shall give advance notice to the police communications center dispatcher and the Department of Transportation before the work is begun. This written notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The location of the planned work; 
(2)  The time that the planned work is to be done; and 
(3)  The nature and extent of the planned work. 
(e)  Any person , persons , agency or corporation obstructing any portion of any of the above defined streets or working to remove or repair the cause of any obstruction in any such street shall at all times use the appropriate signs, signals and warning devices required by the manual providing for by this article. Such person , persons , agency or corporation so working shall remove all signs, signals and warning devices. When the street is not in fact obstructed. 
(f)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §19-34; Ord. No. 1980-416, §§1—3, 7-15-80; Ord. No. 1994-393, §§1—4, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 11-2233. - USE OF FLAGMEN; CHANNELIZATION OF TRAFFIC. 
(a)  In the event that a two-way street is obstructed to the extent that motorists are required to cross the centerline of such street in order to pass the obstruction , the person , or persons , agency or corporation conducting the work at the site of the obstruction shall (See Figure 10): 
(1)  Provide signs and barricades and one (1) or more flagmen, as necessary to maintain traffic flow by the obstruction ; or 
(2)  Clearly and safely separate and channelize the opposing movement of traffic when the unobstructed portion of the roadway is of sufficient width to provide at least a ten (10) feet minimum lane. Such separation and channelization shall be achieved by the use of traffic cones, signs and/or barricades. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §19-35; Ord. No. 1980-416, §4, 7-15-80; Ord. No. 1994-393, §§5, 6, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 11-2234. - USE OF WARNING SIGNS GENERALLY. 
(a)  The following warning signs shall be placed on any street right-of-way prior to its being obstructed and shall be maintained until said obstruction is removed (see illustrations): 
(1)  Advance warning signs stating that work is being performed ahead shall be posted a minimum of 500 feet from the nearest point where the work is being carried on. Such signs shall be placed in either direction from the site of such work. 
(2)  Specified warning signs stating what portion of the street is obstructed or, the extent of the obstruction , or, otherwise the nature of the work that is being done, shall be placed at a minimum of 150 feet proceeding in either direction from the nearest point of obstruction . 
(3)  A flag tree warning device set forth in the manual provided for in this article shall be located adjacent to the location of the obstruction , in either direction of traffic, in the direct line of sight of any motorists approaching the obstruction from either direction. 
(4)  The flow of traffic in either direction shall be channelized around obstruction by means of traffic cones and/or barricades set up in the roadway . 
(5)  Minimum specifications for such signs, signals, and warning devices, and illustrative examples of properly placed signs, signals and warning devices shall be maintained in the manual . 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §19-36; Ord. No. 1994-393, §7, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 11-2235. - WARNING DEVICES FOR NIGHTTIME OBSTRUCTION. 
(a)  In the event that an obstruction remains in any portion of any street after sunset, the obstruction shall be clearly defined by reflective signs as specified by §11-2234 and by barricades with flashing lights and reflective qualities, and by placing a flashing light on the high level warning devices at the obstruction . Such devices with flashing lights shall remain so placed until sunrise of the following day. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §19-37)  
Sec. 11-2236. - ALTERNATE WARNING DEVICES WHEN DURATION OF OBSTRUCTION 30 MINUTES OR LESS. 
In the event that the obstruction of the street will last no longer than thirty (30) minutes, the person , persons , agency or corporation obstructing the street may , in lieu of using the other warning devices provided for in this article, use only high level warning devices or may use rotary flashing lights mounted on each vehicle present at the obstruction which is being used in furtherance of the work being performed at the site of the obstruction . 
( Code 1959 , §19-38)  
Sec. 11-2237. - FAILURE TO REMOVE SIGNS. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person , persons or corporation to leave signs, signals, and/or warning devices standing in the street or right-of-way when the obstruction for which such signs, signals and/or warning devices were erected has been removed. 
( Code 1959 , §19-38.1)  
Sec. 11-2238. - SIGNS MUST CONTAIN CORRECT INFORMATION. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person , persons or signs to state a warning in which is inconsistent with the actual condition of the obstructed street . 
( Code 1959 , §19-38.2)  
Sec. 11-2239. - EMERGENCY SITUATIONS. 
In the event of an emergency situation , as defined in this article, which results in the obstruction of any street the prohibitions and requirements of this article shall not apply. In the event of such emergency situation the person , persons , firm or corporation working to remove the obstruction shall make all reasonable efforts to provide for the immediate protection of the health, safety and property of all persons using the street during the existence of the emergency situation . Such person , persons , firm or corporation working to remove the obstruction shall notify the Department of Transportation and Emergency Communication at 911 and shall comply with the provisions of this article as soon as is reasonably possible after commencing work to remove the obstruction causing the emergency situation . 
( Code 1959 , §19-39; Ord. No. 1994-393, §8, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 11-2240. - DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION TO PUBLISH AND MAINTAIN MANUAL; CONTENTS OF MANUAL; COPIES ON FILE. 
The director of the Department of Transportation shall publish and maintain, with the approval of the Council , a manual entitled "Traffic Control Manual for Construction and Maintenance, City of Raleigh." This manual shall contain a clear description of the various signs, signals and devices referred to in this article. This manual may refer to and incorporate by reference provisions contained in certain texts providing nationally accepted standards and specifications for traffic-control devices and procedures. This manual shall contain or incorporate by proper reference, illustrations and drawings of examples of properly signed, signalled, and channelized obstructions . This manual and all materials incorporated by reference or referred to in said manual shall be kept on file at all times in the City Clerk's office. A copy of the manual and the incorporated and referred-to materials shall be available for public inspection at all times during the regular office hours of the City Clerk. 
( Code 1959 , §19-40)  
Sec. 11-2241. - NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS EXEMPTED. 
Any employee of the North Carolina State Department of Transportation, or any person , persons , firm or corporation acting pursuant to a contract with the agency , working on any street in the City shall be exempt from the provisions of this article when the procedures for traffic control in the event of street construction and maintenance, promulgated by said agency , are being followed. 
( Code 1959 , §19-41; Ord. No. 1980-416, §5, 7-15-80; Ord. No. 1994-393, §9, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 11-2242. - REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF WARNING DEVICES. 
No person shall take, steal, move, remove, carry away, destroy, damage or otherwise impair or impede the effectiveness for its intended use, any lamp, lantern, torch, blinking light, reflecting sign, reflecting barricade, traffic cone, barricade, or any other sign, signal, or warning device which has been placed or erected at any place in the City for the purpose of warning and safeguarding the public in the event of the construction, maintenance, repair, opening or closing of any street as defined in this article. 
( Code 1959 , §19-42)  
Sec. 11-2243. - BUILDING MATERIALS ON STREET. 
(a)  Every person permitted by the building inspector to use any portion of any street for the purpose of placing and storing any building material, equipment or supplies, or spoil material from a demolished structure, shall store such items and material on as small amount of space as is reasonably possible. 
(b)  In no event shall such permittee obstruct an area in width more than ten (10) feet. Before obstructing any street , such permittee shall have the permit issued by him by the transportation director or his agent as provided for in this article. No permittee storing building materials pursuant to the provisions of this section shall block, impede or otherwise prevent the passage of water through the gutter of such street . Such permittee shall at all times provide a safe walkway not less than five (5) feet wide around said obstruction . Such walkway shall be adequately lighted and protected at all times. 
On building sites where approval to use a portion of the street for staging has been approved, a chain link fence at least six (6) feet high must first be installed as approved. All building material, equipment, etc., shall be kept inside this staging area. Any changes to this fenced area, the original traffic control plan, or both, shall first be approved by the Department of Transportation after receiving a revised "traffic control site plan." 
( Code 1959 , §19-43; Ord. No. 1980-416, §6, 7-15-80; Ord. No. 1994-393, §10, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 11-2244. - DURATION OF SIGNING, SIGNALLING AND CHANNELIZATION REQUIREMENTS; CLEANING STREET. 
The requirements for signing, signalling and channelizing traffic in the event of an obstruction apply throughout the existence of the obstruction . An obstruction exists as long as any impediment to the free passage of motor vehicle, vehicle , or pedestrian traffic exists. Any permittee who obstructs a street , and any person , persons , firm or corporation not having a permit who works to remove an obstruction shall , before removing the signs, signals, and channelization devices, clean the street and leave the street in a condition to handle the type of traffic that the portion so obstructed was designed to handle. All spoil and excess material shall be hauled away. Such cleaning and repair shall be done as soon as possible. 
( Code 1959 , §19-44)  
Sec. 11-2245. - VIOLATION AND NONCOMPLIANCE. 
(a)  Any person , persons or corporation that wilfully violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In the event that any person , persons , firm or corporation continually fails to comply with the provisions of this article, such continuing failure to comply shall be grounds for the Transportation Department or the Transportation Director to refuse to issue such person , persons , firm or corporation a permit to work on the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Site control superintendent, general contractors, or others responsible for subcontractors or their agents shall be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
( Code 1959 , §19-44; Ord. No. 1994-393, §§11, 12, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 1998-454, §18, 11-4-98)  
CHAPTER 3. - RALEIGH BICYCLE REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, adopted Nov. 5, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§11-3001—11-3009, and enacted a new Ch.3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to bicycles and derived from Code 1959 , §§6A-1—6A-8; Ord. No. 1980-526, §2, adopted Nov. 18, 1980; Ord. No. 1988-173, §1, adopted May 17, 1988; Ord. No. 2000-881, §1, adopted Oct. 3, 2000. 
 
Sec. 11-3001. - TITLE. 
[This chapter may be cited as the] Raleigh Bicycle Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13)  
Sec. 11-3002. - PURPOSE. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt policies, procedures and standards for planning, designing, constructing, maintaining, marking and operating bicycle facilities in the City of Raleigh's jurisdiction for the safety and accessibility of bicyclists, pedestrians, motorists and the public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13)  
Sec. 11-3003. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and expressions defined in this section shall be held to have the meanings herein given to them: 
(1)  Bicycle: 
A non-motorized vehicle with two (2) or three (3) wheels tandem, a steering handle, one (1) or two (2) saddle seats, and pedals by which the vehicle is propelled, and also bicycles with helper motors rated less than one (1) brake horsepower which produces an ordinary pedaling speed up to a maximum of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(2)  Bicycle Facilities: 
All thoroughfares that provide for bicycle travel including facilities existing within street and highway rights-of-way and facilities along separate and independent corridors. 
a.  Shared streets: 
All existing public or private street rights-of-way where bicycles share the roadway with motor vehicles unless otherwise prohibited by law. Shared streets may utilize signs placed on vertical posts or markings stenciled on the pavement. 
b.  Bicycle lane/bike lane: 
Those bicycle facilities on existing street rights-of-way where a portion of the roadway is set aside for exclusive bicycle use and designated by (1) signs placed on vertical posts or markings stenciled on the pavement and (2) by a painted line marking the bicycle lane on the pavement. 
c.  Multi-use path/greenway: 
Those bicycle facilities on existing street rights-of-way or on a completely separated right-of-way or easement or upon mid across parks, schools or other publicly owned lands where a path is designated for the shared use of bicycles and pedestrians. The parking of any through traffic by motor vehicles is prohibited. Cross-flows by motor vehicles and pedestrians when necessary to gain access to and from a public street or alley and/or a private driveway or other entranceway are permitted. 
(3)  Motor vehicle: 
Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, with the exception of bicycles . 
(4)  Motorized scooter: 
A tandem two-wheeled motorized vehicle with handlebars, no seat, that is designed to be operated by a single person in a standing position, and capable of a maximum speed of 15 mph. A motorized scooter is a type of motor vehicle . 
(5)  Street and highway: 
The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of motor vehicles , bicycles , and pedestrians unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13; Ord. No. 2018-895, §1, 11-20-18 )  
Sec. 11-3004. - APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. 
(a)  All bicycles and motorized scooters used and operated upon and across shared streets and other designated bicycle facilities within the City of Raleigh's jurisdiction shall be considered vehicles and the riders of such bicycles and motorized scooters shall be subject to all provisions of the Raleigh City Code and Chapter 20 of the North Carolina General Statutes applicable to the driver of vehicles except those which by their nature can have no application. 
(b)  Bicyclists using sidewalks, greenways, or multi-use paths shall comply with all traffic regulations posted along the facility and shall stop or otherwise yield the right-of-way before entering or crossing a public street . 
(c)  Motorized scooters are not permitted to operate on sidewalks, greenways, or multi-use paths. Motorized scooters may operate on shared streets and bicycle lanes. The operator of a motorized scooter shall stop or otherwise yield the right-of-way before entering or crossing a public street . 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13; Ord. No. 2018-895, §2, 11-20-18 )  
Sec. 11-3005. - PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY ON BICYCLE FACILITIES. 
Bicycles shall at all times yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on and across bicycle facilities upon which through pedestrian traffic is also permitted as well as on sidewalks, greenways and multi-use paths. The operator of a motorized scooter shall at all times yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on shared streets or bicycle lanes . 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13; Ord. No. 2018-895, §3, 11-20-18 )  
Sec. 11-3006. - USE OF BIKE LANES BY MOTOR VEHICLES. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, park, stop or stand any motor vehicle in any bike lane designated as such within official Traffic Schedule No. 26, "Bicycle Lanes," unless otherwise permitted, or except when necessary to gain access to and from a public street or alley and/or private driveway or other entrance way, and except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading and unloading of passengers or materials if otherwise permitted in this chapter, or if necessary to obey traffic regulations or signs or signals of a police officer. 
(b)  The driver of a motor vehicle approaching a turn at an intersecting street or driveway may cross or merge into a bike lane after yielding to other traffic in the bike lane in order to execute the turn. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle accessing on-street parking adjacent to a bike lane may merge into the bike lane after yielding to other traffic in the bike lane in order to execute the parking maneuver. 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13)  
Sec. 11-3007. - OVERTAKING A BICYCLE. 
It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to overtake a bicycle proceeding in the same direction at a distance of less than two (2) feet to the left. 
(Ord. No. 2013-239, §3, 11-5-13)  
CHAPTER 4. - PUBLIC TRANSIT  
ARTICLE A. - TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 11-4001. - TRANSIT AUTHORITY CREATED. 
There is hereby created the Raleigh Transit Authority, of such composition and having the powers and duties herein prescribed. 
(Ord. 1975-1, §1)  
Sec. 11-4002. - MEMBERSHIP. 
The Raleigh Transit Authority (hereinafter referred to as the "authority") shall be composed of nine (9) members, including a Chairman, such members and Chairman to be named by the City Council . In addition to these nine (9) members the City Council may also appoint two (2) alternate members to the authority. The alternate members may only participate in the deliberations of the authority in the event that enough regular authority members are absent to cause the authority to lack a quorum. Service as an alternate member will not count against the member for purposes of the rules against consecutive service on boards and commissions. 
(Ord. 1975-1, §2; Ord. No. 2002-235, §1, 6-18-02)  
Sec. 11-4003. - TERMS OF MEMBERS. 
The term of office for members of the authority shall be two (2) years , except that of the nine (9) initial appointments, three (3) shall be for one (1) year terms (not to include the Chairman); thereafter all appointments shall be for two (2) years . 
(Ord. 1975-1, §3)  
Sec. 11-4004. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
The responsibilities and powers of the authority shall include: 
(a)  Implementation of the transit development program and updating periodically that program. 
(b)  Development and execution of contracts with a private transit management firm for provision of transit service. 
(c)  Marketing, promoting, and providing information about transit service in the Raleigh area. 
(d)  Monitoring the quantity and quality of transit service provided. 
(e)  Performing operational and short range transit planning and coordination with long range transportation planning done by City , regional, and state agencies . 
(f)  To use officers , employees, and facilities of the City on such a basis as may be agreed upon between the City Manager and the authority. 
(g)  To maintain and operate facilities and equipment necessary or convenient for authority operations, including the provision of public transportation service. 
(h)  To enter into and administer contracts or agreements with civil jurisdictions outside the territory of the authority with respect to the provision of public transportation service. 
(i)  To equitably and efficiently establish and administer the scheduling, routing, and rates of transit service. 
(j)  To develop budgets for its operation for approval by the City Council and to exercise authority hereby granted in conformance with such approved budget. No power or duty herein enumerated shall be exercised or carried out except consistently with and according to the approved budget. 
(Ord. 1975-1, §4)  
Sec. 11-4005. - TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT TO STAFF. 
The City Department of Transportation shall serve as staff to the authority to assist in its duties, and the director of transportation or his designee shall serve as the director of transit for the authority. 
(Ord. 1975-1, §5)  
Sec. 11-4006. - TRANSIT DIRECTOR'S DUTIES. 
The director of transit shall have the following duties: 
(a)  To ensure that the desires, actions, and policies of the authority are converted into appropriate transit services for the area and to administer such policies and actions of the authority in conformance with general administrative policies of the City as determined by the City Manager. 
(b)  To direct the implementation of such services. 
(c)  To oversee transit operations for the authority and report and interpret to the authority on current and planned operating results or implications. 
(d)  To develop budgets and standards of transit operation for the authority's approval. 
(e)  To ensure to the authority the timely implementation of the transit development program; make recommendations to the authority for additional service improvements. 
(f)  To testify at regulatory hearings pertaining to all phases of transit activities and/or needs. 
(g)  To monitor transit marketing effectiveness and to administer transit planning coordination. 
(Ord. 1975-1, §6)  
Secs. 11-4007 — 11-4020. - RESERVED.  
CHAPTER 5. - PRIVATE BUS SERVICE 
 
Sec. 11-5001. - SHORT TITLE. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Bus Service Control Ordinance of the City of Raleigh." 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5002. - BUS SERVICE DEFINED. 
Bus service is defined to be public transportation offered to the public for compensation by motor vehicle with a capacity greater than nine (9) passengers, operated along fixed routes, with fixed schedules, or between fixed termini. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5003. - COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER. 
It shall be unlawful for any person , business or other entity to provide bus service as herein defined within the corporate limits of the City unless such person has complied with and shall continue to comply with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, this chapter shall not apply to any bus service operated as follows: 
(a)  Private transit service provided pursuant to contract to a group of more than eight (8) patrons none of whom pay fares when boarding or unboarding or who use prepurchased passes. 
(b)  Between fixed termini only one (1) of which is within the corporate limits of the City and no single passenger trip is within the corporate limits of the City . 
(c)  Contracted transportation of a group of passengers (charter) from a single trip origin to a single trip destination with no boarding or discharging of passengers between the single origin and destination. 
(d)  Passing through the entire City without picking up or discharging any passengers within the corporate limits of the City . 
(e)  For the exclusive purpose of providing transportation to the clientele of public or private, nonprofit human service agencies or to public or private schools. 
(f)  Transportation by motor vehicles owned or operated by or on behalf of hotels or motels while used exclusively for the transportation of hotel or motel patronage between hotels and motels and local railroad or other common carrier stations. 
(g)  Transportation of passengers to and from airports and passenger airline terminals when such transportation is incidental to transportation by aircraft. 
(h)  Transportation by motor vehicles used exclusively for the transportation of passengers to or from religious services or transportation of pupils and employees to and from private or parochial schools or transportation to and from functions for students and employees of private or parochial schools. 
(i)  Transportation of any bona fide employees to and from their place(s) of regular employment by employer. 
(j)  Operations pursuant to Article A, Chapter 4, of the Raleigh City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5004. - APPLICATION FOR BUS SERVICE PERMIT. 
Except as otherwise provided in §11-5003, no person shall operate a bus service in the City unless such person shall in width have applied to and obtained from the City Council a bus service permit authorizing such operation. Application for a bus service permit shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, on forms furnished by the City Clerk and shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The name, age, residence and business address of the applicant if he is an individual, or if the applicant is a corporation, the address of the principal office of the corporation and the name and address of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(b)  A current balance sheet showing in detail the applicant's assets, liabilities and net worth. 
(c)  A list of the number, age, body type and seating capacity of vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the business. 
(d)  The streets over which, and the fixed termini and regular routes between which and over which, the applicant proposes to operate. 
(e)  A schedule of operation showing the time of arrival and departure from terminal and intermediate points and days of service. 
(f)  A schedule of rates and changes showing the fares to be charged between the several points or localities to be served. 
(g)  A statement showing how the granting of the permit will serve the public convenience and necessity. 
(h)  Location and description of maintenance garaging and/or parking facilities for all buses. 
(i)  Such other information as the City Council may require. 
The application shall be verified as to the truth of the statements therein contained by the oath of the person making such application if he is an individual, by one (1) of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, and by an officer of the company if the applicant is a corporation. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5005. - APPLICATION FEE. 
Each application for a bus service permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable certified check payable to the City in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5006. - PUBLIC HEARING ON APPLICATION. 
Upon the filing of an application for a bus service permit under the provisions of this chapter, the City Council shall fix a time and place for a hearing on such application. A notice of date and place of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. A public hearing upon the application shall be held by the City Council at the time specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5007. - DETERMINATION BY CITY COUNCIL AS TO GRANTING OF PERMIT. 
In the determination of applications for bus service permits under this chapter, the City Council shall give due consideration to: 
(a)  Whether public convenience and necessity require the proposed service. 
(b)  Whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to properly perform the proposed service. 
(c)  Whether the applicant is solvent and financially able to furnish adequate service on a continuing basis. 
The City Council may issue the permit as applied for, or may issue it with modifications, or may refuse to issue it based on the considerations stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5008. - TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT. 
Each bus service permit issued under authority of this chapter shall be in writing and shall show the following : 
(a)  The name of the grantee. 
(b)  Designation of the route or routes over which the grantee shall operate; the terminal, intermediate and off-route points of service; complete schedule and fares to be charged. 
(c)  Designation of insurance to be carried by the grantee. 
(d)  Frequency and type of vehicle inspections to be performed on buses. 
(e)  General description of the size and type of buses authorized to be used by the grantee. 
(f)  The term of the permit which shall not exceed three (3) years from the date of Council approval and which shall be subject to renewal by the City Council upon expiration. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82)  
Sec. 11-5009. - VEHICLE DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS. 
In order to enhance the safety and welfare of the passengers using private bus service, all operations of such private vehicles shall conform, notwithstanding the provisions of §11-5003 and to the extent not prohibited by state or Federal law, to the following requirements, and each vehicle must: 
(a)  Obtain and display on the vehicle the North Carolina Utilities Commission certification authorizing its operation or, if exempt from commission regulation, the exemption number. 
(b)  Require all drivers of such vehicles to have in their possession a valid Class B operator's license issued by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(c)  Display a valid North Carolina commercial license plate. 
(d)  Carry a valid North Carolina motor vehicle registration in the vehicle. 
(e)  Display in the vehicle a certificate of insurance representing that it is covered by at least the minimum insurance requirements mandated by the North Carolina Utilities Commission. 
(f)  Assure that each vehicle is equipped with an appropriate fire extinguisher. 
(Ord. No. 1988-198, §2, 6-21-88)  
Sec. 11-5010. - CHANGE IN PERMIT. 
After the issuance of a bus service permit as provided in this chapter, such permit may thereafter be amended, changed or modified upon application of the grantee; provided that the procedure in all such cases as to notice and public hearing shall be the same as provided in this chapter for the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82; Ord. No. 1988-198, §1, 6-21-88) 
Editor's note: Sections 11-5010—11-5012, formerly numbered as §§11-5009—11-5011, were renumbered by §1 of Ord. No. 1988-198, adopted June 21, 1988.  
Sec. 11-5011. - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
Any bus service permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked either in whole or in part by the year ; provided that the Permit Holder shall be given at least fifteen (15) days' actual notice of hearing on any proposed revocation and an opportunity to be heard; provided further that the procedure in all such cases as to notice and public hearing shall be the same as provided in this chapter for the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82; Ord. No. 1988-198, §1, 6-21-88) 
Note See the editor's note to §11-5010.  
Sec. 11-5012. - PREEXISTING ACTIVITIES. 
Any person , business or entity operating a contractual motor bus service prior to enactment of this chapter shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter in providing such contractual service during the term of the contract existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1982-992, §1, 10-5-82; Ord. No. 1988-198, §1, 6-21-88) 
Note: See the editor's note to §11-5010.  
CHAPTER 6. - STREET MAINTENANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note: Chapter 6 was created by renumbering §§7-2001—7-2008, pursuant to Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, adopted Nov. 4, 1998. Prior to amendment by that ordinance, §§7-2001—7-2008 derived from Code 1959 , §18-3, 19-22, 19-28, 19-27, 19-30—19-32; Ord. No. 1983-98, §1, adopted Apr. 19, 1983; Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, §6, adopted Dec. 6, 1983; Ord. No. 1985-613, §5, adopted July 16, 1985; Ord. No. 1985-639A, §§1—5, adopted Sept. 17, 1985; Ord. No. 1986-735, §3, adopted Feb. 18, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-25, §1, adopted Aug. 4, 1987; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §12, TC-20C-95, adopted Nov. 21, 1995; Ord. No. 1988-128, §1, adopted Feb. 16, 1988; and Ord. No. 1998-361, §§1—6, adopted June 6, 11, 1998. Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 1998-454, sections 7-2002 and 7-2004, as amended by 1983-245-TC-205, adopted Dec. 6, 1983, were transferred by §57 of that ordinance to become Ch. 7 of Part 10. Section 7-2003 has been transferred by §9 to §12-1037.1. Sections 7-2005—7-2010 were renumbered 7-2002—7-2007 by §58. The editor's footnote to Part 7 should also be consulted. 
 
Sec. 11-6001. - PERMIT AND REGULATIONS FOR WORKING IN, UPON, OVER, UNDER OR ADJACENT TO THE STREETS AND SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  Prohibitions where no certificate of eligibility issued. 
Unless and until a written certificate of eligibility to receive permits shall have been issued pursuant to the provisions of this section by the Director of Transportation, or by an authorized employee in the Department of Transportation, either in the form of an annual certificate or a specific certificate covering a particular project: 
(1)  No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street , sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, pole or for any other purposes. 
(2)  No person shall grade, construct, pave or otherwise improve or repair or undertake the grading, construction, paving, improvement or repair of any street or sidewalk or other public place, including the construction, extension, paving or repair of any driveway which extends over or within the boundaries of any street , sidewalk or street right-of-way. 
Cross reference: Driveway Access, Sidewalks, and Streets, Part 10, ch. 7. 
(3)  No person shall engage in any work or activity which shall in any way obstruct or tend to obstruct any street , sidewalk or other public place except those operating according to a valid permit issued pursuant to this Code. 
(4)  No person shall engage in the erection, construction, repair, demolition, renovation, maintenance or any other work or activity in or upon, over, under or adjacent to or within five (5) feet horizontally of any street , sidewalk or other public property within the City outside of any permanent building. 
(b)  Liability insurance and performance bond. 
(1)  In order to provide for the general welfare and safety of the citizens and their property , no such certificate as is required by subsection (a) shall be issued unless and until, and as a prerequisite of the issuance of any such certificate, such person shall file with and keep on file with the Director of Transportation or his duly authorized representative a certificate of insurance denoting that a standard public liability policy has been issued and executed by a company authorized to write such insurance business in the State of North Carolina. The policy shall insure such person and the City , separately as to each insured except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability; against liability to persons for bodily injuries to the extent of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injuries or death sustained by one person and to the extent of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death sustained by more than one person in a single accident or occurrence and against liability for property damage to the extent of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) which may be sustained as a result of a single accident or occurrence as a result of any work referred to herein. The certificate of insurance provided for herein shall indicate that coverage is provided for the operations of the person and his subcontractors, completed operations of the contractor where the work is not to be performed for the City . The certificate shall further provide that cancellation or material change in the insurance coverage cannot be accomplished until fifteen (15) days' written notice thereof shall have been given by the insurance company to the certificate holder. Copies of any limiting or restrictive endorsements attached to the basic policy shall also be attached to the certificate. The certificate may limit the coverage applying to the City to those jobs or projects for which the Director of Transportation or any authorized agent has issued a permit. If the work for which the permit is issued has unusual exposures in that there is a danger of collapse, underground property damage, or explosion to be determined by the Director of Transportation or his duly authorized agent, the contractor will be required to denote the same on his request for a permit and will be required to obtain insurance insuring both the contractor and the City against those specific hazards and the certificate of insurance shall indicate such coverage. As a condition of the issuance of the certificate, provided for in subsection (a) herein, both the person obtaining the certificate and the insurance company agree that upon request they will furnish to the City a copy of the policy of insurance as it pertains to the insured interest of the City . Any public utility company subject to the jurisdiction of the North Carolina Public Utilities Commission which is engaged in the City in any of the activities referred to in this chapter, and which is a self-insurer of its public liability, in whole or in part, may file with the City a certificate of liability, in whole or in part, approved by the City Attorney in lieu of the liability insurance policy required by this section. 
(2)  As a further condition of the issuance of such certificate, the person desiring to work in the public streets as provided in this section shall file with the Director of Transportation or his duly authorized agent, a bond in the amount of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or in such additional amount as the Director of Transportation or his duly authorized agent may prescribe to guarantee the performance of the work in conformity with the requirements of this chapter but the liability of such person shall not be limited to the penalty of the bond. If the work is not performed in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, the cost of making such work conform shall be a charge against the permit or certificate holder and his performance bond. The performance bond shall not be required where the work to be done is strictly maintenance work not involving any type of construction nor shall it be required of the utility companies referred to above. 
(c)  Fees. 
No such certificate as required by subsection (a) shall be issued until and unless the fees as set forth within the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule shall have been paid in full to the City , with such fees found to be reasonable and necessary to cover the cost and expense of issuing the certificates, examining and approving the insurance policies required by this section, the cost of inspecting the work for conformance to the conditions of the permit to work on public ways, and other things incidental to the issuance of such certificates and permits. 
(d)  Other licensing provisions not modified. 
Nothing in this section shall in any way modify, repeal or dispense with the requirements of the plumbing code of the City , the electrical code of the City or the building code of the City , or of any other ordinance or law, as now existing or hereafter adopted, prescribing permits or licenses and fees and charges therefor as prerequisite to the doing of any of the work or activities set forth in subsection (a) of this section; but the procurement of the certificate prescribed by this section shall be a basic preliminary requirement which must be complied with in order to make any applicant eligible for permits when the work or activities are to be done, or performed in, upon, over or immediately adjacent to any street , sidewalk or other public place within the City . 
(e)  Refilling excavations; liability for injuries; indemnifying the City . 
(1)  Whenever any person shall make any excavation or opening of any street or sidewalk or other public place in the City for the purpose of laying pipe, wires or other apparatus, or for any other purpose, it shall be the duty of such person making such excavation or opening to refill such excavation or opening on completion of the purposes for which the excavation or opening was made so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening and such refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the Director of Transportation or his duly authorized representative. 
(2)  Any person obtaining the certificate and permit provided for in subsection (a) herein agrees, as a condition of the issuance of said certificate and permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the City , its officers , councilmen, and employees from any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations, excluding only the liability of the City for its sole negligence except in connection with general supervision of work performed by said person . 
(f)  Protecting public from injury. 
Whenever any person shall do or undertake to do any of the things set forth in subsection (a) for which a permit is required, it shall be the duty of such person to use due and reasonable care to protect from harm and damage all persons or property who or which may be using any street , sidewalk or other public place where such activity is in progress, and to that end such person shall erect and maintain suitable barricades, signs, lights, flares, and other appropriate means of protection and other appropriate warning devices at, near, or around the place or places where such work or activity is in progress. 
(g)  Definition. 
Street shall mean and include all of the area between the boundary lines of any right-of-way granted, conveyed, dedicated or otherwise established for public use within the City . 
(h)  Certificate covers agents, etc. 
When any certificate or permit required by subsection (a) shall have been lawfully obtained pursuant to the provisions of this section by the person responsible for the work or project for which the certificate or permit is issued (either as contractor, subcontractor, property owner , or in any other capacity as a principal responsible for such work), the certificate, so long as it continues in force and effect, shall cover the agents, servants, and employees of such responsible person . 
(i)  Penalty for violation or working without a permit. 
(1)  Any person who performs work without a required permit once in a twelve-month period, then for the first violation, the person shall pay both the permit fee and a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  If a person performs work without a required permit twice in a twelve-month period, then for the second violation, the person shall pay both the amount specified in subsection (i)(1) and a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  If a person performs work without a required permit three (3) or more times in a twelve-month period, then for the third violation, the person shall pay both the amount specified in subsection (1) and (2) and a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and for each subsequent violation the penalty will be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), up to the fifth violation. 
(4)  After the fifth violation in a twelve-month period, privilege and right of the person to work in any public street , sidewalk, or street right-of-way shall be suspended for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the sixth violation. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1998-460, §1, 12-1-98; Ord. No. 2006-83, §1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2009-641, §1, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 2019-949, §11, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Cross references: Building and housing code enforcement, Part 10, Ch. 6; street obstructions and encroachments, Part 12, Ch. 1, Art. A; City Council approval required for private use of public rights-of-way or sidewalks, §12-1022. 
State law references: Authority to regulate, license and prohibit digging in streets and sidewalks, G.S. 160A-296; curb cut regulations, G.S. 160A-307; widening, extending and paving streets , G.S. 160A-296(3).  
Sec. 11-6002. - INDEMNITY BOND. 
As a condition of the issuance of a permit for construction of and improvements to sidewalks, curbs, gutters and portions of driveways and drains within public rights-of-way (in addition to the other requirements of this Code, when such work is to be done either by a person employed by the owner of the property abutting the improvement, or by the City under contract, upon failure of such owner to do the required work, after notice), the person making the improvements shall be required to enter into a continuing indemnity bond with sufficient surety, upon condition that such work will be done in conformity with the standards established by the City and that the City will be indemnified for any damages it might sustain as a result of the breach of such condition. The damages payable to the City shall be the amount required to make such improvements conform to such City standards. The penalty of the bond shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but the amount of damages recoverable by the City from the person failing to perform the work in conformity with the City standards shall not be limited to the penalty of the bond. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98) 
Charter references: Authority for exemptions from special assessments, §2.14(71); street improvements without petition, §6.44(a). 
Cross reference: Street and sidewalk improvements, Part 6, Ch. 2. 
State law reference: Authority and procedures for special assessments, G.S. 160A-216 et seq.  
Sec. 11-6003. - POLES, WIRES, EQUIPMENT; REMOVAL AND RELOCATION. 
It shall be the duty of every person or firm operating a telephone, telegraph or electric lighting or power system within the corporate limits of the City within ten (10) days after notification in writing by the Transportation Director, to remove and relocate any cross-arm, pole or standard used in connection with the system; or, upon such ten (10) days' notice in writing by such Chief Engineer, to remove and relocate any cable, wire or wires, which, in the opinion of such Transportation Director are in dangerous proximity to any high-tension wire or any low voltage electric light or power wire, or when the removal and relocation of such cross-arms, poles, standards, cables or wires is required by the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98) 
Cross reference: Chief Engineer, §6-1001.  
Sec. 11-6004. - HEIGHT OF OVERHEAD WIRES. 
All overhead cables or wires crossing any street at a street intersection or otherwise shall in all instances be at least fifteen (15) feet above the street , and it shall be the duty of every person , firm or corporation, upon ten (10) days' notice by the Transportation Director, to raise such cable or wires to the required height; provided, however, traffic signals under which vehicles must pass shall be no less than thirteen and one-half ( 1/2) feet above the street beneath it. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 11-6005. - NOT TO OBSTRUCT STREETS. 
(a)  No poles, posts or obstructions of like nature shall be permitted to stand in the traveled portion of the streets or gutters of the City . All persons who have erected or constructed any poles or fixtures in the City , as herein provided or embraced, or who may hereafter erect or construct them and have ceased to use them or any of them for the purpose originally intended or who may hereafter cease to use them, all persons owning or using any pole which is obstructing any street , gutter, alley, sidewalk or any other public passageway, or which is rotten or unsafe, or which is not necessary for the proper conducting of wires, are hereby required to take down and remove such poles, wires and fixtures. 
(b)  Whenever the Director of Transportation shall find that any pole, wire or fixture is maintained in violation hereof, he shall order its removal, and it shall be the duty of such persons to make such removal within five (5) days after such notice. Each day violation continues constitutes a separate offense. Nothing herein shall be so construed as to abridge the power or authority of the 
City to forthwith cause the removal of any pole, wire or fixture where the same is imminently dangerous to life and property . 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 11-6006. - REPAIR OF SIDEWALK AFTER REMOVAL. 
In removing poles, the owner or owners shall fill in the hole after removal with sand, crushed stone or other suitable material to the ground level, in accordance with requirements of the Transportation Director. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98) 
Cross reference: Repair of sidewalks and driveways by property owners , §12-1037.1.  
Sec. 11-6007. - PAVING AT GRADE CROSSINGS AND BRIDGES. 
(a)  All railroad companies whose tracks cross any of the streets of the City shall improve such crossing by placing treated timbers on each side of the rails level with the top of the rails and paving between the timbers and to a point at least eighteen (18) inches outside of the rails with an asphalt mix. Where sidewalks are provided on the streets crossed by a railroad track, the sidewalks shall be extended across the tracks using treated timbers between the rails and to a point at least eighteen (18) inches outside of the rails. Such sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. 
(b)  All such crossings and bridge surfaces shall be maintained in a safe and smooth condition. When, in the opinion of the Director of Transportation, a crossing or bridge surface is not properly constructed or maintained, and upon written notice from him, the railroad company shall immediately make the repairs or alterations necessary in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98) 
Charter reference: Authority to regulate railroad track construction, §2.14(6). 
State law reference: Authority to regulate railroad crossings, G.S. 160A-298.  
Sec. 11-6008. - CITY RESPONSIBILITY FOR SIDEWALK REPAIR AND/OR REPLACEMENT OF SIDEWALKS RAISED, BROKEN, ETC. 
(a)  Private properties will be relieved from the responsibility of sidewalk repair and replacement of sidewalks raised, broken or otherwise made uneven by tree trunks located in whole or in part in the public right-of-way under the following conditions: 
(1)  The City receives either written notice or finds that conditions described in the above paragraph exist; and 
(2)  The City determines that the raised, broken, or uneven sidewalk was caused by tree trunks located in the right-of-way or by the roots of said tree; and 
(3)  The property owners of tree trunks located partially in the right-of-way, including the roots of said trees, consent to repair or replacement of the sidewalk and the property owners hold the City , its officials, its employees and its contracts harmless for any damage caused to the tree. 
(b)  In all cases, the Urban Forester shall advise the repair crew ( City or contractor) as to proper care of the trees and determine if the tree shall be removed or its roots cut and removed. However, the timing of these repairs will be determined within the sole discretion of the City which shall be guided in its determinations, among other factors, upon the extent of the offset or damage to the sidewalk, the nature of the character of the sidewalk, its location, the amount of travel over it by pedestrians, and the extent to which the present conditions of the sidewalk would ordinarily be seen or observed by pedestrians. All other sidewalk repairs, maintenance, and replacement shall remain in full force as set forth in §12-1037.1 of this Code. 
(c)  This provision shall in no way enlarge the common law duty of the City to make repairs to sidewalks. 
(d)  The sidewalk construction standards imposed by this Code may be waived by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee for the purpose of sidewalk repairs performed under §11-6008 provided that: 
(1)  Repairs performed according to City standards would destroy, or would be likely to destroy, a healthy mature tree. 
(2)  The repairs will provide a sidewalk that is safe for use by both handicapped and nonhandicapped individuals. 
(3)  The repairs may reasonably be assumed to last for at least seven (7) years . 
If conditions (2) and (3) above, cannot be met without the likelihood of serious harm to the tree, the tree will be removed and the sidewalk will be repaired to City standards. 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §10, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2002-149-TC-212, §6, TC-12-01, 1-15-02) 
Cross reference: Repair of sidewalks and driveways by property owners , §12-1037.1.  
PART 12 - LICENSING AND REGULATION  
CHAPTER 1. - STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS  
ARTICLE A. - STREET OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-1001. - AWNINGS, CANOPIES, MARQUEES, SIGNS AND OTHER PROJECTIONS OVER SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  Regulations. 
(1)  Express approval required. 
It shall be unlawful except with the express approval of the Council , for any person , firm, or corporation to construct or maintain any awning , (fixed or movable) sign, canopy, marquee, structure , or any other encroachment on, projecting into, overhanging, or with its supports on the public rights-of-way, provided no express approval by the City Council is required for mailboxes, lawn irrigation systems for single-family and duplex dwelling units and plantings on street rights-of-way, for banners erected in accordance with the banner display program policy. Before authorizing the construction of any awning , (fixed or movable) sign, canopy, marquee, structure , or encroachment, the Council shall find that such construction will not in any way hinder, obstruct, delay, or in anywise endanger the free and safe use of the public rights-of-way, and comply with the procedure set forth in §12-1022. Permission for the use of the public rights-of-way for any use permitted herein shall not relieve the petitioner from compliance with any other requirement of this Code. In addition to the permission of the City Council , encroachments over, under or in streets and alleys under the control of the State Department of Transportation may be erected only if that department consents thereto. Permission for the use of the public rights-of-way for any use permitted herein shall be subject to revocation by the Council at will. 
Cross reference: City permit required for the planting of plant material in any public street, §9-8005; banner display program policy, Resolution No. (2000) 590. 
(2)  Awnings, etc. 
Awnings, marquees and other structures extending from and attached to buildings may be permitted under the following rules: 
a.  Every fixed awning, marquee , or structure and sign extending from and attached to buildings erected after March 8, 1992, shall be at its lowest point at least nine (9) feet, excluding a flexible balance which may extend one additional foot, above a sidewalk or the ground when projecting over public rights-of-way and shall not extend or occupy more than two-thirds of the width of the sidewalk when measured from the building. When proposed fixed awnings, marquees , or signs are at least fourteen (14) feet above a sidewalk or the ground, the Council may permit such fixed awnings, marquees , or other structures and signs to extend or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk, provided that such encroachments shall not extend closer than eighteen (18) inches from the back of the curb. 
b.  Metal or canvas movable awnings may extend over public rights-of-way for a distance of not more than five (5) feet provided such awnings or any part thereof maintain a clear height of eight (8) feet, excluding a flexible balance which may extend one additional foot, above the sidewalk. All movable awnings shall be supported on metal frames attached to the building. 
c.  Inside the primary fire districts, all awnings (fixed and movable) and marquees shall be entirely made of noncombustible material or in the use of canvas, cloth of similar synthetic fabric-like materials, such coverings shall be treated so as to produce a flame spread no greater than twenty-five (25). 
d.  The design and construction of marquees shall comply with the requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
e.  The director of transportation shall advise the Council as to whether the proposed awning (fixed or movable), marquee, structure , or sign will obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, or approach to any street intersection. 
(3)  Canopies. 
Where supports are to be placed on the public rights-of-way, all canopies may be permitted under the following rules: 
a.  Plans for such canopies shall be submitted to the Council . 
b.  All canopies on streets other than the first four (4) blocks from the State Capitol of Fayetteville Street, shall be constructed of concrete or metal in such a manner as to be substantially permanent in nature and in compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code. 
c.  The minimum underside clearance including signs or other appurtenances below the structure shall be fourteen (14) feet above the sidewalk. 
d.  The center line of the columns shall be three (3) feet behind the back of the existing street curb. No columns shall be more than two (2) feet in diameter (or other cross-section). Other improvements may be placed in the space between two (2) feet and four (4) feet from the face of the curb (the column area), upon Council approval of specific plans. 
e.  No part of the canopy shall project closer than eighteen (18) inches to a street parking or traffic lane. 
f.  All canopies must be equipped with underside lighting, provided and maintained by the abutting properties at a level of ten (10) footcandles at the sidewalk. 
g.  An identification sign on the underside of the canopy which conforms to §10-2065.2(a) is permitted. 
h.  The director of transportation shall advise the Council as to whether the proposed canopy will obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, or approach to any street intersection. 
(4)  Fayetteville Street limitations. 
On Fayetteville Street (first three (3) blocks from the State Capitol) no marquees shall be hereafter constructed and all canopies must conform to the design established by the mall committee, approved by the Council and on file in the Department of Planning. 
(5)  Gasoline service stations. 
Gasoline service stations having pumps constructed, erected, reconstructed, or reerected as provided in Code §10-6036 may have canopies which extend from the wall of the main service station building to a point four (4) feet beyond the pumps and pump islands; provided that the construction of such canopies shall meet all of the construction requirements of subsection (a)(3); provided that all permits which allow the construction of such canopies as are constructed nearer the street than the building setback line specified in the zoning ordinance shall be removed at any time at the cost of the property owner in the discretion of the Council ; provided further, no permit shall be issued for the construction of a canopy closer to the public right-of-way than provided in the zoning ordinance unless and until an instrument, sufficient to give proper notice to subsequent owners of the conditions on which the permit is to be issued, shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds. 
(b)  Definitions of Terms for Purposes of This Section. 
(1)  Sign. 
Any identification, description, animation, illustration or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any right-of-way, which directs attention to any realty, product, service, place, activity, person , institution, performance, commodity, firm, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner, poster, bulletin board, pennant, placard, or temporary sign designed to identify or convey information, with the exception of state, municipal, or national flags. 
(2)  Marquee. 
A marquee shall include any hood or awning of permanent construction supported from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending into a street right-of-way without pillars or posts within a street right-of-way. 
(3)  Awning. 
An awning shall include any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting into a street right-of-way regardless of whether the same is supported by pillars or posts in the right-of-way and regardless of whether it can be raised to a position flat against the building when not in use. 
(4)  Canopy. 
A canopy shall include any structure, other than an awning, made of metal or other incombustible material attached to a building projecting into a street right-of-way and supported by pillars or posts within a street right-of-way. Canopies shall extend across the entire street frontage of a building. 
(5)  Structure. 
The term structure shall mean a combination of material to form a construction that is safe and stable including among others, buildings, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, trestles, shelters, fences, and display signs; the term structure shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
( Code 1959 , §19-2; Ord. No. 1977-579, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1979-982-TC-96, §§35—37, 1-2-79; Ord. No. 1979-118, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 1980-503, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1981-806, §§1, 2, 12-8-81; Ord. No. 1985-598, §1, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 1985-645, §§1—3, 10-1-85; Ord. No. 1987-946-TC-286, §52, 4-7-87; Ord. No. 1992-930, §§1—5, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-482, §1, 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2000-800, §1, 5-16-00) 
Cross reference: Sign regulations generally, §10-2065.  
Sec. 12-1002. - BRIDGES OVER GUTTERS. 
No person shall erect or maintain any platform or bridge over the gutters within the limits of the City ; provided, this shall not prevent the installation of drainage pipes for walkways or driveways where there is no paved curb and gutter. The installation of such drainage pipe shall be as approved by the Director of Transportation. 
( Code 1959 , §19-3; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98) 
Cross reference: Public works, Part 7.  
Sec. 12-1003. - CELLAR DOORS, GRATINGS AND MANHOLES IN SIDEWALKS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any cellar door, grating or manhole on the sidewalks of the City without approval of the Council . Cellar doors, gratings or manholes shall be on a level with the sidewalk and shall be kept in good repair by the owner of such structures. Doors, gratings and manhole covers shall be constructed of iron or other material as approved by the Director of Transportation. All such openings shall be kept closed at all times when not in use, and when in use proper guards shall be provided to warn and protect the public. 
( Code 1959 , §19-4; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 12-1004. - CELLARS AND VAULTS UNDER SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  No person shall appropriate any space under a sidewalk for cellar, vault or other underground uses without first obtaining approval of the Council . When approved, underground structures shall be constructed so as not to interfere with public utilities. 
(b)  The sidewalk over any such underground space permitted shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of such structure so as to permit safe travel over the same by pedestrians. 
(c)  The roof over any such underground space shall be of approved noncombustible material. Glass lights shall not be permitted within the sidewalk area over cellars, vaults or other underground structures. 
( Code 1959 , §19-5)  
Sec. 12-1005. - PLACING ARTICLES ON SIDEWALKS SO AS TO OBSTRUCT. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the sidewalks of the City by placing thereon any box, bag, bale, crate, stand, frame, vehicle, coal, wood, brick, lumber, litter, or other obstruction for a longer period than is absolutely necessary for the purpose of loading, unloading, moving or transporting the same. 
(b)  The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  Standard covered garbage cans, at the times and places designated by ordinance or order of the City Manager. 
(2)  In case of a special permit for construction, dismantling, advertising, and for such other purposes as are or may be provided by ordinance. 
( Code 1959 , §19-13; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 12-1006. - BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS. 
No person shall ride bicycles on any of the following pedestrian ways or sidewalks: Fayetteville Street Mall, Moore Square Station Transit Mall, adjacent to designated bike lanes. This prohibition shall not apply to sworn law enforcement officers while on duty and to any private security force employed by a non-profit corporation and approved by the City Council. 
( Code 1959 , §19-21(c); Ord. No. 1987-96, §1, 12-1-87; Ord. No. 2000-747, §1, 3-7-00) 
Cross reference: Bicycles generally, Part 11, Ch. 3.  
Secs. 12-1007 — 12-1020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - STREET USE AND CLEANLINESS 
 
Sec. 12-1021. - AUCTION SALES IN STREETS; ATTRACTING CROWDS. 
No auction shall be held on any street within the City limits; nor shall any person attract a crowd to himself on any street or thoroughfare in the City so as to impede travel thereon by advertising his goods or merchandise, or by offering them for sale, or by any manner of speech making whatsoever; providing, nothing herein contained shall prohibit speech making or serenading under the control of the Chief of Police; provided further, this section shall not apply to legal sales held on public property . 
( Code 1959 , §19-1)  
Sec. 12-1022. - USE OF SIDEWALKS FOR PRIVATE PURPOSES; PERMIT REQUIRED; INSURANCE. 
(a)  No use of the surface of public sidewalks or public right-of-way for private purposes shall be permitted or continued unless the person , partnership, firm, or corporation desiring to use or continue the use of a sidewalk or public right-of-way shall procure a permit from the Director of Transportation of the City , after the approval of such use by the City Council . Such permit shall be issued only upon condition that the user of the sidewalk or public right-of-way for private purpose shall first assume in writing , responsibility for any injury or death of persons or damage sustained as a result of such use. 
Users of the sidewalk or public right-of-way shall post indemnity with a surety or liability insurance in accordance with §11-6001(b)(1). The indemnity or insurance so provided shall be maintained throughout the period of such use and it shall be unlawful to continue such use without continuing such indemnity or insurance. Encroachments for transmission devices of any type shall pay a fee at the rate of four cents ($0.04) per linear foot per month of use, except that Wake County, the State of North Carolina, any educational institution of Wake County or the State of North Carolina, and companies holding approved franchise agreements with the City shall be exempt from this fee; said fee shall be collected prospectively on an annual basis. All users of the sidewalk or public right-of-way shall pay an administrative charge of seventy dollars ($70.00) which partially defrays the City's expense in keeping records and processing these requests. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no neighborhood identification sign funded all or in part by a loan or grant from the City of Raleigh and approved by the Director of Public Works shall be subject to the insurance requirement set out in this section. 
Upon construction of the encroachment the user shall submit to the City as built drawings showing the precise location of the encroachment, and in the case of encroachments for transmission devices the drawing shall also show the location of other utilities in the public right-of-way or sidewalk. As-built plans shall not be required for underground lawn irrigation systems when used specifically for single-family or duplex dwelling units. Permission for the use of the public rights-of-way or sidewalks shall not relieve the petitioner from compliance with any other requirement of this Code. Permission for the use of the sidewalk or public rights-of-way for any use permitted herein shall be subject to revocation by the Council at will. Newsracks and public utility companies authorized to use the streets under the franchise from the City shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Handicapped ramps installed to serve government buildings built prior to March 20, 1979, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided such ramps shall not extend or occupy more than three-fifths the width of the sidewalk and shall not extend closer than three (3) feet to the curb. 
Any person , partnership, firm, corporation or any other entity who shall use a sidewalk or public right-of-way without first obtaining the approval of the City Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished as in such cases provided by statute. In addition to this criminal remedy and any other authorized remedy, any person , partnership, firm, corporation or any other entity who excavates or excavated in a sidewalk or public right-of-way without first obtaining the approval of the City Council shall be subject in the sole discretion of the Council to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each continuous day of use. No penalty shall be assessed until the alleged violator has been notified of the violation. The Council shall determine the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed and shall make a written demand for payment upon the person , partnership, firm, corporation or entity responsible for the violation and shall set forth in detail the violation for which the penalty has been invoked. If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within thirty (30) days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice of Wake County for recovery of the penalty. 
Cross reference: Permit and regulations for working in, upon, over, under or adjacent to the streets and sidewalks, §11-6001. 
(b)  Newsracks shall not be allowed on the public right-of-way unless the conditions contained in this subsection are met. A newsrack is defined as any self-service container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the distribution of newspapers or news periodicals. After the effective date of this ordinance [September 18, 1984] no newsrack shall be placed at the sidewalk until it has received a permit granted by the Inspections Department. There shall be no charge made for the permit and it shall be issued if the issuing officer finds that the newsrack and location meet the following conditions: 
(1)  No individual newsrack shall exceed fifty (50) inches in height, twenty-four (24) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in thickness. This includes all signs and any other permanent attachments necessary for the operation of the newsrack . 
(2)  Newsracks may be placed no closer than five (5) feet from the edge of the street curb and shall be placed parallel to and no more than six (6) inches from the sidewalk edge farthest away from the street curb, or the wall of a building which is adjacent to the sidewalk edge. 
(3)  No newsrack shall be affixed or attached to any fixture or other property owned or maintained by the City of Raleigh. All newsracks shall be enclosed so as to prevent the unintended escape therefrom of the printed material being dispensed from the rack. If a vendor cannot provide an enclosed rack, it may use an open rack if that rack has a latch or other device to prevent the contents of the rack from being removed by the wind or other accidental means. Any newsracks not meeting these standards shall be removed from the public right-of-way no later than July 15, 1995. 
(4)  No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
a.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, standpipe or siamese connector. 
b.  Within five (5) feet of any emergency call box or other emergency telecommunications equipment or any other emergency facility. 
c.  Within five (5) feet of any driveway or cross-walk. 
d.  Within five (5) feet of any public transit benches or other public benches and trash containers. 
e.  Within five (5) feet of any area within the public right-of-way improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, or trees. 
f.  At any location where the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than five (5) feet. 
g.  Within a ten-foot radius of the points of intersection of the right-of-way of two (2) intersecting streets . 
h.  Within five (5) feet of any underground utility access points, ventilation areas or meters. 
i.  Within five (5) feet of any handicapped ramps or other facilities provided for handicapped persons . 
j.  Within five (5) feet of any building access, exits or any emergency access or exit ways. 
(5)  No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than an identification sign dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. Within ninety (90) days after this section becomes effective, every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on the streets of the City of Raleigh shall have the vendor's name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. A uniform sticker shall be supplied by the Inspections Department for this purpose. Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section shall be tagged with a "notice of violation" stating the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected within ten (10) days or procedure for obtaining a hearing before the Inspections Department is made giving the owner of the newsrack opportunity to be heard regarding the violation. The Inspections Department or its designate may , as an alternative to tagging said newsrack , move, align, or otherwise reposition such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition. Any newsrack which has been tagged and remains in violation of the provisions stated on the tag past the ten-day correction period, and for which no hearing has been requested, shall be removed by the Inspections Department or its designate and stored in a secure location. The Inspections Department or its designate shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a "notice of removal" to the last known address of the owner . Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Inspections Department, if desired. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty-five (45) days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage. Upon failure of the owner to claim such newsrack and pay the reasonable charges within forty-five (45) days after the mailing of written notice of removal, such newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the Police Department and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions outlined in the Code of the City of Raleigh. Any newsrack in violation of the provisions of this section, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the newsrack, may be summarily removed and stored in a secure location so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Inspections Department or its designate shall notify the owner as outlined in this section. Every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or right-of-way in the City of Raleigh shall file a written statement with the Inspections Department satisfactory to the City Attorney whereby he or it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City , its officers , councilmen and employees, from any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, or maintenance of a newsrack within the City of Raleigh. 
( Code 1959 , §19-5.1; Ord. No. 1977-472, 3-15-77; Ord. No. 1979-46, 3-20-79; Ord. No. 1984-415, §§1—3, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 1985-639A, §§7—9, 9-17-85; Ord. No. 1987-36, §1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 1994-521, §1, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 1999-482, §2, 1-5-99; Ord. No. 2006-83, §2, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2009-641, §§2, 3, 9-1-09)  
Sec. 12-1023. - PRESENT USES; REPAIRS; COSTS. 
Uses presently made of the sidewalks for private purposes may be continued only on condition that the provisions of this section are complied with within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this section, and upon failure to comply herewith, the property owner using a sidewalk for private purposes shall immediately discontinue such use and restore the sidewalk to its original condition. The City may restore the sidewalk to its original condition and assess the cost thereof against the property of the owner if he shall fail to do so and such cost shall be a lien upon the property , collectible in the same manner that taxes are collected; by civil action; or require that the sidewalk be repaired and assess the cost thereby against the property abutting on both sides of the street , unless there already exists a sidewalk, on the other side of the street the total cost of which was assessed against the abutting property .  
Sec. 12-1024. - PEDDLERS' TIME ON STREET LIMITED; PRESENCE RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN AREA; IMPEDING PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED; WASTE RECEPTACLE REQUIRED ON STAND, CART, ETC. 
(a)  All vending controlled by the Private Use of Public Spaces Handbook as adopted by the Raleigh City Council on February 20, 2007, and as subsequently amended shall only be conducted pursuant to the terms of that document. Anyone vending without a permit or outside the parameters of the handbook relating to location, type of cart, product sold, or any other specification shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The misdemeanor may be punished by a fine greater than fifty dollars ($50.00) as set out in N.C.G.S. 14-4. 
(b)  Except pursuant to a special event permit, it shall be unlawful to peddle in the streets of the City items other than home-made food goods, fresh cut flowers, fruits, vegetables, nuts, eggs, meat, dairy products, and original artworks and handicrafts produced by the peddler. If a special event permit is granted the peddler may also sell merchandise which is related to the event for the permit has been granted. The peddler shall comply with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The peddler shall obtain an annual permit from the City after establishing that the vendor complies with all legal requirements for its operation. The fee for the annual permit is as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . Permits are not transferrable; 
(2)  The peddler shall comply with all federal, State, and local regulations applicable to the products offered for sale, including health and food safety regulations. 
(3)  The peddler's operations shall not impede, endanger, or interfere with travel on or use of the street or the sidewalk by the public. 
(4)  The peddler shall obey all parking regulations. If the parking space selected by the peddler is not a metered space, the peddler shall park to conduct sales for a maximum of two (2) hours during anyone day. 
(5)  The peddler shall not use or permit customers to use the street. All vending transactions with customers shall occur at the curb or inside the peddler's vehicle; 
(6)  The peddler shall promptly remove any trash associated with its operation and may not dispose of its trash in any City -owned public trash receptacle; 
(7)  The vehicle used by the peddler shall have a gross vehicle weight when unloaded no greater than three thousand nine hundred (3,900) lbs. and the vehicle shall not extend beyond the boundaries of any parking space in which it is located; 
(8)  The peddler shall provide proof of a valid insurance policy that provides a minimum liability coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000) with the City named as an additional insured. The peddler shall also hold the City , its officers, councilors, and employees harmless and indemnify them for any loss, liability, damage, and costs and expenses arising from its operations; and, 
(9)  The peddler shall not locate within fifty (50) feet of a fixed-location or City permitted pushcart business of a competing nature or within fifty (50) feet of an outdoor dining space. No peddler may operate within fifty (50) feet of another peddler operating under this section. 
(10)  The peddler shall not operate within an area designated for a special event unless the peddler is a part of the permitted special event. 
(c)  Vendors who operate solely from a zero-emissions motorized vehicle licensed by the State Division of Motor Vehicles to operate on streets and highways may peddle those items described in subsection (b) from commercial loading zones within the Downtown Overlay and Glenwood South Business Districts on the following conditions: 
(1)  The vendor shall obtain an annual permit from the City after establishing that the vendor complies with all legal requirements for its operation; 
(2)  All equipment required for the operation and the operation itself is contained within the zero-emissions motorized vehicle; 
(3)  The vendor may occupy the loading zone space at the end of the posted period for the loading zone space and shall remove all equipment and leave all loading zones no later than 11:00 p.m.; 
(4)  The vendor shall not use or permit customers to use the street. All vending transactions with customers shall occur at the curb; 
(5)  The vendor shall promptly remove any trash associated with its operation; 
(6)  The vehicle shall be no larger than shall have a gross vehicle weight when unloaded no greater than three thousand nine hundred (3,900) lbs. and the vehicle shall not extend beyond the boundaries of the commercial loading zone; 
(7)  The vendor shall hold the City , its officers, councilors, and employees harmless and indemnify them for any loss, liability, damage, and costs and expenses arising from its operations; and, 
(8)  No fixed-location business of a competing nature and no outdoor dining space is located within 50' of the loading zone parking space to be used by the vendor. 
(d)  Provided further, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or have any stand, cart or vehicle upon any street which impedes, endangers or interferes with the travel upon or use of the streets by the public. Each such stand, cart or vehicle shall be equipped with a waste receptacle and shall have rubber tires. 
(e)  All pushcarts must obtain and maintain a permit for each location where the owner of the pushcart intends to operate. All applications for permit renewal must be filed no later than June 20 preceding the next permit year. During the period June 21 through July 1 the permits for any spaces that were not renewed will be available to new applicants. In the event that more than one applicant desires one of the abandoned locations the City will conduct a lottery to assign that space. The price of each permit and permit renewal is as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . Permit applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A home occupation use permit for a home based business. 
(2)  A food vending permit from Wake County. 
(3)  A valid City of Raleigh business license. 
(4)  A scaled sketch plan or photographs showing proposed cart location, dimension, and details of surrounding streetscape elements, covering six (6) feet on all sides of the edge of the cart operation area including property lines, sidewalks, curb lines, lighting, trees indicating size, tree grates, planters, parking meters, benches, street signs, bus stops and fire hydrants. The cart operation area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(5)  A list of products to be sold. 
(6)  Proof of a valid insurance policy that provides a minimum liability coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with the City named as an additional insured. 
(7)  A written indemnity agreement that will hold harmless the City , its officers, and employees, for any loss or liability or damage, including costs, for bodily injury or property damage sustained by a person as a result of the negligent installation, use, or maintenance of a permitted space. 
(8)  A food permit from the N.C. Department of Agriculture if the applicant intends to sell baked goods or ice cream. 
(f)  Permit holders may be required to remove private materials or accessories to allow street , sidewalk, or utility access for maintenance operation or during approved special events. All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be suspended during a special event approved by the City Council. Carts are excluded within four hundred (400) feet of the edge of any special events area unless the permit holder is given permission from the event sponsor to set up within the designated event area. No more than three (3) permits per cart shall be issued to any cart owner. 
(g)  Pushcarts are prohibited in areas not zoned for commercial use. In all other areas of the City the carts shall conform to the following regulations regarding location and operation: 
(1)  Carts must not locate in any area that impedes, endangers, or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Carts selling food products must be located at least fifty (50) feet from the entrance to any business selling food unless the owner of the other business gives written permission for the infringement of the no vending area. 
(3)  Carts must locate at least fifty (50) feet from any outdoor eating area. 
(4)  Carts must be located at least two (2) feet from any curb. 
(5)  Carts must not be locked or attached to trees or street furniture. 
(6)  Carts must maintain an unobstructed pedestrian corridor of a minimum of five (5) feet in width parallel to the street . On Fayetteville Street the minimum pedestrian corridor is seven (7) feet. 
(7)  No more than two (2) carts will be allowed on any block face. 
(h)  All carts must meet the following design standards: 
(1)  Carts must be non-motorized with operable wheels. Persons with disabilities may use a motorized system to propel the cart. 
(2)  All carts must be self contained with a waste receptacle. All equipment other than coolers must be contained on or with in the cart. 
(3)  A cart may not exceed six (6) feet in height and eight and one-half (8.5) feet in length and four (4) feet in width. Carts permitted prior to 2007 may continue to operate if they exceed any of these dimensions. 
(4)  Umbrellas or canopies must be attached to the cart and must not exceed eight (8) feet in height above grade. Maximum diameter of canopies and umbrellas shall not exceed six (6) feet and shall not interfere with pedestrian movement. No cart shall have more than two (2) umbrellas. 
(5)  Carts must be constructed of durable material and not plastic or wood may be visible. 
(6)  Carts must comply with all local, state, and federal rules regarding sanitation and protection of food from airborne contamination. 
(7)  All signage on carts shall comply with the Raleigh Sign Ordinance. No free standing signage is permitted. 
(8)  Sales of goods and merchandise are limited to food and beverage, fresh cut flowers, or original artwork and handicrafts produced by the vendor. All items for sale must be confined to the cart. Food vendors may place a maximum of three (3) coolers within their containment area so long as the coolers are neatly stacked to avoid visual clutter. No generators may be used at any time. 
(9)  A vendor may maintain one chair for his own use. No public seating is allowed. Pushcarts may not be stored, parked, or left overnight on any City property. 
(10)  Carts may only be operated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. Cleanup and removal of the cart must be completed by 3:30 a.m. The operator must be present at all times and must have a valid permit on his person or on the cart at all times. 
(11)  Permits are not transferrable. 
(12)  The operator is responsible for all waste and trash removal. The containment area must be kept clear of grease, trash, paper, cups or cans associated with the operation. No liquid waste or grease is to be disposed of in tree pits or onto the sidewalks, streets or other public places. 
(i)  Any street vending performed that is not in compliance with these regulations is illegal. 
(j)  A permit is revoked if the operator receives three (3) citations, either civil, criminal or combination thereof during any calendar year. 
( Code 1959 , §9-12; Ord. No. 1980-393, §§5, 6, 6-3-80; Ord. No. 1989-441, §1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 2010-773, §1, 8-3-10; Ord. No. 2010-815, §1, 12-7-10; Ord. No. 2011-835, §1, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-87, §1, 7-3-12; Ord. No. 2015-489, §1, 9-15-15 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 12-1024.1. - FOOD TRUCK ACTIVITIES LOCATED ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Food truck means a licensed, motorized vehicle or mobile food unit licensed by the NC State Division of Motor Vehicles and as authorized by N.C.G.S. 130A-247 et seq. which is temporarily stored in a location where food items are sold to the general public. A food truck hasan unloaded gross vehicle weight between three thousand nine hundred (3,900) pounds and sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds. 
Defined locations means five (5) distinct areas within the City of Raleigh: 0—199 blocks of South State Street between New Bern Avenue and West Hargett Street; 0—199 Blocks of Polk Street between North Wilmington Avenue and North Blount Street; 400 Block of West North Street between Harrington and North West Street;; and the blocks bounded by West Hargett Street, South West Street, West Davie Street and South Dawson Street. 
Permit holder means any person who holds a current food truck permit. 
Permitted parking space means the location identified by the City in the approved food truck permit. 
Vendor means any person who owns, operates or manages a business that uses or applies for a food truck permit. 
(b)  Right-of-Way Use Limited, Permit Required. 
1.  No food truck may utilize the right-of-way to serve customers without obtaining a permit for food trucks within the right-of-way. This shall not apply to special events approved by the City . 
2.  A vendor may obtain a permit to serve customers from the right-of-way, provided all standards identified in this section are met. If demand for food trucks exceeds available parking spaces within the defined locations , the City may utilize a lottery system to award the permits. 
3.  A completed permit application must be submitted to the City . The permit application shall be accompanied by all required elements listed on the application and the submittal fee, as indicated in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
4.  The vendor must possess a valid insurance policy through an insurance carrier authorized or eligible to do business in the State of North Carolina for any damage to the public right-of-way and for any damages for which the City might incur liability because of property damage or personal injury arising out of the use of the public right-of-way. The minimum liability limit of the policy shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The City of Raleigh shall be listed as an additional insured as its interests may appear on all Certificates of Insurance. 
5.  The vendor shall hold the City , its officers, councilors and employees harmless and indemnify them for any loss, liability, damage and costs and expenses arising from its operations. 
(c)  Right-of-way Eligible for Food Truck Service. 
A food truck providing service from the right-of-way must meet all of the following standards: 
1.  The food truck may only be parked within the permitted parking space within the defined locations . 
2.  All food trucks must be situated to allow at least five (5) feet of unobstructed space for pedestrians on sidewalks, pedestrian paths and other locations intended primarily for pedestrian travel. If any applicable law, including Americans with Disability Act regulations, shall require a greater distance, the greater distance shall apply. 
3.  The food truck shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the main entrance of any restaurant, any outdoor dining space, or any fixed location or City -permitted pushcart business of a competing nature. If a restaurant subsequently locates within the minimum spacing requirement, the food truck may operate until the food truck permit expires. 
4.  No food truck may be parked in a location that prohibits or restricts access to a private property . A minimum five (5) foot spacing is required from any driveway, measured from the driveway apron. 
5.  The food truck must be located at least five (5) feet from any utility box, utility vault, handicapped ramp, or emergency call box. The food truck must be located at least fifteen (15) feet from a fire hydrant. 
6.  The food truck operator must dispose of all waste associated with the food truck operation. City receptacles may not be utilized for this purpose. No liquid waste or grease may be poured into any tree pit, storm drain, gutter pan, sidewalk or any other public space. Grease cannot be released into the City's sanitary sewer system. The food truck operator shall make available hand sanitizer to its customers. 
7.  Once a permit has been granted by the City , a food truck may operate within the permitted parking space on every day of the week from the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. During the First Friday Festival of each month, the food truck may operate until 8:00 p.m. The food truck may not operate or park within the permitted parking space before 10:00 a.m. and must cease operation and leave the permitted parking space by 3:00 p.m., except during the First Friday Festival. 
8.  The food truck operator shall not utilize tables, chairs, free-standing signage or audio amplification in conjunction with the food truck . All equipment shall be contained within or on the food truck. 
(d)  Suspension of Permit. 
1.  The City reserves the right to require any permit holder to cease part of all of its operation, or remove the food truck from the permitted parking space in order to allow for construction, maintenance or repair of any street , curb, gutter, sidewalk, storm drain inlet any other similar municipal utility. 
2.  The food truck operator must comply with all other applicable local, state and federal regulations. Any food truck operated in a manner inconsistent with these regulations is illegal. 
3.  If a food vending permit is revoked by the issuing County entity, the City's food truck permit shall also be revoked. 
4.  The City may temporarily suspend the permit to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the public. The City may temporarily suspend the food truck permit when the street is closed for a special event. 
5.  If at any time evidence of the improper disposal of liquid waste or grease is discovered, the food truck permit will be rendered null and void and the food truck business will be required to cease operation immediately. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
1.  Civil Penalties. 
a.  Violations of any of the provisions of this section will result in the following civil penalties: 
i.  First offense in any twelve- month period ..... $100.00 
ii.  Second offense in any twelve- month period ..... $500.00 
iii.  Third offense in any twelve- month period ..... Permit revocation 
b.  The City Manager or the Manager's designee may issue a notice of violation assessing civil penalties. The notice shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable specificity the basis for the civil penalty. The notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail, or by personal service. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the Post Office within ten (10) days after the mailing. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty. 
c.  The notice of violation shall contain a time period by which the violation must be corrected. From and after the date specified in the notice, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
d.  If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within thirty (30) days after the decision becomes final, the City may recover the penalty, together with all costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
2.  Administrative Fee. 
Any person who violates this article shall pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
3.  Other Remedies. 
In addition to civil penalties and permit suspension, a violation of this division is a misdemeanor and may also be enforced through injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of remedies. 
4.  Appeals. 
a.  A party aggrieved may appeal any decision under this section to the City Manager within fifteen (15) calendar days after the contested decision. An appeal must be made in writing and shall contain the reasons supporting the appeal and any evidence that supports it. The person appealing may review the evidence that is the basis of any suspension or violation during the City's normal business hours. The City Manager or his designee shall review the information provided and shall issue a written decision determining whether a violation has occurred. 
b.  After receiving a determination from the City Manager or his designee, a party aggrieved may appeal to the City Council within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the City Manager's decision (or the decision of his designee) was mailed. The scope of the City Council 's review shall be limited to verifying the facts supporting a written decision or Findings of Fact made on a suspension. If the City Council finds that the facts as found are correct, the civil penalty, administrative fee, or suspension shall not be disturbed. 
(f)  Termination or Amendment of Streetside Vending. 
The City Council may amend, revise, or terminate streetside vending by ordinance duly enacted. The City shall retain the entire fee paid for the permit by the permit holder ; no refund shall be issued to any food truck permit issued that is no longer valid because of an amendment, revision, or termination. 
( Ord. No. 2016-555, §1, 3-15-16, eff. 5-14-16 ; Ord. No. 2018-857, §1, 6-19-18, eff. 6-24-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 12-1025. - SALE OF MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALKS. 
It shall be unlawful, except pursuant to the provisions of §12-1024, for any person to expose, sell or to offer for sale any merchandise, cooked provisions, poultry, fruits, vegetables or other commodities upon any sidewalk in the City ; provided that this section shall not prevent the sale of merchandise if the proceeds of such sales are used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, or [from] sidewalk cafes [which] are permitted in a pedestrian business overlay district. 
( Code 1959 , §19-15; Ord. No. 1986-856-TC-274, §9, 9-16-86; Ord. No. 1989-441, §2, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 12-1026. - SOLICITING BUSINESS OR EMPLOYMENT. 
(a)  Business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit business of any kind on the streets or sidewalks of the City . 
(b)  Employment near Nash Square. 
Loitering for the purpose of seeking employment or the seeking thereof or the solicitation by any prospective employer of any person for hire within or upon any of the streets or sidewalks contiguous to Nash Square is declared to be a public nuisance and such practices are prohibited. 
(c)  Employment, generally. 
Loitering for the purpose of seeking employment or the seeking thereof or the solicitation by any prospective employer of any person for hire within or upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the City is declared to be a public nuisance and such practices are prohibited. 
(d)  Approaching motor vehicles. 
No person shall stand, sit, or loiter in the right-of-way of any streets in the City with the intent to approach any motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contribution from the driver or occupant of the motor vehicle; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to licensees, employees or contractors of the Department of Transportation or City employees engaged in construction or maintenance or in making traffic or engineering surveys. 
( Code 1959 , §19-16; Ord. No. 1994-447, §1, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 1995-678, §1, 7-5-95) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate solicitation, G.S. 160A-178.  
Sec. 12-1027. - SUBSCRIPTIONS OF PUBLICATIONS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit subscriptions for papers, magazines, books, or other publications on the streets or sidewalks of the City , or in any public park within the City limits. 
( Code 1959 , §19-17)  
Sec. 12-1028. - TREES, PLANTING, INJURING, DESTROYING. 
Citizens may plant trees in front of their lots and around their lots, on the sidewalks, under the supervision of the director of parks. No tree shall be planted in the streets or gutters. No person shall cut, destroy or injure any tree or box around same without permission from the director of parks. 
( Code 1959 , §19-19) 
Cross reference: Trees and vegetation, Part 9, Chapter 8.  
Sec. 12-1029. - UNLOADING COAL ON SIDEWALKS. 
Every manhole or other aperture located within the sidewalk areas of the City and used for delivering coal into the basement of an adjacent building shall be located within two (2) feet of the curb line of the street . Coal shall not be permitted to be shoveled or thrown across the sidewalk. 
( Code 1959 , §19-20)  
Sec. 12-1030. - VEHICLES AND ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  No person shall lead, drive or ride any horse or motor vehicle upon any sidewalk except such part of it as lies directly between the street and the entrance to any adjacent lot, and then only for the purpose of going into or out of such lot. 
(b)  No person shall place, roll, drive or ride on the sidewalk any wheelbarrow, handcart or hand carriage except in passing directly across the sidewalk into or out of a house or lot or when transporting an infant or invalid. 
( Code 1959 , §19-21)  
Sec. 12-1031. - PLAYING GAMES OR THROWING MISSILES ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PRIVATE LOTS OR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
It shall be unlawful to play any game of any description or to throw any stone, snowball, or other missile by bean shooter or other such device upon the streets and sidewalks of the City . It shall also be unlawful to play such games or throw such missiles by such means in any private lot or public place in any such manner as to annoy or injure another or to constitute a nuisance. 
( Code 1959 , §21-10)  
Sec. 12-1032. - DISCHARGING NOXIOUS FLUIDS. 
No person shall use the streets or sidewalks, or gutters of the City , as a drain to carry off any water that has been used, or other noxious fluids of any description whatsoever. 
( Code 1959 , §19-7)  
Sec. 12-1033. - DRAINS UNDER SIDEWALKS. 
Every owner or lessee of any building having conductors or down pipes emptying on any sidewalk shall provide and maintain under efficient operating conditions underdrainage for same across such sidewalks. Each day's failure to comply with the provisions of this section after notice shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Code 1959 , §19-8)  
Sec. 12-1034. - FILTHY MATTER IN WASTE RECEPTACLES. 
It shall be unlawful to place any ashes or empty the contents of any cuspidor or to place any other filthy or objectionable matter in the sidewalk waste receptacles provided for public use. 
( Code 1959 , §19-9)  
Sec. 12-1035. - HAULING REFUSE; TRACKING MUD. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled over the streets of the City any dirt, shingles, laths, or trash in a wagon or other vehicle, unless the wagon or vehicle is constructed to prevent, and does prevent, the spilling of dirt, shingles, laths or trash upon the streets . 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a truck or other vehicle under his control to track mud, in appreciable quantity, on the streets or sidewalks of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §19-11; Ord. No. 1978-700, §1, 1-7-78)  
Sec. 12-1036. - PAINTING STREETS, CURBS, ETC.; AUTHORIZED CITY EMPLOYEES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than duly authorized employees of the City to paint the streets , sidewalks or curbs, or any part thereof, within the right-of-way of any street or public alley within the City . 
( Code 1959 , §19-11.1)  
Sec. 12-1037. - CLEANING SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS. 
It shall be the duty of all occupants or tenants of improved property and of the owners of all vacant property in the City to keep sidewalks, parkways and gutters clean, and to do such cutting, sweeping and scraping as may be necessary to keep such sidewalks clean and free from weeds, grass, snow, ice, dirt and trash, and to render the same passable, comfortable, and sightly, and the gutter next to and along each sidewalk open and free from obstruction, for the full width of their respective fronts. 
( Code 1959 , §19-6)  
Sec. 12-1037.1. - REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS BY PROPERTY OWNERS. 
It shall be the duty of every property owner in the City to maintain in good repair and safe condition, the sidewalk and driveway abutting his property for the safe passage of pedestrians over the same except as otherwise provided in §7-2008. 
( Code 1959 , §19-25; Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, §9, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1986-735, §4, 2-18-86) 
Editor's note: This section was formerly numbered §7-2003. 
Cross reference: Repair of sidewalk after removal of poles, §7-2006.  
Sec. 12-1038. - JUNK, ETC., ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place or leave or cause to be placed or left, temporarily or permanently, any trash, refuse, garbage, scrapped automobile or truck or part thereof, scrap metal or junk of any kind on the right-of-way of any street or highway within the City . 
(b)  This section does not apply to domestic trash or garbage placed on such rights-of-way for removal by the City . 
( Code 1959 , §11-9)  
Sec. 12-1039. - REMOVING MATERIAL FROM STREETS. 
(a)  No person shall remove any sand, dirt, loam, sod, clay, gravel or other materials from any of the streets , alleys or sidewalks; provided, that this section shall not apply to lot owners who are repairing or constructing sidewalks under the specifications prescribed by the City nor to persons planting trees along the edge of sidewalks. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, any recyclable material placed on the public right-of-way or in any other approved collection area and in containers approved by or provided by the Department of Solid Waste Services becomes the property of the City upon being placed in either of the above areas for collection. It is unlawful for anyone other than the person placing the material or an authorized City employee to remove any of the recyclable material from the right-of-way or any other approved collection area. A misdemeanor violation of this ordinance can be punished by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) as provided by law. 
(c)  Any material placed on the public right-of-way in a container provided by a person , partnership, firm, or corporation holding a permit issued by the City pursuant to §12-1022 to collect recyclable material from the right-of-way is not the property of the City and must be removed by the permittee consistent with the schedule for collection of recyclables by the City . Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to revocation of the permit issued pursuant to§12-1022. Any violation of this subsection shall be deemed a non-criminal violation and shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to G.S. 14-4 or §14-1005(a) of this Code of Ordinances. 
( Code 1959 , §19-14; Ord. No. 2012-19, §1, 3-6-12, eff. 3-13-12; Ord. No. 2017-662, §1, 1-17-17 )  
Sec. 12-1040. - DEPOSITING TRASH ON STREET. 
No person shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped or deposited on any street , avenue, alley, highway, footway, sidewalk, park, or other public place or space in the City , any waste (including but not limited to, refuse, garbage, ashes, rubbish, building rubbish , dead animals, putrescible matter, paper, drinking cups, broken glass, tacks, brush, grass, weeds, and anything injurious to health); provided, however, building rubbish and material used in building, construction, repair, remodeling and excavating operations may be deposited in the aforesaid places when permitted by and in accordance with other applicable ordinances. If any person , while transporting or hauling, or causing to be transported or hauled, such rubbish or material, or earth, excavation, coal or other material, shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped or deposited, such rubbish or material from the body of the vehicle, in violation of the provisions of this subsection, such person must daily clean up and remove such rubbish or material in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Public Works, failing which the Department of Public Works may clean up and remove such rubbish and material, and the City may collect the cost of such cleaning up and removal from such person . 
(Ord. No. 1998-454, §12, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 12-1041. - OUTDOOR SEATING AREAS ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Meandering path. When the placement of tables, chairs or other movable object causes the pedestrian corridor to shift alignment in a horizontal manner in either direction or otherwise substantially impedes continuous unobstructed pedestrian travel. 
Medallion means a disc provided by the City that is affixed to the ground that identifies the limits of the approved outdoor seating area . 
Operator means any person who owns, operates, or manages a business that uses or applies to use an outdoor seating area . 
Outdoor seating area means a permitted seating area on a public sidewalk that is used for seating purposes by a permit holder . 
Permit holder means any person who holds a current permit for an outdoor seating area . 
Permitted business means the business that regularly and customarily sells food or drink and is allowed to use an outdoor seating area as authorized under this section. 
(b)  Sidewalk Use Limited; Outdoor Seating Area Permit. 
(1)  No business may use a public sidewalk to seat its patrons without first obtaining a permit for an outdoor seating area issued by the City. No person shall place tables, chairs, or other seating on a public sidewalk in conjunction with a business without first obtaining a permit for an outdoor seating area that is issued by the City . 
(2)  A business that regularly and customarily sells food or drink may obtain a permit from the City to operate an outdoor seating area on the terms and conditions set out in this section. The permit shall specify the specific area to be used for outdoor seating, the furniture to be used within the outdoor seating area , and the proposed arrangement of the furniture. 
(3)  An outdoor seating area permit authorizes a limited use of the public sidewalk so long as that private use does not interfere with the public interest or public use of the sidewalk. 
(4)  The City may temporarily suspend a permit holder's use of an outdoor seating area for any reason and for any length of time. During periods of temporary suspension, the permit holder must remove its furnishings from the outdoor seating area and shall not use the area. Outdoor seating areas may be prohibited during special events, parades or pickets, or for any other reason deemed appropriate by the City . The City will endeavor to give permit holders reasonable advance notice before issuing a temporary suspension, including a suspension related to a special event, parade, or picket. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this shall specifically exclude any furnishings owned by Pavilion tenants located within an Outdoor Seating Easement or Pavilion Operational Easement, as defined in the City Plaza Agreement and recorded the City Plaza Agreement as recorded in Book 13233, Page 1672, in the Wake County Register of Deeds, as amended by the First Amendment to the City Plaza Agreement recorded in Book 13885, Page 1656, in the Wake County Register of Deeds, as defined and described therein. 
(5)  The City will endeavor to give permitted businesses a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours advanced notice, using information as provided on the permit application or renewal, of any pressure washing of the sidewalk to allow for the relocation of outdoor furniture. 
(c)  Sidewalk Areas Eligible for Outdoor Seating. 
An outdoor seating area shall meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The building in which the permitted business operates must share a common boundary line with a public sidewalk. 
(2)  The outdoor seating area shall not extend beyond the boundaries fronting the permitted business. 
(3)  The operation of the outdoor seating area must be related to the sale of food or drink from the permitted business . 
(4)  The outdoor seating area shall allow a minimum five-foot-wide unobstructed pedestrian corridor at all times. Businesses located on Fayetteville Street shall provide a minimum seven-foot-wide unobstructed pedestrian corridor. Wider pedestrian corridors or increased clearances may be required where warranted by pedestrian traffic or other circumstances or to comply with the North Carolina Building Code, Americans with Disabilities Act, or other laws. Furniture in an outdoor seating area may be located next to the curb (with two (2) feet clearance) and/or adjacent to the building, so long as clearances are maintained. 
Where existing obstructions are present (such as fire hydrants, street light poles or other utility structures), the corridor can be measured to go around these obstructions, provided that the obstruction does not exceed one foot in diameter. For tree grates, the outdoor seating area must be located at least two (2) feet from the outside edge of the tree grate, measured from the outer edge of the grate. 
(5)  Outdoor seating areas must be positioned to allow a pedestrian path to continue parallel to the street without causing a meandering path. 
(6)  Where curbside abuts on-street parking, curbside tables shall be placed parallel to the street. A minimum two (2) foot setback should be maintained from the curb edge. 
(7)  A minimum clearance of five (5) feet must be maintained between the outdoor seating area and edge of driveways, alleys, and handicapped ramps. A minimum clearance of two (2) feet shall be maintained between the outdoor seating area and any edge of a tree grate. 
(8)  Outdoor seating area at corners must not extend to within sight triangles at street intersections or driveway entrances. 
(9)  Clear unobstructed height of seven (7) feet must be maintained between the sidewalk surface and overhead objects including umbrellas. 
(10)  The outdoor seating area must not block access to public amenities like street furniture, trash receptacles, and way finding, or directional signs. 
(11)  The occupancy of an outdoor seating area shall not exceed the Maximum Floor Area Allowances pursuant to Table 1004.1.1 in the North Carolina Building Code. 
(12)  Above-ground City public utilities infrastructure or transportation infrastructure shall not be enclosed without written authorization of the City . 
(13)  Furniture must be portable and made of commercial grade material meant for outdoor use. The furniture located within the outdoor seating area may not exceed a dimension of forty-two (42) inches tall, forty-two (42) inches wide and forty-two (42) inches in depth. The permit holder shall keep the furniture clean, well maintained and kept in good repair. No plastic, or unfinished or pressure treated wood furniture is permitted. Picnic tables are not permitted within the outdoor seating area adjacent to Fayetteville Street. Furniture shall not be stacked within the outdoor seating area or against the building façade. 
(14)  Umbrellas are not allowed on tables located within ten (10) feet of block corners. In other locations, there can be no more than two (2) umbrellas per table. 
(15)  Lighting must not cause glare to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(16)  Lighting must not be affixed to City trees without a permit from the City Urban Forestry Division. 
(17)  Outdoor seating areas must be placed in the following locations: 
a.  For sidewalks at least fourteen (14) feet in width, the outdoor seating area may be located directly in front of the building façade, at the street edge, or in both locations. 
b.  For sidewalks less than fourteen (14) feet but greater than ten (10) feet in width, the outdoor seating area may be located either directly in front of the building façade or at the street edge. 
c.  For sidewalks ten (10) feet or less in width, the outdoor seating area shall be located at the street edge. 
(d)  Application; Permit Requirements. 
(1)  A person owning, operating, or managing a business that regularly and customarily serves food or drinks may apply for an outdoor seating area permit on a form approved by the City . At a minimum, the application form shall require: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the business desiring to operate an outdoor seating area ; 
b.  The name, address and telephone number of each of the operators of the business; 
c.  The hours of operation of the business and the proposed hours of operation of the outdoor seating area ; 
d.  A scaled drawing or site plan of architectural design standard quality showing of the proposed outdoor seating area boundary and surrounding streetscape details covering seven feet on either side of the frontage of the associated business, including but not limited to property lines, sidewalks, curb lines, lighting, trees (including tree size), tree grates, planters, street signs, bicycle parking, benches, bus stops, and fire hydrants. The drawing shall show the section of any public right of way to be used for the outdoor seating area and the section to be kept clear for pedestrian use, and depict the proposed materials and placement of tables, chairs, barriers, and other furnishings on the public right of way; and, 
e.  The furniture to be used in the outdoor seating area and its proposed arrangement. 
(2)  An applicant shall also provide: 
a.  An application fee as provided in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application and issuing the permit. 
b.  Evidence of a valid insurance policy, through an insurance carrier authorized or eligible to do business in the State of North Carolina for any damage to the public right of way, and for any damages for which the City might incur liability because of property damage or personal injury arising out of the use of the public right of way for seating purposes. The minimum liability limit of the policy shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The City of Raleigh shall be listed as an "additional insured as its interests may appear" on all Certificates of Insurance; 
c.  An indemnity agreement, approved by the City Attorney, whereby the permit holder and the permitted business agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents and employees from any claim arising or resulting from the operation of the outdoor seating area ; 
d.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the State , County or City that are necessary for the operation of the business, including health permits, ABC permits and business licenses. If no permit has been issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of the application submitted. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted a completed application and all items required by this section. 
(e)  Permit Renewals. 
(1)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall expire on June 30. Permits must be renewed annually by the applicant. Applications for renewal must be submitted on or before May 31. If a renewal application is not submitted by this date, a submittal shall be considered a new permit application. 
(2)  The permit renewal process shall consist of re-submission of the following: 
a.  Application Form; 
b.  Certificate of Insurance; 
c.  Indemnity Agreement; 
d.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the State , County or City that are necessary for the operation of the business, including health permits, ABC permits and business licenses. If no permit has been issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of the application submitted; and, 
e.  Permit Fee. 
No scaled drawing shall be required for a permit renewal unless the permit holder has rearranged or reconfigured the tables, chairs, or other furnishings used for outdoor seating purposes or otherwise revised the outdoor seating area from the previous permit year. 
(3)  During the renewal period for any outdoor seating area , the permits for any spaces not renewed will be available to new applicants. In the case of multi-level properties, if the ground floor occupant with direct access to the outdoor seating area does not apply for an outdoor seating area on or before June 30, anyone who operates a contiguous business may apply. In the event that more than one applicant desires the use of the outdoor seating area , the first complete application received by the City shall be assigned that space. In the case more than one complete application is received on the same day for the same space, the City will conduct a lottery to assign that space. Any business in a multi-level property desiring to use the outdoor seating area directly associated with its business use must have a direct, unobstructed access that must front on and open onto the sidewalk, public alley or pedestrian way proposed for the outdoor seating area . 
(f)  Denial of Application; Reconsideration. 
(a)  The City shall notify the applicant in writing if it is determined that the proposed outdoor seating area does not meet the criteria established by this section. The notice shall identify which criteria were not met. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of denial, the applicant may submit for reconsideration one revised plan for an outdoor seating area for the same business. The payment of a new application fee is not required. 
(c)  A revised plan that is submitted for reconsideration after the thirty (30) day period has expired must be accompanied by a new application, including the application fee. 
(g)  Operation of Outdoor Seating Areas. 
(1)  An outdoor seating area may be used only by the permitted business identified in the permit and only for the seating of patrons in the furniture provided by the permit holder. 
(2)  The limits of the outdoor seating area must be delineated by medallions prior to usage of the outdoor seating area. The medallions must continually remain in place while an approved outdoor seating permit is active. If a medallion is removed for any reason, the permit holder shall notify the City to have a replacement installed. 
(3)  A permit holder may place one host station, removable tables, chairs, or other items used in conjunction with seating within an outdoor seating area in the arrangement shown on the permit. No cash registers, tents, minibars or similar appurtenances shall be permitted. Furniture in an outdoor seating area shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(4)  A permit holder may rearrange or reconfigure approved tables, chairs, and other furnishings in the permitted outdoor seating area without submitting a new application and without any fee only if: 
a.  No prior rearrangement or reconfiguration had been submitted within the permit year. 
b.  The permit holder within seven (7) days of the reconfiguration provides the department with a scaled drawing or site plan of architectural design standard quality of the new placement; and 
c.  The furnishings or their new placement do not: 
i.  Extend outside of the approved area; 
ii.  Constitute a danger to the health or safety of a patron or the public; or 
iii.  Otherwise violate the terms of the permit. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permit holder may temporarily rearrange the tables and chairs to accommodate larger groups of patrons provided all of the requirements of this ordinance are met. 
(5)  Outdoor seating areas shall be open to the air, except that seating may be located under approved umbrellas, awnings, or canopies. 
(6)  A permit holder must provide stanchions to delineate the outdoor seating area during all special events or as otherwise required by the City . 
(7)  Stanchions, planters, pots or other portable, visible above ground barrier may be utilized to delineate the outdoor seating area at the discretion of the permit holder . 
(8)  If stanchions are utilized or otherwise required, they shall be made for commercial use; shall be movable, durable and weather resistant; shall be compliant with the standards set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (as amended); shall be at least eighteen (18) inches above the sidewalk and no taller than forty-two (42) inches above the sidewalk. 
(9)  Except for the required medallions , nothing shall be permanently affixed to a sidewalk or to other public property. 
(10)  The permit holder and the permitted business shall not operate outside the area specified in the permit. 
(11)  Permit holders and operators shall keep all licenses and permits required for their business operations continuously in effect. 
(12)  Permit holders and operators shall ensure that the permitted business obeys all laws related to alcohol service and consumption. To retain an outdoor seating area permit, permit holders and operators shall ensure that no alcohol is served or consumed outside the permitted outdoor seating area . 
(13)  An outdoor seating area may be used by the permit holder only when the permitted business is open to customers. 
(14)  No outdoor seating area shall operate after 2:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday. No outdoor seating area shall operate after 12:00 a.m. on any other day of the week. Permit holders shall ensure that their outdoor seating areas are not available for use after the hours specified in this subsection. 
(15)  The maximum occupancy permitted in the outdoor seating area shall be posted either on the inside of a window that faces the public street adjacent to the outdoor seating area or within a weather resistant frame on the exterior of the building in a conspicuous place. The permit holder shall ensure that the number of occupants in the outdoor seating area does not exceed the posted limit at any time. A server or other person employed by the permit holder who briefly enters and exits an outdoor seating area shall not be considered an occupant for the purposes of this subsection. 
(16)  If the permit holder chooses to display signage that notifies patrons of the physical limits of the outdoor seating area for the purpose of clarifying the allowable area for consuming alcohol served by the permit holder , this signage shall either be placed on the menu or posted on the table top and shall not exceed one square foot in size. 
(17)  The permit holder shall keep the outdoor seating area and the adjacent seven (7) feet of public space surrounding it clean of any solid waste, including, food debris, paper, cups, bottles, cans, and other garbage associated with the operation of the outdoor seating area space on a daily basis. The public right of way within and adjacent to the outdoor seating area must be washed down with water and detergent when needed and cleaned on a daily basis. Any stains from spills must be removed. The permit holder must properly dispose of all waste and trash. 
(18)  The permit holder is responsible for timely removal of snow and ice from the outdoor seating area as per the standards specified in the City publication Fayetteville Street Renaissance Maintenance Partnership, Programs and Policies . No ice-melt should drain into tree pits. 
(19)  The permit holder is responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, cleanliness and security of furniture and accessories used in the outdoor seating area . 
(h)  Additional Requirements for N.C. DOT Streets. 
In addition to the requirements set out in this section, when an outdoor seating area is located on a sidewalk along an N.C. Department of Transportation street or highway, applicants and permit holders shall meet all requirements established by the N.C. Department of Transportation. 
(i)  Not Applicable to Pedestrian Malls. 
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to pedestrian malls . Allowances for private outdoor seating in pedestrian malls shall be at the discretion of the City Council . Any authorization by the City Council for private outdoor seating in a pedestrian mall shall be subject to any terms and conditions determined to be appropriate by the City Council , which may include adherence to the requirements of this section 
(j)  Assignment Prohibited; Effect of Ceasing Business Operations. 
(a)  An outdoor seating area permit is not transferrable or assignable. The permit authorizes use of the outdoor seating area by the permit holder for the permitted business . Any change in the ownership of a business after the issuance of an outdoor seating area permit shall cause the permit to be immediately invalid and require the new owner to reapply for the permit. A change in ownership shall mean acquisition of more than ten (10) percent of the stock in a publicly traded corporation, any change in the ownership of shares in a privately held corporation, sale of all or part of a sole proprietorship, or any change in the membership of any form of limited liability organization. 
(b)  Outdoor seating area permit holders shall notify the City when business operations cease. If business operations cease at the business for thirty (30) calendar days or longer, the outdoor seating area permit shall automatically terminate. 
(k)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Civil Penalties. 
Violations of any of the provisions of this section will result in the following civil penalties: 
(a)  First offense in any twelve- month period ..... $100.00 
(b)  Subsequent offense in any twelve- month period ..... $500.00 
The City Manager or the Manager's designee may issue a notice of violation assessing civil penalties. The notice shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable specificity the basis for the civil penalty. The notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail, or by personal service. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the Post Office within ten (10) days after the mailing. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty. 
The notice of violation shall contain a time period by which the violation must be corrected. From and after the date specified in the notice, each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties. 
If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within thirty (30) days after the decision becomes final, the City may recover the penalty, together with all costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(2)  Administrative Fee. 
Any person who violates this article shall pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(3)  Permit Suspension. 
If a person violates any provision contained in this section twice in any twelve-month period, any outdoor seating area permit issued to or on behalf of that person shall be suspended for thirty (30) days. If a person violates any provision contained in this section three (3) or more times in any twelve-month period, any outdoor seating area permit issued to or on behalf of that person shall be suspended for twelve (12) months. 
(4)  Other Remedies. 
In addition to civil penalties and permit suspension, a violation of this division is a misdemeanor and may also be enforced through injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of remedies 
(5)  Appeals. 
(a)  A party aggrieved may appeal any decision under this section to the City Manager within fifteen (15) calendar days after the contested decision. An appeal must be made in writing and shall contain the reasons supporting the appeal and any evidence that supports it. The person appealing may review the evidence that is the basis of any suspension or violation during the City's normal business hours. The City Manager or his designee shall review the information provided and shall issue a written decision determining whether a violation has occurred. 
(b)  After receiving a determination from the City Manager or his designee, a party aggrieved may appeal to the City Council within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the City Manager's decision (or the decision of his designee) was mailed. The scope of the City Council's review shall be limited to verifying the facts supporting a written decision or Findings of Fact made on a suspension. If the City Council finds that the facts as found are correct, the civil penalty, administrative fee, or suspension shall not be disturbed. 
( Ord. No. 2015-519, §1, 11-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-594, §§1—6, 6-7-16 ; Ord. No. 2016-595, §1, 6-7-16 ; Ord. No. 2018-823, §§1, 2, 5-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §1(Att.), 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Secs. 12-1042 — 12-1050. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS AND STREET EVENTS 
 
Sec. 12-1051. - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  The term parade as used in this section is defined as an assemblage of two (2) or more persons participating in or operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or in any procession, promotion or objection of any kind in or upon the public streets , alleys, parks or other public grounds in any manner; provided, the term shall not include: 
(1)  "Pickets," etc., as defined in §12-1055; 
(2)  Funeral processions; 
(3)  Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
(4)  Bands or marching groups proceeding to an assembly point for participation in a parade; or 
(5)  Footraces and bicycle races. 
(b)  No parade shall be conducted on the public ways of this City and no person shall inaugurate, promote or participate in any such parade unless the parade is conducted in conformity with the requirements set out herein and unless a permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police or his designated representative. 
( Code 1959 , §21-31(a)(b); Ord. No. 1979-126, §1, 6-19-79) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate parades, G.S. 160A-296.  
Sec. 12-1052. - PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING PERMIT. 
(a)  Application for a parade permit shall be made in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours and no more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days before the time at which the parade shall be scheduled to begin and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring or proposing the parade; 
(2)  The location or locations in the City where the parade is proposed to take place; 
(3)  The date and hours for which permit is sought; 
(4)  The name of the person applying for the permit; 
(5)  Whether or not persons below the age of eighteen (18) years are expected to participate; and 
(6)  The person or persons to be in charge of the activity and who will accompany it and carry permit at all times. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application properly completed and timely filed as hereinabove set out, the designated officer shall immediately issue a permit consistent with the standards prescribed herein. The permit shall contain all information stated on the application and shall be signed by the issuing officer . 
( Code 1959 , §21-31(c), (d); Ord. No. 2014-343, §7, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 )  
Sec. 12-1053. - STANDARDS FOR CONDUCT OF PARADES. 
The following standards shall apply to all parades conducted in the City : 
(a)  No parade or part thereof may be conducted on the streets of the City between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  Every parade shall follow a route approved by the City Manager or designee. The City Manager or designee shall approve no route which is incompatible with the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. The City Manager or designee's disapproval of a proposed route may be appealed to the City Council . 
(c)  No one participating in a parade or proceeding along the route of a parade shall distribute therefrom any candy, cigarettes, prizes or favors of any kind. 
(d)  No vicious animal whether leashed or unleashed shall participate in or proceed along the route of a parade. 
( Code 1959 , §21-31(e); Ord. No. 1980-346, §2, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 1989-304, §1, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 2014-343, §§8—11, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 )  
Sec. 12-1054. - REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
The Chief of Police or his designated agent may revoke any permit granted for a parade if: 
(a)  Any person violates the standards for the conduct of parades set out herein; or 
(b)  Any participant in a parade fails to comply with the formation, terms and conditions set out in the application and permit or fails to comply with the terms of this section. 
( Code 1959 , §21-31(f))  
Sec. 12-1055. - PICKETING DEFINED. 
The terms picket , pickets and picketing as used herein are deemed to include "demonstrators," persons participating in vigils and any action primarily promoting or objecting to a policy upon those portions of the public ways not used primarily for vehicular parking and moving traffic and not constituting a parade. 
( Code 1959 , §15-35.1(j))  
Sec. 12-1056. - PICKETING PERMITTED; NOTICE OF INTENT AND RECEIPT REQUIRED. 
Peaceful picketing shall be permitted in the City provided the same is done under the following conditions: 
(a)  No picketing shall be conducted on the public ways of this City and no person shall participate in the same unless notice of intent to picket has been given to the Chief of Police or his designated representative, and unless a receipt of such notice has been issued. 
(b)  A group of ten or more persons shall give notice of intent to picket in writing and the notice given shall contain the following information. A group of fewer than ten persons may give written notice of intent to picket but is not required to do so. 
(1)  The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring or proposing to picket unless the group indicates that it intends to picket anonymously, in which case no name is required; 
(2)  The location or locations in the City where the pickets propose to assemble and demonstrate; 
(3)  The date or dates on which the picketing is to occur; 
(4)  The name of the person and organization giving notice of intent to picket unless the person or organization indicates that it intends to picket anonymously, in which case no name is required; 
(5)  Whether or not persons below the age of eighteen (18) years are expected to participate; and 
(6)  The person or persons to be in charge of the activity and who will accompany it and carry any receipt of notice at all times. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or dwelling of any individual. 
(d)  Upon the giving of notice of intent to picket , properly completed as hereinabove set out, the designated officer shall immediately issue a receipt of notice. The receipt shall contain all information stated in the notice. Notice shall be given by the holder of a receipt of notice to the Chief of Police or his designated representative immediately upon the cessation of such picketing for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more. Before resumption of picketing interrupted for any such period, a new notice shall be given and a new receipt issued. 
( Code 1959 , §15-35.1(a)—(c); Ord. No. 1990-504, §1, 3-7-90; Ord. No. 2006-977, §1, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 12-1057. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT FOR PICKETING ACTIVITIES. 
(a)  Picketing shall be conducted only on portions of the public ways not used primarily for vehicular parking or moving traffic. 
(b)  Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding thirty-six (36) inches provided the words used would not tend to incite violence. 
(c)  If pickets promoting different objectives, causes, actions or policies desire to use a sidewalk that is already used for picketing, the Chief of Police or the Chief's designated agents shall allot a number of pickets promoting each objective, to use such sidewalk, on an equitable basis, proportionate to the number of objectives being promoted. 
(d)  Pickets shall be restricted to the use of the outermost half of the sidewalk or other public way nearest the street and shall not at any time nor in any way obstruct, interfere with, or block: persons entering or exiting from vehicles; persons crossing streets or otherwise using the public way; the entrance or exit to any building or access to property abutting the street or sidewalk; or pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  No person observing, engaging in, or assisting in picketing shall bring to or allow to remain in the immediate area of picketing any vicious animal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a group of ten or more persons to picket without filing a notice as required herein. 
(g)  The provisions of §§12-1055 through 12-1057 are mandatory, and not merely directory, and failure to comply with the provisions of these sections is hereby declared to be unlawful and punishable as provided by law. 
( Code 1959 , §15-35.1(d)—(i), (k)—(m); Ord. No. 2006-977, §2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 12-1058. - INTERFERENCE WITH PICKETS PROHIBITED; POLICE AUTHORITY TO DISPERSE CROWDS; FAILURE TO LEAVE WHEN ORDERED DECLARED OFFENSE. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere with pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address profane, indecent, abusive, or threatening language to or at those pickets which would tend to provoke the pickets or others to a breach of the peace. 
(b)  The police officers of the City may, in the event of the assemblage of persons in such numbers as to tend to intimidate pickets pursuing their lawful objective through numbers alone or through use of inflammatory words, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to absent himself from the place of such assemblage when so directed by the police. 
(c)  Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the City shall be obstructed by a crowd, whether or not the crowd assembles as a result of or in connection with picketing , the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer . It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
( Code 1959 , §15-35.2)  
Sec. 12-1059. - FOOTRACES AND BICYCLE RACES. 
(a)  The term footrace as used in this section is defined as a group of three (3) or more runners or walkers competing against either each other or a time limit over a fixed course all or a part of which involves the use of City street right-of-way, City sidewalks, and greenways. 
(b)  The term bicycle race as used in this section is defined as a group of three (3) or more bicyclists competing against each other or a time limit over a fixed course all or a part of which involves the use of City street right-of-way, City sidewalks, and greenways. 
(c)  Application for a race covered by this section shall be made in writing at least one hundred twenty (120) calendar days before the time at which the race shall be scheduled to begin and shall contain the information outlined in the City Council 's Special Event Policy. A race application may be accepted after this deadline only if allowed as a late application permitted under the City Council 's Special Event Policy. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application properly completed and timely filed as hereinabove set out, the City Manager or designee shall issue a permit after the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements imposed in accordance with the City Council 's Special Event Policy. The permit shall contain all information stated on the application and shall be signed by the City Manager or designee. 
(e)  The following standards shall apply to all footraces and bicycle races subject to this section conducted in the City : 
(1)  Every race shall follow a route approved by the City Manager or designee in accordance with the standards set out below. 
(2)  The race applicant and all persons involved in conducting the race shall comply with all terms and conditions set out in the City Council 's Special Event Policy and all terms and conditions contained in the permit issued for the race. 
(3)  No one participating in a race or proceeding along the route of a race shall distribute therefrom any candy, cigarettes, prizes or favors of any kind. 
(4)  No vicious animal whether leashed or unleashed shall participate in or proceed along the route of a race. 
(5)  The organizer of an event subject to this section shall make provision for proper safety procedures at intersections and along other sections of the right-of-way. The location of the safety monitors shall be determined by the Chief of Police or his designee and the personnel shall be provided at no cost to the City . Personnel hired for such duties shall be sworn law enforcement officers certified by the North Carolina Criminal Justice Training and Standards Council. 
(6)  The permit shall not be issued until the sponsor shall acquire sufficient insurance or approval by the City Attorney to indemnify the City for damages or liability which the City might incur. 
(7)  The approval of any route shall be based on the safety of the participants and non-participants, the degree of disruption that the route will likely cause, the available access for cars and pedestrians, and the unique requirements of a specific event. 
(8)  The City Manager or designee's disapproval of a proposed route may be appealed to the City Council . Appeals shall be made in person at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting at least three meetings prior to the proposed event date. 
(Ord. No. 1979-126, §2, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2014-343, §12, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 )  
Sec. 12-1060. - PROHIBITION OF FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess on or about his person or vehicle any firearm or dangerous weapon of any kind, as defined below, whether exposed or concealed, while participating in any parade or any picketing. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person present at any parade or picketing or any person upon any street , sidewalk, alley or other public property within five hundred (500) feet of any parade or picketing, to possess on or about his person or vehicle any firearm or dangerous weapon of any kind, as defined below, whether exposed or concealed. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, the term dangerous weapon shall be defined as any device or substance designed or capable of being used to inflict serious injury to any person or property ; including, but not limited to: firearms, airguns, BB guns, pellet guns, knives or razors with a blade more than three (3) inches in length, metallic knuckles, clubs, blackjacks, nightsticks, dynamite cartridges, bombs, grenades, knives, explosives, molotov cocktails, and sword canes. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the following persons while acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority: 
(1)  Law enforcement officers , 
(2)  Officers and soldiers of the armed forces, militia and national guard. 
(Ord. No. 1980-346, §1, 4-1-80; Ord. No. 2011-989, §1, 12-6-11)  
Sec. 12-1061. - CLOSURE OF CITY STREETS FOR EVENTS. 
(a)  A permit shall be issued by the City Manager or designee for the closure of any City street , sidewalk, or greenway in accordance with the requirements of the City Council's Special Event Policy. The permit will list all permitted activities as approved by the City Manager or City Council . The City Manager or designee's disapproval of a proposed closure may be appealed to the City Council . Appeals must be made in person before Council at a regularly scheduled meeting no later than 3 meetings prior to the event date. 
(b)  The fees associated with special events regulated by the Special Event Policy shall be as indicated on the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . Application fees are non-refundable and due when the application is submitted. Permit fees are paid once an application has been approved just prior to the issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2014-343, §13, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §12, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
CHAPTER 2. - BUSINESSES AND TRADES  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State law reference: Authority to regulate business, trades and professions, G.S. 160A-181. 
 
Secs. 12-2001 — 12-2020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE B. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12-2021. - SHORT TITLE. 
This article shall be known as and may be cited as "The Taxicab Control Ordinance of the City of Raleigh." 
( Code 1959 , §22-1)  
Sec. 12-2022. - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings, respectively, ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(a)  Taxicab. 
The word taxicab shall mean a motor-driven vehicle originally designed by the manufacturer's specifications without modification to be used for the transportation of passengers for a metered fee: 
(1)  other than motor buses operating along regular routes and schedules, or between fixed termini 
(2)  other than vehicles contracted by the Dept. of Education for student transportation. 
(b)  Premium taxi service. 
The words premium taxi service shall mean the type of taxi service which is used by one person or party at a time, unless the original person or party does not object to another person or persons riding in the taxicab, which is provided along the shortest route between the occupant's origin and destination, and for which a taximeter is used to compute the fare. 
(c)  Shared taxi service. 
The words shared taxi service shall mean the type of taxi service which can be used by more than one (1) person or party at a time, which is not necessarily provided along the shortest route between an occupant's origin and destination but rather is provided in such a way so that the taxicab deviates from the shortest route in order to pick up or deliver other passengers, and for which a zone fare is charged. 
(d)  Limousine/Vehicle for Hire. 
Shall mean a for hire motor carrier, as defined by N.C.G.S. 20-4.01(11a), carrying passengers within each vehicle's legal capacity, not equipped with a taximeter, with a driver who carries passengers for hire at rates of fare agreed upon between the operating licensee, its agent or operator and the passengers. This fare is not to exceed the rate agreed upon at the time of the franchise. No limousine may engage in cruising or be operated by on call or demand. 
(e)  Owner. 
The word owner shall mean and include any person having control of the operation or maintenance and collection of the revenue of taxicabs; person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is subject to an agreement for conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested in the original vendee or lessee, or, in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this article. 
(f)  Driver. 
The word driver shall mean and include every person in charge of or operating a taxicab. 
(g)  Permit. 
The word permit shall mean an owner's permit and also a driver's permit as the context indicates. 
(h)  Owner's permit. 
The words owner's permit shall mean a permit granted to the operator of a taxicab business. 
(i)  Shuttle. 
Shall mean any passenger vehicle for hire that provides shuttle transportation to passengers to or from prescribed locations such as the airport, hotels, motels, shopping centers, stadiums, coliseums or theaters, pursuant to a contract or agreement, and that does not accept or discharge passengers indiscriminately between prescribed locations. No shuttle vehicle shall engage in cruising or be operated by on call or demand. 
(j)  Memorandum owner's permit. 
The words memorandum owner's permit shall mean the card issued by the taxicab inspector to a taxicab owner and operator for display within a taxicab indicating that an owner's permit has been issued covering such taxicab and the operation thereof. 
(k)  Rate card. 
The words rate card shall mean the card issued by the taxicab inspector to a taxicab owner and operator for display within each taxicab for which an owner's permit has been issued containing the schedule of fares to be charged by such taxicab. 
(l)  Premium taxi service trip. 
The words premium taxi service trip shall mean each stop and the taximeter shall be cleared at the termination of each trip except in instances when the lessee of a taxicab requests discharge of a passenger enroute to a final destination, and in such event the final destination shall be the termination of the trip. In every instance when the taxicab fare is paid to the taxicab driver, it shall be the duty of the taxicab driver to clear the meter. 
(m)  Shared taxi service trip. 
The words shared taxi service trip shall mean the journey of a passenger from his origin to his destination. 
(n)  Response time. 
The words response time shall mean the time elapsed between the time which a prospective passenger specifies as the time he wishes to have a vehicle at his trip origin, and the time when the vehicle arrives at that location. 
(o)  Accessible Raleigh Transportation (ART) Program. 
The words Accessible Raleigh Transportation (ART) Program or ART service shall mean taxi service provided to persons certified by the City as disabled. Charges for service under the ART program will be paid with a special currency or scrip approved by the City which can be redeemed by the City at full face value. 
(p)  Handivan. 
The word handivan shall mean and include every public passenger vehicle with less than sixteen (16) passenger capacity equipped to transport persons who are confined to wheelchairs. 
(q)  Cruising. 
Shall mean driving on, over and along the streets or public places of the City in search of, or soliciting, prospective passengers for hire. Listed below are the specific vehicle types prohibited from "cruising": 
Limousine/vehicle for hire 
Shuttle 
( Code 1959 , §22-2; Ord. No. 1978-799, §1, 5-16-78; Ord. No. 1980-487, §§1—3, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1989-383, §8, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 1990-674, §1, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§1—4, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2023. - TAXICAB INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED; DUTIES GENERALLY. 
There is hereby created the office of taxicab inspector. The taxicab inspector shall be responsible for the inspection of taxicabs and other vehicles, the practical administration of this article, and the safety and welfare of the public in connection with the operation and use of taxicabs and other vehicles as defined by this article. 
The taxicab inspector shall from time to time cause to be made an inspection of taxicabs and other vehicles as defined in §12-2022. If any vehicle shall be found unsafe or unfit for operation, written notice shall be given the driver and the holder of the certificate and license therefor of such condition, and such vehicle shall not be operated thereafter until the same has been put in safe and fit condition. 
( Code 1959 , §22-3; Ord. No. 1980-487, §4, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1990-674, §2, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2009-671, §5, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2024. - COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; ENFORCEMENT SANCTIONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating one or more taxicabs , or to drive any taxicab , within the corporate limits of the City or within a radius of one mile beyond the corporate limits in all directions unless such person shall have complied with and shall continue to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any taxicab operated between fixed termini only one of which is within the corporate limits of the City and within a radius of one mile beyond the corporate limits; that is, where only the point of origin or only the point of destination, respectively, of any trip is within the corporate limits of the City and within a radius of one mile beyond in all directions, except that any such surrounding territory shall be subject to the following sections of this chapter, to wit: §§12-2025, 12-2026, 12-2027, 12-2029, 12-2031, 12-2032, 12-2033, 12-2039, 12-2041, 12-2042, 12-2081 through 12-2093 to the extent applicable; nor shall the provisions of this article apply to any taxicab operated through the corporate limits of the City without picking up and discharging any passenger within the City and surrounding one-mile territory. 
(b)  Pursuant to G.S. 160A-175(c), and in addition to all other remedies and sanctions imposed under this Code, there is hereby imposed a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for failure to observe the standards established, and requirements and restrictions imposed, under this article. Beginning January 1, 2011, the amount of the penalty will increase from fifty dollars ($50.00) to seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and on January 1, 2012, the amount will cap at one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(1)  The levying of civil penalties shall be initiated by any police officer or the taxicab inspector giving written notice of the infraction committed to the taxicab owner or driver , along with a statement that a civil penalty is being imposed. The notice shall inform the owner or driver that he may appeal the civil penalty within ten (10) days to the taxicab inspector's immediate supervisor. If an appeal is made, a hearing shall be held before the taxicab inspector's immediate supervisor, who, following the hearing, shall affirm or reverse the imposition of the penalty. 
(2)  For the second, and successive violations under the provisions of this article during a single calendar year , the civil penalty shall be double that imposed for the first violation. 
(3)  Civil penalties shall be paid within fifteen (15) days to the office of the Revenue Collector. If not so paid, the City may initiate a civil action in the name of the City in the nature of debt to collect the unpaid penalties. Owner's and/or driver's permit privileges will be revoked until the entire debt is paid. 
(4)  Any permit required to be issued and renewed under the terms of this article shall not be issued or renewed in the event civil penalties for violations remain unpaid by the applicant or by an employee of the applicant. 
(5)  In addition to the levying of civil penalties for violations of this article, violations shall also be punishable as a misdemeanor offense under G.S. 14-4, each day's continuing violation constituting a separate offense. 
(c)  All companies with valid owner's permits shall be responsible for the compliance of their affiliated drivers. Failure of a driver to comply with this section may result in the issuance of citations to the company owners of taxicabs. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any limousine or vehicle for hire to operate within the City of Raleigh without a for hire tag issued by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles in accordance with N.C.G.S. 20-86 and 20-87. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any limousine, vehicle for hire or shuttle to cruise, as defined by Raleigh City Code 12-2022(c). This restriction shall not apply to properly registered taxicabs. 
(f)  Violations of subsection (d) or (e) of this section, in addition to all other remedies and sanctions under this Code or State law, shall be a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §22-4; Ord. No. 1980-487, §5, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1999-691, §1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2003-409, §1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§6—9, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2025. - INSURANCE. 
The operator- owner of every taxicab and of every other motor vehicle (other than taxicabs operated under the jurisdiction of the utilities commission of the State ) engaged in the business of transporting passengers for hire over the public streets of the City shall furnish and keep in effect for each such taxicab or such other motor vehicle, a policy or policies of insurance as required by G.S. 20-280, as amended. Such policy or policies of insurance (or a duplicate thereof, or a certificate from the agent of the insurance company issuing the policy or policies) shall be filed with the City taxicab inspector as a condition precedent to the operation of any such vehicle over the streets of the City and the policy or policies of insurance shall , among other things, set forth a description of each and every taxicab operated under the terms of such policy or policies, including the make, model, motor number and serial number of each and every such taxicab . 
The license of each car licensed under this section which is not covered by insurance as required in this article shall be immediately revoked. 
The owner's permit of the owner of a taxicab that is not covered by insurance as required by this section shall be immediately suspended by the Chief of Police or his designee so that an investigation can be conducted by the police department while an investigation is conducted by the police department. If the investigation reveals that the owner's taxicabs are not insured, then the owner's permit will be revoked as set forth in §12-2060. 
( Code 1959 , §22-5; Ord. No. 1980-487, §6, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1999-691, §§2, 3, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2009-671, §10, 11-3-09) 
State law reference: Financial responsibility of taxicab operators, G.S. 20-280.  
Sec. 12-2026. - OWNER INFORMATION FILE. 
Every owner shall maintain on file with the taxicab inspector, his name, business address, garage address, all business telephone numbers listed in his name, and the names of all drivers , their license numbers and addresses, and shall , within forty-eight (48) hours after any change in connection therewith report such change or changes to the taxicab inspector in writing . In case more than one owner operates under the same name, the owner of the name may keep the records and make the reports required by this article in behalf of all owners operating under his name; but his failure to do so shall not relieve such other owners of responsibility for such records and reports with respect to taxicabs owned by them, it being the intention of this article to impose such responsibilities upon each owner . 
( Code 1959 , §22-6; Ord. No. 1980-487, §7, 10-7-80)  
Sec. 12-2027. - TYPE OF TAXICAB. 
(a)  Each taxicab for which an owner's permit is issued under this chapter shall have a body of the sedan or enclosed type. 
(b)  The body of each taxicab shall have four (4) doors, two (2) leading into the passenger's compartment, and two (2) leading into the driver's compartment, so constructed that they may be opened from the inside and the outside. Any other type of vehicle must be approved by the City Council . Each door shall be constructed with a double or safety lock. 
( Code 1959 , §22-7; Ord. No. 1980-487, §§8, 9, 10-7-80)  
Sec. 12-2028. - EQUIPMENT; ITEMS REQUIRED. 
In addition to equipment required of motor vehicles by the General Statutes, every taxicab for which an owner's permit is issued under this article: 
(a)  Shall be equipped with a tell-tale light on top of the taxicab so designed that when the meter is engaged and the parking lights are on, the light goes out and when the vehicle is not engaged the light is burning. The size of the light shall be no less than ten (10) inches across, four (4) inches deep, and four (4) inches high. It is strictly prohibited for any non-metered vehicle for hire to have any form of tell-tale light anywhere on or inside the vehicle. Notwithstanding this restriction, limousines may have a tell-tale light that reads "Limo" or "Limousine." 
(b)  Shall be equipped with a standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. No taxicab shall be operated in taxicab service while such speedometer is out of repair or disconnected. 
(c)  Shall be equipped with a heater with a shutoff appliance thereon, sufficient to heat the interior of the cab adequately in cold weather and shall be equipped with an air conditioner with a shutoff appliance thereon, sufficient to cool the interior of the cab adequately in warm weather. 
(d)  Shall be equipped with a card frame or frames for the proper display of the owner's permit and the taxicab driver's permit. No vehicle shall be operated without a vehicle decal affixed thereto and issued pursuant to this subsection unless, pursuant to this division, the vehicle is being used as an authorized passenger for hire vehicle. 
(e)  Shall be equipped with a single-tariff taximeter of a type approved by the Council , inspected for accuracy and installed according to the requirements of the taxicab inspector unless the taxicab is to be used exclusively to provide shared taxi service ; provided, no taxicab shall be operated while occupied by a person in addition to the driver with the taximeter not engaged, except when the taxicab is being used to provide shared taxi service . The taximeter shall be attached to and located within the taxicab so as to be in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times, day and night; the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, operated either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels of the taxicab by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. 
The taximeter shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. The taximeter on each taxicab shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the taxicab inspector. Any inspector or other officer of the Police Department is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any taximeter, and upon discovery of any inaccuracy, to notify the owner and person operating the taxicab to cease operation on premium service; thereupon, such taxicab shall not be operated on premium service until the taximeter has been repaired and is in the required working condition, approved by the proper inspecting officer of the City . 
(f)  Handivans shall be equipped in the same manner as taxicabs as described in items (a) through (e) above. In addition, handivans shall be inspected by a mechanic certified to inspect the handivan equipment to ensure the van is equipped with a wheelchair lift or ramp, properly installed and in good working order, designed to safely move a person confined to a wheelchair into and out of the handivan . The interior of the handivan shall be arranged and outfitted so that a wheelchair can be quickly, easily and safely secured in place without having to remove the chair's occupant. Upon semi-annual/annual inspection, written proof of mechanic's inspection is mandatory. 
(g)  All taxicabs shall be equipped with an amber safety warning light system for driver safety. The safety warning lights shall be approved by the taxicab inspector; and used by the driver only to summon assistance in the event that he/she has reason to believe that he/she is being threatened with harm. 
(h)  All taxicabs/vehicles for hire shall satisfy the vehicle age requirements contained in this section: 
(1)  The taxicab inspector is satisfied with the condition of the passenger vehicle for hire; 
(2)  No taxicab will be placed into service that is ten (10) years old or older and/or the mileage exceeds 250,000 unless the vehicle is declared a unique vehicle. Vehicles currently in service that exceed ten (10) years in age and/or 250,000 in mileage must be approved on an annual basis by the taxicab inspector. A taxicab driver/owner can appeal the taxi inspector's decision about acceptable conditions of a car older than ten (10) years and/or 250,000 in mileage; 
(3)  If the taxicab owner/driver does not agree with the taxicab inspector's decision as to not waive the age limit and/or the mileage on their vehicle, then that owner/driver has ten (10) days from the date of the decision to file a written appeal to the taxicab inspector's immediate supervisor; 
(4)  All taxicabs shall be clean, operable and in good repair. Trunks in all taxicabs shall be clean and empty except for one spare tire and necessary emergency equipment. 
(i)  Door handles and locks. All doors shall operate easily, shall close securely from both the outside and inside of the vehicle, and shall be accessible to passengers. No devices that restrict the ability of a passenger from readily exiting the vehicle in an emergency are allowed. 
(j)  No person shall equip, mark, paint, or display marking lights or windshield lights or in any way cause a motor vehicle to resemble a duly licensed taxicab or create a public impression that a motor vehicle is a duly licensed public vehicle approved by the taxicab inspector under the authority of Chapter 12 of the City of Raleigh Taxicab Ordinance. 
(k)  North Carolina State law requires that all children who are under age eight (8) and under eighty (80) pounds ride in a properly used car seat or booster seat. Children may be moved into a seat belt when they reach age eight (8) or eighty (80) pounds, whichever comes first. If a lap/shoulder belt is not available for a child who weighs more than forty (40) pounds, a properly fitted lap belt may be used, since booster seats should not be used with lap-only belts. North Carolina State law also requires that car seats be installed in the rear seat if the child is less than five (5) years old and weighs less than forty (40) pounds, and if vehicle has a passenger side airbag and a rear seat, unless the car seat is specifically designed for use with air bags. Children through age sixteen (16) who are not required to be in car seats by weight must wear a seatbelt. No taxicab/vehicle for hire may transport any passenger(s) eight (8) years old and younger without a car seat or a booster seat per N.C. State law. 
(l)  No person shall use a public vehicle for an unlawful or immoral purpose. 
When such unlawful or immoral use has occurred with the knowledge of the person owning the taxicab or when, within any period of five (5) years, two (2) such convictions have occurred involving the vehicle/vehicles covered by a given taxicab license, the taxicab inspector shall revoke the taxicab license for the vehicle involved. 
When such unlawful or immoral use has occurred with the knowledge of the person driving the taxicab, the taxicab inspector, upon recommendation by the inspector's immediate supervisor, after a hearing, shall revoke the taxi driver's permit of such person. 
(m)  Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway, but shall pull up to the sidewalk on the right-hand side of the roadway and there receive or discharge passengers. Drivers may discharge passengers from either side of the roadway on one-way streets. 
No driver shall park or stop or operate his taxicab in such a manner as to unduly obstruct traffic or to constitute a nuisance to other vehicles and pedestrians. 
( Code 1959 , §22-8; Ord. No. 1980-487, §§10, 11, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1990-674, §3, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§11—15, 11-3-09) 
State law reference: Requirements for motor vehicles generally, G.S. 20-115 et seq.  
Sec. 12-2029. - FILING DESCRIPTION. 
Every owner shall keep a description of his equipment at all times on file with the taxicab inspector showing the make, model, passenger capacity, date of acquisition, from whom acquired, the vehicle identification number (VIN) and serial number, and the State and/or City license number of each taxicab for which he holds an owner's permit . No vehicle shall be substituted for that described in the owner's permit until it has been inspected and approved by the taxicab inspector designated by the City Manager, and the substitution or addition of such vehicle has been endorsed on the owner's permit issued under this chapter. 
A filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall accompany each new application for a taxicab owner's permit. This fee will cover the following: 
• Investigation of the applicant to ensure the applicant will meet the ordinance standards. 
• The fee applies to each owner permit application and not per car. 
• If you own a car under an existing franchise, then the fee applies to each owner application submitted regardless of whether you own one car or multiple cars under that franchised taxicab business. 
( Code 1959 , §22-9; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§16—18, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2030. - IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES. 
(a)  Subject to the approval of the taxicab inspector, each owner of a taxicab business shall adopt a color scheme for painting his cabs distinct from that of any other owner , and may adopt an identifying design, monogram or other insignia. All taxicabs of each owner shall be the same color scheme. The owner of a cab may adopt the color scheme of another cab owner , if (1) both owners ' cabs are operating under the same business name and (2) both owners agree to the adoption of the color scheme, and that the owners must present a written agreement to the Police Chief or his designee specifying who owns the company name and colors, that permission is being given to use the name and colors, and that the permission to use the name and colors may be revoked upon written notice to the borrowing owner and the Police Chief or his designee. A name identifying the owner (i.e., taxicab company), taxicab number, and telephone number(s) shall be painted with permanent paint on both sides and rear of each cab with letters and numbers at least four (4) inches high or greater on sides, and with a cab number at rear of at least four (4) inches high at a location to be designated by the taxicab inspector. If a taxicab is used for providing both premium taxi service and shared taxi service , separate telephone numbers for the two (2) services shall be painted on it, and the telephone number associated with the shared taxi service shall be identified by the label "shared taxi." 
(b)  Colors of paint to be used for lettering and number shall be of sharp contrast with color of surface paint to which this is applied, so as to be evenly visible at a reasonable distance, especially at nighttime with streetlights. No lettering or numbers shall be acceptable which have been painted upon a sheet of metal or other material which in turn can be removed or detached to conceal the identification of such cab company and cab number, provided that an owner who operates under the name of another owner may use the same color scheme as such other owner . 
(c)  No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed nor shall a permit be issued for any vehicle whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article, in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public; provided, after a license or permit has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, if the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be in conflict with or imitate any existing approved color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other owner in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public, the license of or permit covering such taxicab or taxicabs shall be suspended or revoked. 
(d)  It is a violation of this article for any owner to engage in false or misleading marketing or advertising included but not limited to the use of the name or color scheme of a competing taxi company licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  In lieu of paint, any material required by this section to be painted on a taxicab may be placed on the cab through the use of an adhesive decal containing the required information and name. This authorization does not include or permit the use of magnetic signs or devices to convey the required information. 
( Code 1959 , §22-10; Ord. No. 1980-487, §12, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1988-220, §1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 1999-691, §§4, 5, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2003-390, §2, 2-18-03)  
Sec. 12-2031. - CONDITION OF VEHICLE; INSPECTION. 
Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the taxicab inspector at such intervals as shall be established by the taxicab inspector to insure the taxicab is mechanically and structurally in good repair and working order and is safe to operate under the streets of the City . 
Annual/semi-annual inspection of taxicabs will be at the discretion of the taxicab inspector. 
Beginning on January 1, 2011, an inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per vehicle shall accompany each semi-annual and/or annual inspection, and on January 1, 2012, the cost will cap at twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Also, beginning on January 1, 2011, an inspection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall accompany each inspection performed outside of the semi-annual and/or annual inspection for additional vehicles added to a fleet or for replacement of an existing vehicle, and on January 1, 2012, the cost will cap at twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
A penalty fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall accompany any vehicle that fails to come for the semi-annual and/or annual inspection without prior approval from the taxicab inspector. 
( Code 1959 , §22-11; Ord. No. 1980-487, §12, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 2009-671, §19, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2032. - MAINTENANCE. 
When an owner shall find any taxicab to be in unsafe or improper condition for operation, he shall have such repairs and alterations made as may be required and shall not operate, or cause or permit to be operated, any such taxicab until all such repairs and alterations have been completed. 
Every owner shall institute a system of regular monthly inspection of taxicabs and equipment owned and operated by such owner . A record of these inspections shall be kept by each owner and shall be available to the taxicab inspector upon request. 
The [ taxicab ] inspector shall reserve the right, at any time, after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any licensed taxicab/vehicle for hire for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this article are being violated. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is in control of a taxicab to refuse, upon the [ taxicab ] inspector's request, to present the taxicab or any issued permits to the inspector for the purpose of inspection or the removal of any issued permits. 
( Code 1959 , §22-12; Ord. No. 1980-487, §14, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 2009-671, §20, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2033. - SANITATION. 
Every owner of a taxicab or taxicabs shall clean the exterior as needed and shall clean the interior of such taxicab at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours, and shall disinfect the interior when required by the taxicab inspector. 
( Code 1959 , §22-13)  
Sec. 12-2034. - DRIVERS' MANIFESTS. 
(a)  Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip, the number of passengers and amount of fare, and, in the case of trips taken by persons who are eligible to use ART scrip, record in addition, the ART identification number of the user, the exact fare registered on the taximeter and the amount of scrip used to pay for the trip. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for such records shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the City Manager. 
(b)  Every owner shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least one hundred eighty (180) days and the same shall be made available upon demand for inspection by the Police Department and taxicab inspector, and as requested by the taxicab inspector, information on the driver's manifests shall be tabulated and forwarded to him. 
( Code 1959 , §22-14; Ord. No. 1989-383, §7, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 12-2035. - ACCEPTING ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS. 
Whenever any taxicab providing premium taxi service is occupied by a passenger or passengers, the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy or ride in such taxicab if the original passenger or passengers object thereto. If a child under fourteen (14) years of age is the original passenger, no other passenger shall be permitted in such taxicab without the consent of the parent or guardian. 
( Code 1959 , §22-15; Ord. No. 1980-487, §15, 10-7-80)  
Sec. 12-2036. - RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF PASSENGERS. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab at any one time than the seating capacity of such taxicab (as rated by the automobile manufacturer), including the driver , children in arms excepted. 
( Code 1959 , §22-16)  
Sec. 12-2037. - REFUSAL TO CARRY ORDERLY PASSENGERS. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons , upon request, unless previously engaged in the provision of premium taxi service or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.  
Sec. 12-2038. - DECEPTION OF PASSENGERS. 
No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may ride in his taxicab , or who may desire to ride in such taxicab as to his destination or the rate of fare to be charged, or shall convey any passenger, or cause him to be conveyed, to a place other than directed by him. In no event shall any operator providing premium service take a longer route to the destination than necessary, unless so requested by the passenger. 
( Code 1959 , §22-19)  
Sec. 12-2039. - COMPLIANCE WITH PASSENGERS' REQUESTS. 
All drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of the passenger or passengers as to the speed of travel, and, when providing premium service, the route to be taken. 
All companies holding valid owner's and/or driver's permits shall provide prompt, efficient service and shall be courteous at all times to the general public, to the taxicab inspectors, to other taxicabs, to other taxicab owners, and to any officer of the Raleigh Police Department. 
( Code 1959 , §22-20; Ord. No. 2009-671, §21, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2040. - USE OF TOBACCO. 
The use of tobacco in taxicabs is controlled by the public transportation provisions of §13-3016 of this Code. 
( Code 1959 , §22-21; Ord. No. 1980-487, §16, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 1999-691, §6, 11-16-99)  
Sec. 12-2041. - LOST ARTICLES. 
Every driver of a taxicab shall thoroughly search the interior of such taxicab at the termination of each trip for any article of value which may be left in such taxicab by a passenger. An article found therein shall be immediately returned to the passenger owning it, if he be known; otherwise, it shall be deposited with the owner of the cab (the holder of the owner's permit ) at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty. A written report in duplicate of the finding and deposit of such articles shall be made by the owner (holder of owner's permit ) within twenty-four (24) hours to the Police Department. 
( Code 1959 , §22-22)  
Sec. 12-2042. - ATTENDING VEHICLE BY DRIVER. 
No driver of any taxicab shall at any time solicit passengers by any word, sign, signal (audible or otherwise) or gesture or use any word, sign, signal (audible or otherwise) or gesture to solicit patronage, annoy any person, obstruct the movement of any person or traffic or follow any person, except that within a taxicab zone, a driver of any taxicab located inside his vehicle or outside, but within five (5) feet of the taxicab, may solicit passengers by word, sign, or gesture. Except as provided in this subsection, a driver of any taxicab may not solicit or have any other person solicit passengers on the driver's behalf. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a driver of any taxicab from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of his taxicab. 
In no case shall one driver of a taxicab interfere between another driver and his passenger. 
No driver of any taxicab shall lay hold upon or take possession of any trunk, baggage or any other article belonging to any traveler or person without the consent of the owner of such trunk, baggage or other article. 
Drivers of any taxicab shall not permit such cars to be used as sleeping quarters or lounging places, for the unnecessary gathering of persons other than passengers. 
( Code 1959 , §22-23; Ord. No. 1980-487, §17, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 2009-671, §22, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2043. - FARES; SCHEDULE. 
No owner or driver of any taxicab , subject to the provisions of this article, shall charge for the use of a taxicab within the City or within a radius of one mile beyond the corporate limits thereof in all directions, an amount greater than in accordance with the following rates: 
(a)  Effective from and after November 7, 2006, premium taxi service : 
(1)  Mileage rates. One dollar and ninety-five cents ($1.95) for the first one-tenth mile or fraction thereof, and twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each additional one-tenth of a mile or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Waiting time. Twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each one minute of waiting time or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Effective from and after April 15, 1995, handivan service: a surcharge of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per one-way trip added to the premium taxi rate. 
(c)  Upon application of the taxicab rider to the taxicab driver , the following charges per trip shall apply: 
(1)  Foot lockers. Fifty cents ($0.50) each. 
(2)  Trunks. One dollar ($1.00) for each trunk, except where two (2) persons are required to handle, the charge shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for each trunk. 
(3)  Hand baggage. Ten cents ($0.10) for each handling in excess of one handbag per person . 
(4)  Groceries in bags. Ten cents ($0.10) for each bag in excess of one bag per person . 
(5)  Groceries in cartons, boxes or crates. Ten cents ($0.10) for each container. 
(6)  Bulky items. Fifty cents ($0.50) for each article, container of commodity (such as, but not limited to, bags, cartons, boxes or crates of groceries, coal, feed, fertilizer, rolls of roofing paper, etc.) weighing more than fifty (50) pounds. 
(d)  Upon being issued a public certificate of conveyance [convenience] and necessity or a driver's permit , each owner and driver shall file with the taxi inspector a written schedule of the rates they charge. No rate shall be charged which is different than on file with the taxi inspector. 
( Code 1959 , §22-24; Ord. No. 1966-611, §1, 9-6-77; Ord. No. 1978-799, §2, 5-16-78; Ord. No. 1978-181, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 1983-111, §§1—3, 5-3-83; Ord. No. 1990-541, §§1—5, 5-1-90; Ord. No. 1990-674, §4, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 1995-568, §1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 2000-737, §1, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 2006-99, §1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2006-121, §1, 11-7-06)  
Sec. 12-2044. - HIRING WITH INTENT NOT TO PAY. 
Any person who engages, uses, employs or hires any truck, automobile, taxicab , ambulance or other vehicle and who fails or refuses to pay for same, with intent to cheat and defraud the owner and/or agent of the owner of the rental price, charge, fee or fare, therefor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §22-24.1)  
Sec. 12-2045. - FURNISHING RECEIPT. 
When requested by a passenger, every driver shall give a legible receipt showing the driver's name, taxicab number and any items for which a charge has been made, the total amount paid, and the date of such payment. Providing credit card acceptance will be at the taxicab company owner's discretion. 
( Code 1959 , §22-25; Ord. No. 1980-487, §18, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 2009-671, §23, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2046. - RATE CARD; ISSUANCE, POSTING, COMPLYING WITH. 
For every taxicab for which an owner's permit shall be granted, the taxicab inspector shall issue a rate card stating on it the elements of the schedule of fares pertaining to premium taxi service described in this article. In addition, for every taxicab owned by a person holding a certificate of convenience and necessity to provide shared taxi service , the taxicab inspector shall issue a rate card stating on it the elements of the schedule of fares pertaining to shared taxi service described in this article, including a map depicting the zones described in §12-2043(2)e. Such rate cards shall at all times be displayed so that they will be clearly visible to the passenger or passengers using the taxicab . The print used on the rate card shall be of such size as may be determined by the taxicab inspector. No charge may be made by a taxicab driver in excess of the charge permitted by the relevant rate card displayed and, in the case of premium service, by the taximeter operating to reflect correct charges in conformity therewith. 
( Code 1959 , §22-26; Ord. No. 1978-799, §3, 5-16-78; Ord. No. 1980-487, §19, 10-7-80)  
Sec. 12-2047. - TAXI INSPECTOR'S HOURS. 
The hours of the taxi inspector shall be set by special memorandum from the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 1980-487, §20, 10-7-80)  
Secs. 12-2048—12-2050. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 2. - OWNER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 12-2051. - REQUIRED. 
No person shall, within the corporate limits of the City or within a radius of one mile beyond the corporate limits in all directions, engage in the business of operating one or more taxicabs or to permit to be driven any taxicab of which such person is the owner , unless an owner's permit shall have been issued and shall be in effect. 
( Code 1959 , §22-27)  
Sec. 12-2052. - APPLICATION. 
(a)  No owner's permit or driver's permit shall be issued to any person until and unless such person shall have made and filed with the taxicab inspector an application therefor, sworn to before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths , on application forms provided by the City . The sworn application for such permit or renewal thereof shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant ( owner or driver), and if the applicant ( owner or driver) be a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation. 
(2)  The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by such owner on the date of such application, if any; 
(3)  The number of vehicles to be operated under the owner's permit applied for; 
(4)  The net worth of the applicant ( owner ) over and above all debts, judgments, claims and demands whatsoever; 
(5)  Whether there are any unpaid or unbonded judgments of record against such owner , and if so, the title of all actions and the amount of all judgments unpaid or unbonded, and reference to the judgment docket and page where the judgment is recorded; 
(6)  The make, type, year of manufacture, serial number, engine number and passenger capacity of each taxicab to be operated under the owner's permit applied for; 
(7)  Whether there are any liens, mortgages, or other encumbrances on such taxicabs, and, if so, the amount and character thereof; 
(8)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire; 
(9)  A consent to use the applicant's name, race, sex, date of birth, social security number, and fingerprints for the purposes of conducting a State criminal history records check through the North Carolina Department of Justice and a national criminal history records check through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(10)  The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall submit the applicant's fingerprints and identifying information to the North Carolina Department of Justice for a State criminal records check and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a thorough national criminal records check. 
(11)  Criminal History Records Information obtained by the North Carolina Department of Justice or the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall be privileged information and shall be kept confidential and not disseminated outside the Raleigh Police Department. This information shall not be public record information as defined by Chapter 132 of the North Carolina General Statues; 
(12)  Authority to conduct Criminal History Records Check is referenced with North Carolina General Statute 160A-304. 
(13)  Prior to the denial or termination of an owner's permit based upon Criminal History Records Information the Raleigh Police Department shall verify the existence of a record by either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the North Carolina Department of Justice for verification that the Criminal History Records Information belongs to the individual. 
(14)  Any of the following information obtained from Criminal History Records shall be deemed sufficient for refusing to issue a permit or for revoking a permit already issued: 
(i)  Conviction of a felony against this State, or a conviction of any offense against another State or the United States which would have been a felony if committed in this State; 
(ii)  Violation of any federal or State law relating to the use, possession, or sale of alcoholic beverages, or narcotics or barbiturate drugs; 
(iii)  Addiction to or habitual use of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or barbiturate drugs; 
(iv)  Violation of any federal or State law relating to prostitution; 
(v)  Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances. "Habitual violation" shall mean a determination of guilt within the three-year period immediately prior to application for a permit or initiation of action to revoke a permit on more than three (3) infractions of traffic law or more than two (2) general misdemeanors in violation of traffic laws. 
(b)  The applicant shall from time to time furnish to the Council such other information as the Council , in its discretion, may require. 
( Code 1959 , §22-28; Ord. No. 1988-220, §2, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§24—26, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2009-672, §1, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2053. - ISSUANCE. 
(a)  After giving due consideration to the information set forth on the application, the taxicab inspector shall authorize the issuance of a permit to the applicant unless the inspector shall find and determine: 
(1)  That the applicant has not complied with all of the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  That the criminal record of the applicant (or of the officers , directors, or supervising employees of a corporate applicant), if any, is such that it would be against the public interest and welfare for such application to be granted; or 
(3)  That applicant has made a false or misleading statement in his application. 
(b)  The taxicab inspector may refuse to issue an owner's permit to any person who has been convicted of a felony, or of a violation of any Federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of intoxicating liquors, or of any Federal or state statute relating to prostitution, or of any Federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of any habit-forming drugs; or to any person who is an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or to a person who has been an habitual violator of traffic laws or ordinances. 
( Code 1959 , §22-29; Ord. No. 1988-220, §§3, 4, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 12-2054. - FORM. 
The owner's permit shall contain the name and address of the owner to whom it is granted, the number, kind and description of the vehicles the operation of which is authorized by such owner's permit , and a statement that the permit is issued subject to full compliance with the provisions of the taxicab control ordinance of the City and all other ordinances and laws governing the operation of taxicabs in the City , and subject to revocation as provided by the taxicab control ordinance. Each owner's permit shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the City Clerk and the official seal of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §22-30)  
Sec. 12-2055. - EXPIRATION. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter an owner's permit shall remain in force and effect until midnight on December 31 following the date of issue. Application for renewal of an owner's permit shall be filed with the taxicab inspector, on or before the October 1 next following the date of the issuance of the permit and annually thereafter on or before October 1. 
( Code 1959 , §22-31; Ord. No. 1988-220, §5, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 12-2056. - PERMIT ISSUANCE, RENEWAL REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTIONS. 
No owner's permit shall be issued or renewed, and no owner shall operate taxicabs required to be licensed under this chapter, unless the requirements of this section are met: 
(a)  Every owner shall provide service at least eighteen (18) hours each day, shall provide dispatching by two-way radio in each taxicab , and shall be listed under the firm name in the current or first subsequent publication of the Raleigh telephone directory following adoption of this section. 
(b)  Any taxicab company which has less than six (6) taxicabs in operation is exempt from the requirements of this section. Upon an increase in an owner's fleet which results in six (6) or more taxicabs being in operation the vehicles which caused the increase shall be subject to the provisions of this section. So long as the fleet consists of six (6) or more vehicles, any vehicles added or replaced shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
( Code 1959 , §22-3.1; Ord. No. 1977-429, 1-18-77; Ord. No. 1978-53, 4-3-79)  
Sec. 12-2057. - ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER. 
No owner's permit granted and issued under this chapter shall be assigned or transferred. 
In the event any taxicab operated pursuant to an owner's permit issued under this chapter shall become damaged or worn out or for other reason is rendered unfit for use, and its use for taxicab purposes discontinued by the holder of the owner's license pursuant to which such taxicab was operated, and such licensee desires to operate another vehicle in its place, then such licensee shall file an affidavit with the taxicab inspector setting forth the fact that such vehicle has been discontinued in use and that such other vehicle has replaced it. Such affidavit shall also contain the make, model, serial number and body style of the vehicle that is being replaced and the same information for the replacement vehicle. 
( Code 1959 , §22-32; Ord. No. 1980-487, §21, 10-7-80)  
Sec. 12-2058. - ISSUANCE OF MEMORANDUM PERMIT. 
For each taxicab for which an owner's permit has been granted, a memorandum owner's permit shall be issued in such form as the taxicab inspector may from time to time prescribe, such memorandum permit to be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place, in the taxicab for which issued, as provided in this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §22-33)  
Sec. 12-2059. - REVOCATION UPON CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP; ISSUANCE TO NEW OWNER. 
Change of ownership of, or title to any taxicab shall automatically revoke any owner's permit previously granted to the extent applicable to the operation of such taxicab or taxicabs . The purchaser of any such taxicab shall not operate such vehicle as a taxicab unless and until he has applied for, and has been granted, an owner's permit in the manner provided by this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter a change of ownership is deemed to have taken place, if, in addition to other methods usually employed, the owner of any taxicab leases the same to any person under any lease or other arrangement whereby such person shall have the right upon the payment of an amount of money or other consideration of any other thing of value to acquire title at any future date to such taxicab . 
( Code 1959 , §22-34)  
Sec. 12-2060. - SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; CAUSES, HEARING. 
(a)  An owner's permit may be suspended or revoked by the Council at any time in case the Council finds and determines: 
(1)  That the past record of the holder of the owner's permit is unsatisfactory and that it is detrimental to and not in the public interest to permit the continued operation of a taxicab business by such person ; or 
(2)  That the owner has failed to operate the taxicab or taxicabs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(3)  That the taxicab or taxicabs of the owner have been operated at a rate of fare other than that provided by this chapter; or 
(4)  That the holder of a permit has failed to register properly with the State , in the correct and true owner's name, any taxicab covered by the owner's permit ; or 
(5)  That the holder of an owner's permit has been convicted of a felony; or violation of any Federal or state statute or City ordinance relating to the possession or sale of intoxicating liquors; or violation of any Federal or state statute or City ordinance relating to prostitution; or any Federal or state statute or City ordinance relating to the use, possession or sale of narcotic drugs; or repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances; or becomes a habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or 
(6)  That the holder of any owner's permit has made a false or misleading statement on his application. 
(b)  An owner's permit may be temporarily suspended or revoked by the Police Chief or his designee when it is found that there has been a violation of subsection (a). Notice of suspension or revocation will be communicated in writing to the owner through registered mail. The notice shall state that the owner may have a hearing before the Chief of Police within ten (10) days upon the written request of the owner. The owner will have the right to appeal to the City Manager in writing within ten (10) days of the decision of the Police Chief. The owner may file a written appeal to the City Council within ten (10) days of the issuance of the City Manager's decision. It shall be unlawful for an owner to operate a taxicab business regulated by this article during the pendency of an appeal taken pursuant to this section. 
( Code 1959 , §22-35; Ord. No. 1999-691, §7, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2009-671, §27, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2061. - SURRENDER OF PERMIT; RETIRING VEHICLES FROM SERVICE. 
Owner's permits which shall have been suspended or revoked by the Council shall, forthwith, be surrendered to the taxicab inspector together with the corresponding memorandum permits , and the operation of any taxicabs covered by such permits shall cease. Any owner who shall permanently retire any taxicabs from taxicab service and not replace same within thirty (30) days thereof shall immediately surrender any permits granted for the operation of such taxicabs to the taxicab inspector. 
( Code 1959 , §22-36)  
Secs. 12-2062 — 12-2070. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 3. - ACCESSIBLE RALEIGH TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: Former Div. 3 to Pt. 12, Ch. 2, Art. B, §§12-2071 — 12-2076, which pertained to shared taxi service , was repealed by §1 of Ord. No. 1989-383, adopted June 6, 1989. §2—6 of the ordinance enacted a new Div. 3, §§12-2071—12-2074, to read as herein set out. The repealed provisions derived from the 1959 Code, §§22-37—22-42; Ord. No. 1977-664, §1, adopted Nov. 15, 1977; Ord. No. 1978-799, §§4—7, adopted May 16, 1978; and Ord. No. 1979-196, §§1—3, adopted Sept. 4, 1979. 
 
Sec. 12-2071. - PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS. 
Any taxicab company that operates six (6) or more taxicabs must accept scrip of a type approved by the City in payment for premium taxi service . Scrip shall be sold to eligible ART users in appropriate denominations. The charge in scrip for a trip taken by an ART user shall be an amount no greater than that indicated in the rate schedule rounded to the nearest multiple of twenty-five cents ($0.25). Any taxicab company which has less than six (6) taxicabs in operation is exempt from this division. 
(Ord. No. 1989-383, §3, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 12-2072. - DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY. 
No scrip shall be accepted in payment for taxi service until the passengers first identify themselves as an eligible ART user by showing the driver an official ART identification card. The taxicab driver is required to ensure that the individual paying scrip for taxi service is the same as the individual whose photograph is displayed on the official ART identification card. If the passenger does not have an identification card or if the passenger's picture does not match, then scrip shall not be accepted and the passenger must pay fare in cash. 
(Ord. No. 1989-383, §4, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 12-2073. - REDEMPTION OF SCRIP. 
The City of Raleigh Department of Transportation will redeem scrip for its full face value. taxicab companies may turn in scrip to the City once each month at a location and on a time schedule determined by the City's transportation director. A receipt will be issued for the scrip that is turned in, and within ten (10) working days a check for that amount will be issued to the taxicab company. 
(Ord. No. 1989-383, §5, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 12-2074. - PENALTIES. 
Any violation of the Accessible Raleigh Transportation Program regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor. It shall specifically be a violation for anyone purchasing scrip to resell the scrip to a third party or to use the scrip for any purpose other than the provision of transportation services. It shall also be a violation for any taxicab driver to take scrip from anyone other than the authorized purchaser of the scrip. 
(Ord. No. 1989-383, §6, 6-6-89)  
Secs. 12-2075 — 12-2080. - RESERVED.  
DIVISION 4. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 12-2081. - REQUIRED. 
(a)  No person shall drive a taxicab within the corporate limits of the City or within a radius of one mile beyond the corporate limits in all directions unless he shall have first been issued, by the taxicab inspector, a taxicab driver's permit which is then in force and effect. An identification card shall be issued as evidence of the permit . The card shall be approximately four (4) inches by five (5) inches in size and shall contain the name and photograph of the permit holder and the permit number. It shall also bear the name of the taxicab inspector and the following words in bold type or print: 
"PASSENGERS—FOR YOUR PROTECTION, KEEP A RECORD OF YOUR DRIVER'S NAME AND NUMBER ." 
(b)  Each driver , while on duty, shall display his permit card in a frame in the taxicab he is driving in such a manner as to be in full view of all passengers at all times. The driver shall retain custody of it and present it, on demand, for inspection by any passenger or law enforcement officer . 
( Code 1959 , §22-43; Ord. No. 1978-799, §8, 5-16-78)  
Sec. 12-2082. - APPLICATION. 
(a)  A person may obtain a driver's permit upon meeting the qualifications required herein and by filing, in writing , with the taxicab inspector, an application, signed and sworn to by the applicant, which shall contain the following specific information: 
(1)  The full name, age, date of birth, place of birth and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The length of time of the applicant's residence in the City and in the State and whether or not he is a citizen of the United States. Citizens of the United States shall provide a social security card and non-citizens shall provide a current alien registration card. 
(3)  The applicant's full personal description; including his height, weight, sex, race, color of eyes, color of hair, complexion, body and facial marks and defects, if any. 
(4)  The applicant's physical condition including hearing and eyesight and the extent of his present and past due to intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages and narcotic and barbiturate drugs. 
The applicant will produce valid evidence that he has successfully passed a drug test prior to employment or affiliation with a taxicab/vehicle for hire company. If the applicant has failed the drug test, he is not eligible to apply for a taxicab/vehicle for hire driver's permit, for a one-year period following the drug test. 
(5)  The applicant's previous places of employment for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of his application for a driver's permit and his previous experience in driving taxicabs and other vehicles for hire carrying passengers. 
(6)  The applicant's complete record of criminal citations (including those for traffic violations), arrests and convictions. 
a.  Have no more than seven (7) accrued points for motor vehicle violations pursuant to §12-2091; six (6) during the previous three (3) years or any comparable provision of the law of another state. The taxicab inspector will review the driving records of all applicants who have eight (8) or more points on their current driving records. The issuance of a taxicab driving permit will be at the taxicab inspector's discretion based on the totality of the driving record. 
b.  No application for a driver's permit shall be accepted from an applicant who has criminal charges pending against him at the time of application. For purposes of this subsection, pending criminal charges shall not include traffic infractions. 
(7)  The number and date of issuance of the applicant's state driver's license. 
(8)  The number and date of issuance of the applicant's required state license. 
(9)  Such other information as the taxicab inspector or City Council may require. 
(b)  Every application for a driver's permit shall be accompanied by the following attachments: 
(1)  Full fingerprints of the applicant. 
(2)  Four (4) front view photographs of the applicant of such sizes as specified by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(3)  A certificate of a physician in the City stating that the applicant is not afflicted with any disease, physical disability, hearing deficit, vision deficit, or any other physical affliction which would materially impair his ability to drive a taxicab in a safe manner and in a manner that will not endanger the health of the public. 
(4)  A current health certificate issued by the Board of Health. 
(5)  The sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) and an additional amount to be determined by the Chief of Police or his designee to cover the cost of the fingerprint check. Both fees are non-refundable. 
(6)  On forms provided by the taxicab inspector: 
a.  A testimonial from his last employer; 
b.  A letter of introduction from his prospective employer; and 
c.  Affidavits of his good character from two (2) reputable citizens of the City who have known him personally and have observed his conduct for one year next preceding the date of his application. 
(7)  Each operating permit holder must require its taxicab drivers to enroll in and successfully complete within ten (10) days from the date of the issuance of the driver's permit a training course conducted by the taxicab inspector or his/her designee. All current drivers of taxicabs must be in compliance with this section within two (2) years of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any applicant knowingly to make a false statement or knowingly to give false information on his application for a driver's permit . Any material false statement or false information made or given by an applicant in applying for a driver's permit shall invalidate the permit issue to such applicant. 
( Code 1959 , §22-44; Ord. No. 1988-220, §7, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 1999-691, §§8—11, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2002-332, § 1, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 2003-390, §3, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§28—31, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2083. - PROBATIONARY DRIVER'S PERMIT. 
After the taxicab inspector has become satisfied as to the qualifications of the applicant, as indicated on the fully completed application, and after an interview of the applicant, the taxicab inspector, in his discretion, after checking locally available information contained in the application, may issue a probationary driver's permit to the applicant, not to exceed sixty (60) days in duration, pending his receipt of an FBI report on the applicant. The taxicab inspector does reserve the authority to lengthen the probationary period if the driver's investigative results received gives the inspector cause for concern. 
( Code 1959 , §22-45; Ord. No. 2009-671, §32, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2084. - EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATION. 
(a)  Each applicant for a new or renewed taxicab driver's permit may be examined orally, in writing , or both, by the taxicab inspector as to his knowledge of the provisions of this division, the traffic regulations of the State and the City , and the geography of the City . 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the taxicab inspector to cause a thorough investigation to be made of each applicant for a new or renewed taxicab driver's permit to determine: 
(1)  Whether or not the information stated in the original application is true. 
(2)  Whether or not the applicant is a person meeting the qualifications required herein. 
(3)  Whether, as to the particular applicant, there is any basis for refusing to grant or renew a taxicab driver's permit as prescribed herein. 
(c)  The applicant is required to provide his/her fingerprints which will be submitted to State and national criminal history checks of his/her criminal record. City/County Bureau of Identification (CCBI) shall forward the applicant's fingerprints to the State Bureau of Investigation (SBI) for a search of the State's criminal history records file and the SBI shall forward a set of the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for a national criminal history records check in accordance with G.S. 160A-304. This information shall be kept privileged and private and shall not be a public record under G.S. Chapter 132. The receipt by the taxicab inspector of the criminal history records check shall be used solely to determine eligibility for a permit. 
( Code 1959 , §22-46; Ord. No. 2001-44, §1, 7-17-01; Ord. No. 2009-671, §33, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2085. - QUALIFICATIONS. 
The taxicab inspector shall not issue or renew a permit before appeal unless the applicant for a driver's permit shall meet the following requirements: The applicant must: 
(a)  Be qualified for and in possession of a valid chauffeur's license issued to him by the State of North Carolina. Such license must have been issued unconditionally. A conditional license will not be deemed sufficient to comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  Be of good health, with good eyesight and hearing, and not have any illness or disease which would materially impair his ability to drive a taxicab. 
(c)  Any applicant who has ever been treated for any mental disorder, heart attack, epilepsy or diabetes shall have a written opinion from a physician or psychiatrist stating that the applicant is physically capable to operate a taxicab. 
(d)  Be able to read, write and speak English, except renewals. 
(e)  Every driver shall wear shoes and clean clothing. Short shorts, mini-skirts, or short dresses are not permitted. Also not permitted are undershirts, T-shirts, tank top shirts, or any lewd, vulgar, or inappropriate clothing. A flip-flop style sandal shoe is not permitted. 
(f)  Not be addicted to intoxicant, alcohol or narcotic barbituric or other habit-forming drugs. 
( Code 1959 , §22-47; Ord. No. 1999-691, §12, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§34, 35, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2086. - REFUSAL TO ISSUE. 
The taxicab inspector shall , before appeal, refuse to grant or renew the taxicab driver's permit for any person : 
(a)  Whose state driver's license has been revoked or suspended; provided, however, in case of a state license revocation or suspension a taxicab driver's permit may be granted or renewed at the end of the revocation or suspension period. 
(b)  Who has accumulated over eight (8) points against his driving record (pending the discretion of the taxicab inspector's review of the totality of the applicant's driving record). 
(c)  Who, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of a felony; unless the conviction is for a felony drug offense in which case application may not be made for a period of ten (10) years. Persons convicted of the felonies of homicide, manslaughter, death by motor vehicle, hit and run, assault, sexual assault, robbery, blackmail, extortion, kidnapping and arson are not eligible to receive permits pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Who, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of any crime involving the driving of an automobile resulting in death to any person . 
(e)  Who, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated. 
(f)  Who, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of this application, has been convicted of a violation of any City , County , state or Federal law relating to the use, possession or sale of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, narcotic or barbituric or other habit-forming drugs. 
(g)  Who, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of his application, shall have been convicted of a violation of any City , County , state or Federal law relating to prostitution or lotteries. 
(h)  Who, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of his application, has been a habitual user of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, narcotic, barbituric or other habit-forming drugs. 
(i)  Who is a person of such bad character or reputation that it would be clearly contrary to the public interest, safety and welfare to permit such applicant to drive a taxicab . 
( Code 1959 , §22-48; Ord. No. 1999-691, §13, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§36—38, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2087. - APPEAL FROM REFUSAL. 
(a)  In case of refusal by the taxicab inspector to grant a permit under this section, the applicant shall have the right to appeal, in writing , within ten (10) days of each successive administrative refusal, to the Chief of Police and then to the City Manager. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days after the refusal of the City Manager, he may appeal, in writing , to and be heard by the Council . 
(c)  Each written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(d)  The scope of the administration's and the Council's review shall be limited to that of fact finding only. 
(e)  The Council's decision on the question of granting or refusing such permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(f)  The Council may attach conditions to any appeal it sustains. 
(g)  After refusal by the administration or Council , the applicant shall make no new application within twenty-four (24) months from the date he submitted the original application. 
(h)  During the pendency of any appeal from a decision of the taxicab inspector, Chief of Police or City Manager refusing to issue a driver's permit or revoking a driver's permit , it shall be unlawful for such applicant to drive a taxicab within the City or within one mile of the corporate limits thereof. 
( Code 1959 , §22-49; Ord. No. 2009-671, §39, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2088. - GRANTING. 
(a)  After full consideration of the application and investigation of the applicant, and upon determination that the applicant has satisfactorily complied with the conditions and requirements of this division and that the applicant is entitled to a driver's permit in the light of the provisions of this division, the taxicab inspector shall issue the applicant a driver's permit pursuant to this division in such form as he shall prescribe. 
(b)  The issuance of a driver's permit shall be dependent upon a determination by the taxicab inspector, after a careful check of the applicant's conduct during the probationary period of the applicant, that such conduct warrants the approval of a driver's permit . 
( Code 1959 , §22-50)  
Sec. 12-2089. - CONTENTS AND EFFECT. 
(a)  The driver's permit shall specify the certificate holder for whom such driver may operate a cab. The driver holding such permit shall not drive for any other certificate holder without securing a new permit from the inspector designating the new certificate holder. 
(b)  The driver's permit shall bear a recent photograph of the driver to whom it issued and shall show the name, address, height, weight, age and expiration date of the permit . 
(c)  Upon the issuance of a driver's permit , the permittee may drive a taxicab under its authorization for the period of time stated therein, subject to its revocation as provided in this division. 
( Code 1959 , §22-51; Ord. No. 2009-671, §40, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2090. - SAFETY PERMIT. 
The taxicab inspector shall have the authority to issue a taxicab safety permit on forms prescribed by him for periods of time not to exceed ten (10) days. The holder of such a permit shall be authorized to occupy the front seat of a taxicab while in operation, and shall observe all rules and regulations of this article while on duty. 
( Code 1959 , §22-52)  
Sec. 12-2091. - REVOCATION. 
(a)  At any time after the issuance of a permit , that Police Chief or his designee, before appeal, shall revoke the permit : 
(1)  If he finds that the person holding the permit has made a material false statement in the application for the permit or attachments to it; 
(2)  If he finds that the person holding the permit is not qualified for or has not been issued a state driver's license; 
(3)  If he finds that the person holding the permit is physically or mentally incapable of operating a taxicab in a safe manner; 
(4)  If he finds that the permit holder, while driving a taxicab is not clean in dress and person ; 
(5)  If he finds the driver has become addicted to alcohol or drugs; 
(6)  If he finds that the State driver's license of the permit holder has been revoked; 
(7)  If he finds that the permit holder has accumulated enough points for the taxicab inspector to review the totality of the driver's driving record (eight (8) or more points). 
a.  The occurrence of three (3) successive violations of any section of this ordinance within a twelve (12) month period pertaining to the operation of a taxicab will result in suspension or revocation of the driver's permit for the duration of one (1) year. 
(8)  If he finds that the person holding the permit has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty of nolo contendere to: 
a.  A felony; 
b.  A crime involving the driving of an automobile resulting in death; 
c.  Driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated; 
d.  A violation of any Federal or state statute relating to the use, possession, sale of intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, narcotic, barbituric or other habit-forming drugs; 
e.  A violation of any state or Federal statute relating to prostitution or lotteries; 
f.  Any crime which is so offensive to the public safety or morals and/or so recent as to justify a finding that the applicant does not possess a good moral character. 
(9)  If found after investigation and review that the permit holder has given reason to believe he/she has engaged in conduct that is detrimental to the health and safety of another person that renders the holder unfit to operate a taxicab in the City of Raleigh. 
(10)  If found after investigation and review that the permit holder knowingly transported a passenger for the purpose of committing a crime. 
(b)  No revocation shall become permanently effective until the person whose permit is being revoked is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to appeal, successively, to the Chief of Police, the City Manager, and to the Council , as provided in §12-2087 herein. The City Manager may affirm the action of the Chief of Police in revoking a permit; or, may make the revocation effective for a fixed period of time not to be less than thirty (30) days; or, may suspend a revocation upon condition that the revocation shall become effective if another violation of this part occurs within one (1) year from the date of the first violation. Upon revocation, a notice thereof shall be served upon the person holding the permit , who shall immediately surrender the permit . The permit shall be retained by the Police Chief or his designee pending a failure to appeal or a final decision as to revocation. 
(c)  The Council may revoke a driver's permit for any of the reasons permitting a revocation by the Police Chief or his designee. 
( Code 1959 , §22-53; Ord. No. 1993-146, §1, 3-16-93; Ord. No. 1999-691, §14, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§36, 41—43, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2092. - SURRENDER, DISPLAY, LOSS, ETC., OF DRIVER'S PERMIT. 
(a)  A driver's permit which has been revoked shall be immediately thereafter surrendered to the taxicab inspector. 
(b)  In any case in which the holder of a driver's permit has lost, destroyed or mutilated his permit , he shall immediately report such facts to the taxicab inspector who shall issue a duplicate driver's permit to the permittee. A charge of one dollar ($1.00) shall be collected by the taxicab inspector for each duplicate permit issued. Beginning on January 1, 2011,, the cost of replacement of lost permit will increase to ten dollars ($10.00), and then on January 1, 2012, the amount will cap at twenty dollars ($20.00). 
( Code 1959 , §22-54; Ord. No. 2009-671, §44, 11-3-09)  
Sec. 12-2093. - EXPIRATION, RENEWAL. 
(a)  All driver's permits shall automatically expire and be null and void on the driver's birthday after two (2) years from the date of issue. 
(b)  A driver's permit may be; renewed for successive periods of twenty-four (24) months by the taxicab inspector upon application and compliance with the same terms and conditions as are prescribed for original applications and the issuance of original driver's permits ; provided, the taxicab inspector may permit the filing of an abbreviated application for renewal which shall update the information required in the original application as specified by the taxicab inspector. 
(c)  Each renewed driver's permit shall be applied for not less than ten (10) days before the expiration of his current permit . 
(d)  The fee of two dollars ($2.00) for the renewal of a driver's permit shall be attached to the application for renewal. Beginning on January 1, 2011,, the cost of driver's renewal fee will increase to ten dollars ($10.00), and then on January 1, 2012, the amount will cap at twenty dollars ($20.00). 
( Code 1959 , §22-55; Ord. No. 2009-671, §§45, 46, 11-3-09)  
Secs. 12-2094 — 12-2100. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note: Former Article C, "Auctions," was repealed by N.C. Session Laws of 1973, Ch. 552, §9 and Ord. (1974)-679. Art. C consisted of substantive §§12-2101—12-2105, and derived from Code 1959 , §§5-1—5-5. Ord. No. 1992-982, §§1—5, adopted June 2, 1992, effective Oct. 10, 1992, added §§12-2101—12-2105, which the editor has designated a new Art. C. 
 
Sec. 12-2101. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this article the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Pawn or Pawn Transaction : A written bailment of personal property as security for debt, redeemable on certain terms within one hundred eighty (180) days, unless renewed, and with an implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker : A person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods and who may also purchase merchandise for resale from dealers and traders. 
Pawnshop : The location at which or in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business. 
Person : Any individual, corporation, joint venture, association, or any other legal entity, however organized. 
Pledged Goods : Tangible personal property which is deposited with or otherwise delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business in connection with a pawn transaction. 
Purchase : Any item purchased from an individual for the purpose of resale whereby the seller no longer has a vested interest in the item. 
(Ord. No. 1992-982, §1, 6-2-92)  
Sec. 12-2102. - LICENSING OF PAWNBROKERS. 
(a)  No person , firm, or corporation shall establish or operate a pawnbroker business without first having applied for and been granted the license provided by this section. 
(b)  Every application for a pawnbrokers license shall be upon a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed with the Revenue Collector. Each application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the person , and in case of a firm or partnership, the names and addresses of the persons composing such firm or of the officers of a corporation. 
(2)  The name of the business and the street address and mailing address where the business is to be operated. 
(3)  A statement indicating the amount of net assets or capital proposed to be used by the petitioner in operation of the business. This statement shall be accompanied by an unaudited statement from an accountant verifying the information contained in the statement. 
(4)  An affidavit by the petitioner that he has not been convicted of a felony. 
(5)  A certificate from the Chief of Police, sheriff of the County , or the State bureau of investigation certifying that the petitioner has not been convicted of a felony. 
(c)  The Revenue Collector shall transmit a copy of the application to the Police Department for an investigative report, to the Inspections Department for a determination as to compliance with zoning and development regulations, and to the Fire Department to determine compliance with laws relating to fire protection. These department shall report back to the Revenue Collector within a reasonable period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(d)  An application in proper form shall be placed on the printed agenda of the first regular Council meeting after completion of the reports and for which the normal agenda deadline date can be met. 
(Ord. No. 1992-982, §2, 6-2-92)  
Sec. 12-2103. - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. 
(a)  Before issuing a license, the Council shall be satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to hold a pawnbroker license and that the location is a suitable place to hold the proposed license. To be a suitable place, the establishment shall comply with all the rules and regulations set out in G.S. Chapter 91A. Other factors the Council may consider in determining whether the applicant and the business location are suitable shall include all of the following : 
(1)  The application contains no misstatement of fact. 
(2)  The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning, building, and fire prevention codes. 
(3)  The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony within a ten- year period preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  Parking facilities and traffic facilities in the neighborhood. 
(5)  The recommendations of the City of Raleigh Police Department. 
(6)  Any other evidence that would tend to show whether the applicant would comply with the provisions of G.S. Chapter 91A and the applicable provisions of this Code and whether the operation of the business at that location would be detrimental to the neighborhood. 
(7)  This ordinance [section] shall apply to all pawnbroker licenses pending on May 8, 1995, and to all applications for such licenses filed after that date. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application by the Council and upon receipt of a license fee of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00), the Revenue Collector shall issue a pawnbrokers license to the applicant. The license must be renewed annually. 
(c)  At the time of receiving the license the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond payable to the City in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to be executed by the licensee and by two (2) sureties or a surety company licensed to do business in North Carolina, which shall be for the faithful performance of the requirements and obligations pertaining to the licensed business. The City may sue for forfeiture of the bond upon breach, and any other person who obtains a judgment against a pawnbroker and upon which judgment execution is returned unsatisfied may maintain an action in his own name upon the bond to satisfy the judgment. 
(Ord. No. 1992-982, §3, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1995-639, §1, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 1995-679, §1, 7-5-95)  
Sec. 12-2104. - REVOCATION OF PAWNBROKER'S LICENSE. 
A license issued pursuant to §12-2103 may be revoked by action of the Council for substantial abuses of this article or G.S. 91A-1-22. Before the Council revokes a license pursuant to this chapter, and before the Council considers an application for a license pursuant to this chapter, a written notice shall be sent to the licensee or applicant affected, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed on the application. The notice shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the Council , with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place at least ten (10) days following the date of the notice for the purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to such revocation or application and for the purpose of cross-examining any person providing evidence against the respondent. A revocation hearing can be initiated by the Chief of Police or by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1992-982, §4, 6-2-92)  
Sec. 12-2105. - RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep consecutively numbered records of each pawn transaction . The records shall correspond in all essential particulars to a detachable pawn ticket or copy thereof attached to the record. 
(b)  The pawnbroker shall at the time of making the pawn or purchase transaction enter upon the pawn ticket a record of the following information which shall be typed or written in ink and in the English language: 
(1)  A clear and accurate description of the property , including model and serial number if indicated on the property . 
(2)  The name, residence address, phone number, and date of birth of the pledgor. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  The type of identification and identification number accepted from pledgor. 
(5)  Physical description of the pledgor. 
(6)  The amount of money advanced. 
(7)  The date and the amount due. 
(8)  All monthly pawn charges, including interest, annual percentage rate on interest, and total recovery fee. 
(9)  Agreed upon stated value between the pledgor and the pawnbroker in case of loss or destruction of pledged item. Unless otherwise noted the stated value is the same as the loan value. 
(c)  The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets: 
(1)  The statement that "ANY PERSONAL PROPERTY PLEDGED TO A PAWNBROKER WITHIN THIS STATE IS SUBJECT TO SALE OR DISPOSAL WHEN THERE HAS BEEN NO PAYMENT MADE ON THE ACCOUNT FOR A PERIOD OF 60 DAYS PAST MATURITY DATE OF THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT. NO FURTHER NOTICE IS NECESSARY." 
(2)  The statement that "THE PLEDGOR OF THIS ITEM ATTESTS THAT IT IS NOT STOLEN, HAS NO LIENS OR ENCUMBRANCES, AND IS PLEDGOR'S TO SELL OR TO PAWN ." 
(3)  The statement that "THE ITEM PAWNED IS REDEEMABLE ONLY BY THE BEARER OF THIS TICKET OR BY IDENTIFICATION OF THE PERSON MAKING THE PAWN ." 
(4)  A blank line for the pledgor's signature or initials. 
(d)  The pledgor shall sign the pawn ticket and shall receive an exact copy of the pawn ticket, which shall be signed or initialed by the pawnbroker or an employee of the pawnbroker. These records shall be available for inspection each regular workday by the Police Department. The records shall be provided to the Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours after the record is created in one of the following ways: 
1.  Hand delivery to: 110 South McDowell Street 
Raleigh Police Department 4th floor 
Attention: pawnshop investigator 
2.  Facsimile to: (919) 890-3004 Attention: pawnshop investigator 
3.  Electronic data as set forth in the next paragraph. 
All pawnbrokers are required to utilize a reporting system that offers an electronic data transmission system that is compatible with the standard used by the local City or County law enforcement computer system. The electronic data must be provided to the appropriate law enforcement agency as designated by the Raleigh Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours after the record is created. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this part any person presenting a pawn ticket for redemption is presumed to be entitled to redeem the property described by the ticket. 
(Ord. No. 1992-982, §5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2003-410, §1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 2007-222, §§1, 2, 5-1-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-222, §2, adopted May 1, 2007, shall become effective on May 4, 2008.  
Secs. 12-2106—12-2110. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE D. - AMUSEMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note: At the editor's discretion, §§12-2111—12-2117 and §§12-2118—12-2122 have been grouped under division titles, Div. 1 and Div. 2, respectively. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12-2111. - THEATERS AND SHOWS; ADVANCE APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, ISSUANCE DISCRETIONARY; TYPES OF SHOWS PROHIBITED. 
(a)  Before any license or permit shall be issued to any carnival company and shows of like character, moving picture and vaudeville shows, museums and menageries, merry-go-rounds and ferris wheels, and other like amusement enterprises, conducted for profit and filling week-stand engagements, or in giving week-stand exhibitions, application shall be made therefor for a period of thirty (30) days before any license or permit shall be issued to such company or enterprise, and it shall be in the discretion of the Council as to whether any license or permit shall be issued to such company or enterprise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the City limits to exhibit or show, for profit, in a tent or tents or other temporary structures, any circus, carnival or other show of like kind or description, including side shows, vaudeville shows, museums, menageries, and like amusements or exhibitions; or to operate merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels or other riding devices of like character for private profit. 
( Code 1959 , §3-1) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate and prohibit amusements, G.S. 160A-181.  
Sec. 12-2112. - SALE OF TICKETS IN EXCESS OF SEATS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a theater or moving picture show in the City to sell a greater number of tickets than there are seats provided for the accommodation of patrons for any performance. 
( Code 1959 , §3-2)  
Secs. 12-2113 — 12-2116. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Section 25 of Ord. No. 1991-767-TC-369, adopted April 16, 1991, repealed §§12-2113—12-2116 in their entireties. Formerly, §§12-2113—12-2116 pertained to exit doors, aisles, and the winding and repairing of reels, and derived from the 1959 Code, §§3-3—3-6.  
Sec. 12-2117. - PERMIT REQUIRED. 
All establishments located in Raleigh and providing amplified music or other amplified entertainment shall possess an amplified entertainment permit or shall comply with the requirements applicable in the hospitality district in which the establishment is located. Religious worship facilities and schools are exempt from the provisions of this division. Any establishment located outside a hospitality district and providing amplified entertainment four (4) or fewer times a year is also exempt from the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2014-349, §1, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
DIVISION 2. - AMPLIFIED ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-539, § 1, adopted April 6, 1999, repealed the former Div. 2 and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2, §§ 12-2118—12-2123, pertained to entertainment centers and derived from Ord. No. 1981-570, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 1981; Ord. No. 1981-605, § 1, adopted March 17, 1981; Ord. No. 1982-949, § 1, adopted July 20, 1982; Ord. No. 1986-799-TC-267, § 50, adopted June 3, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-22, § 1, adopted July 21, 1987; Ord. No. 1987-79, §§ 2, 3, adopted Nov. 19, 1987; Ord. No. 1988-121, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 1988; Ord. No. 1991-767-TC-369, § 26, adopted April 16, 1991; Ord. No. 1993-225, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 6, 1993; Ord. No. 1993-296-TC-68, § 10, TC-23-93, adopted Dec. 7, 1993; Ord. No. 1995-600, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 4, 1995; Ord. No. 1996-843, § 1, adopted March 19, 1996; Ord. No. 1996-879, §§ 1—5, adopted May 7, 1996; Ord. No. 1996-924, § 1, adopted June 18, 1996; Ord. No. 1997-148, §§ 1—3, adopted June 17, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-149, § 1, adopted June 17, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-241, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1997; Ord. No. 1998-327, §§ 1—3, adopted May 5, 1998; and Ord. No. 1998-471, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1998. 
 
Sec. 12-2118. - DEFINITION. 
Amplified entertainment shall mean any type of music or other entertainment delivered through and by an electronic system. Televisions operating with no amplification other than their internal speakers and background music systems operated at a low volume and not intended for entertainment shall not be deemed amplified entertainment. 
Background music or sound shall mean amplified music or amplified sound that cannot be heard or felt outside the structure in which it is played except for brief periods when customers enter or exit the establishment and that is played within the structure at low volume . 
Hospitality district shall mean a district established by the City Council by ordinance that contains a concentration of establishments offering amplified entertainment that are located in close proximity to residential dwellings. 
HDEP shall mean a hospitality district entertainment permit. 
Low volume shall mean sound played at a level such that a person speaking in a normal tone of voice can be heard clearly over this sound by another person standing thirty-six inches (36") away. 
Manager shall mean the individual responsible for the establishment's operations who is accessible to the public at all times when the establishment is open, occupied, or when employees are on site, and who possesses sufficient authority to address issues that arise at the establishment. 
Non-resident neighbor shall mean any person who owns, occupies, or leases property within one-quarter (¼) mile of the hospitality district . 
Permittee shall mean any person possessing an amplified entertainment permit or a hospitality district entertainment permit. 
Resident shall mean any person who owns, occupies, or leases property within the hospitality district . 
(Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2005-851, §1, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 2014-349, §2, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-2119. - REQUIREMENTS FOR AMPLIFIED ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Establishments holding an amplified entertainment permit shall not generate any sound from their structure or parking area that exceeds the decibel limits set out in §12-5003 of this Code when measured at or beyond any property line of the premises covered by the permit. In addition to the decibel limits set out above, no establishment shall be in violation of any of the noise restrictions found in §12-5006 and §12-5007(a), (b), and (d) through (p) of this Code. A violation of this subsection occurs when, under Part 12, Chapter 5 of this Code, any of the following occur: a civil citation is issued and not appealed or upheld on appeal by an arbitrator; a criminal conviction occurs, regardless of a later appeal; or a finding of responsibility for an infraction occurs, regardless of a later appeal. 
(c)  Bass noise provisions. In addition to the limits set out in §12-5003 of this Code, the holder of an amplified entertainment permit shall be subject to regulation of certain low frequency emissions from the premises. The following table sets out the greatest allowable amount of low frequency steady-state sound which may be transmitted across an adjoining property line. 
MAXIMUM SOUND LIMITATIONS-LOW FREQUENCY STEADY-STATE SOUNDS, dB 
(Commercial, Industrial, Business, Office Zones 
To Residential) 
One-Third Octave-Band Center 
Frequency, Hz 	Daytime 	One-Third Octave-Band SPL, dB 
Nighttime 
16 	84 	79 
20 	76 	71 
25 	68 	63 
31.5 	60 	55 
40 	59 	54 
50 	57 	52 
63 	56 	51 
80 	55 	50 
100 	54 	49 
125 	53 	48 
160 	52 	47 
200 	51 	46 
250 	50 	45 
315 	49 	44 
 
The terms daytime and nighttime shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in §12-5003. The term steady-state sound is a sound source that is detectable at least fifty (50) per cent of the time in a three (3) minute period. Measurements shall be made according to the measurement standards and policies adopted by the Raleigh Police Department for the measurement of low frequency noise. Low frequency noise is those sound sources that exhibit acoustic energy in one-third ( 1/3 ) octave bands at or below three hundred fifty-five (355) Hertz. 
(d)  Every holder of an amplified entertainment permit shall provide the required number of off-street parking spaces required in Part 10 of this Code or the UDO, whichever is applicable, for the zoning district in which the establishment is located. All amplified entertainment permit off-street parking areas and all amplified entertainment permit establishment property abutting a public right-of-way shall be cleaned of all litter by 7:30 a.m. each morning. All off-street parking areas shall be lighted. Such illumination shall be a minimum average of two (2) maintained foot-candles. 
The holder of an amplified entertainment permit shall provide at least one (1) uniformed sworn law enforcement officer or at least one (1) uniformed security guard furnished by a company licensed to provide security by the State of North Carolina continuously present in the parking area between 9:00 p.m. and until one (1) hour after closing to provide security and supervision of the parking area. Any establishment that has maintained a nine (9) month history of safe and effective operation shall be exempt from the security requirement. Safe and effective operation means that the establishment, either inside or in its parking area or lot, has had less than two (2) custodial arrests for felony drug offenses; less than seven (7) custodial arrests for misdemeanor drug offenses; less than two (2) custodial arrests for acts of violence; or no custodial arrests for acts of violence involving a deadly weapon. The persons arrested must be patrons of the establishment or on their way into or out of the establishment before the arrest limits will apply. For purposes of this ordinance a custodial arrest means a physical arrest that result in a finding of probable cause by a magistrate or judge. The City Manager will implement a system within the City administration to monitor such arrests and probable cause determinations. The safe and efficient requirement shall be retroactive to January 1, 2005. Any establishment that becomes subject to the security requirement can become exempt again if it operates in a safe and efficient manner for nine (9) months from the time it is placed into the program. No security will be required on days when the establishment is not providing amplified entertainment . Any establishment receiving an amplified entertainment permit after the effective date of this ordinance will be presumed to be a safe and efficient operator and will not be required to implement the security requirement until it fails to meet the safety requirements of this section. 
The security requirement will be waived if the establishment presents satisfactory evidence to the City showing that the parking area is leased from a third party who maintains personnel at the lot or deck or garage at all times during the establishments hours of operation and that the personnel on duty have a wireless phone, radio, land line phone or other communications device capable of calling the 911 emergency number. 
(e)  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2002-267, §1, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 2005-851, §§2, 3, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 2008-417, §1, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 2010-788, §1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2014-349, §§3, 4, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-793, § 1, adopted May 2, 2000, provides that the provisions of §12-2119(e) shall expire and be of no effect on and after January 1, 2001.  
Sec. 12-2120. - OUTDOOR AMPLIFIED ENTERTAINMENT. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this division, all amplified sound must originate within the structure housing a business which holds an amplified entertainment permit or an HDEP and shall not be conveyed outside the structure by any means, including but not limited to exterior loudspeakers, open windows, open doors except entrance doors when opened as needed for ingress and egress, or any other means which conveys or facilitates amplified music being conveyed from inside the confines of the building to the outside of the building. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Code, the holder of an amplified entertainment permit may allow amplified entertainment to be created or conveyed outside the confines of its building under a special use permit or when within the exemptions as set out below. In addition, the holder of an HDEP may allow amplified entertainment for special events on the establishment's premises not otherwise permitted in a hospitality district only if granted a permit by the City Manager or when within the exemptions as set out below: 
(1)  Occasional Outdoor Event Permit in Hospitality District. 
The City Manager or designee may grant a permit allowing outdoor amplified entertainment at an establishment located within a hospitality district when all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The event begins no earlier than 11:00 a.m. and ends no later than 10:00 p.m.; 
(b)  No more than one (1) event may be held at the same establishment in any calendar year; 
(c)  The event does not generate noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities; 
(d)  Speakers and any other noise generating equipment are oriented away from residential dwellings; 
(e)  The proposed event does not conflict with other events previously scheduled in the vicinity; 
(f)  The proposed event does not create an undue burden on nearby residents or other business operators because of the nature of the event or the frequency of activity in the same neighborhood previously authorized under the Special Events and Road Race Policy; 
(g)  The business requesting the event has, within the last 24 months, complied with all conditions imposed on it applicable to a permit previously issued under this subsection; and 
(h)  The applicant establishes that holding the event will not adversely impact public health, safety and welfare through the overcrowding of public facilities, imposing undue traffic burdens, or blocking access to other facilities. 
The City Manager or the City Manager's designee may include conditions and safeguards in the permit that will lessen negative impacts likely to occur from the outdoor amplified entertainment at the event. 
(2)  Thoroughfare corridor. 
Outdoor music may also be allowed outside a hospitality district if amplified from a point within a corridor extending three hundred (300) feet on either side of the right-of-way line of any major/minor thoroughfare, interstate, or Federal aid primary highway. 
(3)  Special use permit required. 
Outdoor music in the area described in subsection (2) above shall be allowed only after the issuance of a special use permit allowing the use by the Raleigh City Council . Notice of any hearing pursuant to this subsection shall be accomplished by publishing a notice of the hearing in a newspaper qualified to convey legal advertising. The newspaper notice shall be augmented by a placard measuring no less than twenty-four (24) inches by eighteen (18) inches setting out the place and time of the hearing. The newspaper advertisement shall be published and the placard displayed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The placard shall remain on display from its first posting until the date of the hearing. The City Council shall consider the following factors when acting on a request for a special use permit to allow outdoor music: 
(a)  The establishment's proximity to residential areas, schools, churches, and health care facilities. 
(b)  The establishment's history of compliance with noise and nuisance laws. 
(c)  Access with respect to pedestrian and automotive safety, traffic flow, emergency service. 
(d)  Intensity including such considerations as size, location, hours and/or conditions of operation, and number of participants. 
(e)  Landscaping, screening, fencing with respect to protecting affected properties from anticipated noise, loss of privacy, and glare; preserving of important natural features; or harmonizing the request with affected properties . 
(f)  Control or elimination of noise, dust, vibration, and lighting. 
(g)  The proposed use will not adversely impact public services and facilities such as parking, traffic, police, etc., and that the secondary effects of such uses will not adversely impact on adjacent properties . The secondary effects would include but not be limited to noise, light, stormwater runoff, parking, pedestrian circulation and safety. 
(4)  Duration of permit. 
Any special use permit issued by the City Council may be limited in its duration and may contain other conditions and limitations including, but not limited to, hours of operation. An Occasional Outdoor Event Permit issued to the holder of an HDEP shall expire at the conclusion of the authorized special event. For holders of an amplified entertainment permit, the special use permit shall remain in full force and effect so long as the establishment maintains a valid amplified entertainment permit unless the conditions of approval of the special use permit set out a different term of validity. 
(5)  Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempted from the regulations controlling outdoor amplified sound: 
(a)  Stadiums and arenas holding existing special use permits for their operation. 
(b)  Shopping centers containing more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of retail space so long as no such event continues more than seven (7) consecutive days and so long as the total number of days devoted to such events in a calendar year does not exceed twenty (20) days or four (4) weekends. 
(c)  Parades and spectators and participants in parades. 
(d)  Outdoor events, races, festivals or concerts on public property or public vehicular areas that are sponsored, cosponsored, or permitted by the City . 
(Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2001-990, §1, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 2008-417, §2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 2014-349, §5, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-2121. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2015-519, §3, adopted Nov. 17, 2015 , repealed §12-2121, which pertained to outdoor seating and derived from Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, adopted April 6, 1999; Ord. No. 2015-479, §1, adopted August 4, 2015 . The user's attention is directed to §12-1041.  
Sec. 12-2122. - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. 
(a)  The amplified entertainment permit shall be issued by the Chief Financial Officer or his designee upon verification by the Inspections Department and the Fire Department that all relevant code and safety to life requirements have been met. The permit shall be applied for on a form supplied by the Chief Financial Officer or his designee. The application shall contain the name of the Manager , the name of the registered agent for service of process and such other information as the Chief Financial Officer or his designee may deem relevant and appropriate. Upon receipt of the application, the Chief Financial Officer or his designee shall forward a copy of the same to the Inspection Department for verification of the zoning and building code requirements necessary for the issuance of a license. 
The Chief Financial Officer or his designee is directed to require the name of the business owner as a part of the application for an Amplified Entertainment Permit. Any change in the ownership of a business after the issuance of the permit shall cause the permit to be immediately invalid and cause the new owner to reapply for the permit. A change in ownership shall mean acquisition of more than ten percent of the stock in a publicly traded corporation, any change in the ownership of shares in a privately held corporation, sale of all or part of a sole proprietorship, or any change in the membership of any form of limited liability organization. 
(b)  The amplified entertainment permit shall be required to be renewed annually to maintain validity. The fees for the initial amplified entertainment permit and any subsequent renewal shall be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
(c)  Anyone denied a license pursuant to subparagraph (b) may appeal, within thirty (30) days of denial, to the Raleigh City Council . In reviewing appeal of a denial, the Council shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The accuracy of the Chief Financial Officer or his designee's factual determination; 
(2)  The number and type of police calls within a three-block area within the past six (6) months and the relationship of the calls to the establishment holding the permit; 
(3)  The zoning classification of surrounding properties ; 
(4)  The status of any previously issued permits. 
If, after a review of the foregoing factors, any adverse conditions exist on any one (1) of the factors, the appeal will not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2009-642, §§1, 2, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 2014-349, §6, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §13, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 12-2123. - ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS. 
The use or possession of controlled substances, alcohol or ABC law violations and acts of violence on the premises or in parking areas provided by the permittee for patrons of its establishment are prohibited. Violation of any of these conditions is punishable according to the schedule of fines, penalties and suspensions set out in §12-2124. 
(Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2006-24, §1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2014-349, §7, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-2124. - PENALTIES. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions of this division will result in the following civil penalties: 
(1)  First offense in any twelve- month period: $500.00. 
(2)  Second offense in any twelve- month period: $1,000.00. 
(3)  Third offense in any twelve- month period: $5,000.00. 
(4)  Fourth offense in any twelve- month period: One year suspension. 
Any Police Officer may issue a notice of violation assessing civil penalties under this section for a violation of any of the provisions of this division. The City Manager or his designee shall issue a notice of hearing to suspend or revoke a permit. 
(b)  A violation that occurs or continues three (3) or more hours after an earlier violation shall constitute a new violation punishable as a separate offense. 
(c)  Upon the issuance of a written notice of a first, second, or third violation, the holder of the amplified entertainment permit shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to provide a written appeal of the notice and to provide additional written or electronic materials in support of the appeal to the City Manager or his designee. The permittee may review the evidence that is the basis of the violation during the City's normal business hours. The City Manager or his designee shall review any additional information provided and shall issue a written decision determining whether a violation has occurred. 
(d)  A hearing shall be held at the office of the City Manager or his designee prior to the suspension or revocation of an HDEP , amplified entertainment permit, or permit allowing outdoor amplified entertainment . The permittee shall have the opportunity to question witnesses, present evidence, and may be represented by an attorney. Upon termination of the hearing, an Order shall be issued by the City Manager or his designee, which shall include Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. 
(e)  An appeal may be made to the City Council within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the City Manager's decision (or the decision of his designee) was mailed to the permittee . The scope of the City Council's review shall be limited to verifying the facts supporting a written decision or Findings of Fact made on a suspension. If the City Council finds that the facts as found are correct, the civil penalty or suspension shall not be disturbed. 
(f)  If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within thirty (30) days after the decision becomes final, the City may recover the penalty, together with all costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(g)  In addition to civil penalties and permit suspension, a violation of this division is a misdemeanor and may also be enforced through injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2014-349, §8, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-2125. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2014-349, §9, adopted Oct. 7, 2014, effective October 12, 2014 , repealed §12-2125, which pertained to effective date and derived from Ord. No. 1999-539, §1, adopted April 6, 1999.  
Sec. 12-2126. - ESTABLISHMENT OF HOSPITALITY DISTRICTS. 
The City Council may designate one or more hospitality districts that contains a concentration of establishments offering amplified entertainment located in close proximity to residential dwellings. Any such district shall be created by ordinance duly enacted after a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 2014-349, §10, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-2127. - HOSPITALITY DISTRICT ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. 
No permit is required for an establishment located within a hospitality district to provide only background music or sound . Establishments located within a hospitality district that provide or permit any other type of amplified entertainment at the establishment shall obtain a hospitality district entertainment permit ( HDEP ). 
( Ord. No. 2014-349, §10, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-2128. - ISSUANCE OF HOSPITALITY DISTRICT ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT. 
(a)  On the effective date of an ordinance creating a hospitality district , amplified entertainment permits for establishments located within that hospitality district shall automatically convert to HDEPs and all provisions applicable to HDEPs shall thereafter apply. Holders of converted HDEPs shall provide the contact information required under §12-2129(a) within seven (7) calendar days after conversion. 
(b)  An HDEP for a new establishment shall be issued by the Chief Financial Officer or his designee upon verification by the Inspections Department and the Fire Department that all relevant code and safety to life requirements have been met. The permit shall be applied for on a form supplied by the Chief Financial Officer or his designee. The application shall contain: 
a.  The name of the business owner; 
b.  The name of the permittee's manager ; 
c.  The name of the registered agent for service of process; and 
d.  Such other information as the chief financial officer or his designee may deem relevant and appropriate. 
Upon receipt of the application, the Chief Financial Officer or his designee shall forward a copy of the same to the Inspections Department for verification of the zoning and building code requirements necessary for the issuance of a license. 
(c)  Any change in the ownership of a business after the issuance of the HDEP shall cause the permit to be immediately invalid and require the new owner to reapply for the permit. A change in ownership shall mean acquisition of more than ten percent of the stock in a publicly traded corporation, any change in the ownership of shares in a privately held corporation, sale of all or part of a sole proprietorship, or any change in the membership of any form of limited liability organization. 
(d)  HDEP permittees shall notify the City when business operations cease. If business operations cease at the establishment for thirty (30) calendar days or longer, the HDEP shall automatically expire. 
(e)  The HDEP shall be required to be renewed annually to maintain validity. The fees for the initial HDEP and any subsequent renewal shall be as set forth in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule . 
(f)  Anyone denied an HDEP may appeal within thirty (30) days of denial to the Raleigh City Council . In reviewing appeal of a denial, the Council shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The accuracy of the Chief Financial Officer or his designee's factual determination; 
(2)  The number and type of police calls within a three-block area within the past six (6) months and the relationship of the calls to the establishment holding the permit; 
(3)  The zoning classification of surrounding properties ; 
(4)  The status of any previously issued permits. 
If, after a review of the foregoing factors, any adverse conditions exist on any one (1) of the factors, the appeal will not be allowed. 
( Ord. No. 2014-349, §10, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2019-949, §14, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 12-2129. - REQUIREMENTS FOR HOSPITALITY DISTRICT ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT. 
(a)  HDEP permittees shall provide to the City the name, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of the persons responsible for operation of the establishment, including the manager . The City shall publish the manager's name, numbers, and addresses in a manner in which they are available to the public. HDEP holders shall provide updated information so that the manager is accessible to the public at all times when the establishment is open, occupied, or when employees are on site. 
(b)  From 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m., no HDEP permittee shall cause or allow amplified entertainment that can be heard or felt outside the establishment in which it is played. In addition, from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. no amplified entertainment shall be played on any outdoor portion of the establishment, including decks, patios, and permitted outdoor dining areas. 
(c)  No HDEP permittee shall cause or allow amplified entertainment within the hospitality district that exceeds the following maximum noise limitations during the following days and times: 
60db(A) Sunday through Thursday from 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. 
55db(A) Sunday through Thursday from 11:00 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. 
60db(A) Friday through Saturday from 7:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. 
Measurements shall be taken in accordance with section 12-5002 of the City Code. Ten (10) readings above the allowed decibel limits attributed to the sound source or sources shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation. The sound meter operator may cease taking readings as soon as the readings already taken show a violation. It shall not be necessary to complete all one hundred (100) readings if a fewer number have already indicated a violation of the ordinance. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, HDEP permittees shall comply with limitations on sound set out in section 12-2119(c), 12-5006, and 12-5007(a), (b), and (d) through (p). For purposes of this subsection, a violation of section 12-5006 or 12-5007 occurs when, under Part 12, Chapter 5 of this Code, any of the following occur: a civil citation is issued and not appealed or upheld on appeal by an arbitrator; a criminal conviction occurs, regardless of a later appeal; or a finding of responsibility for an infraction occurs, regardless of a later appeal. 
(e)  HDEP permittees may keep doors or windows of the establishment open when playing amplified entertainment only during the following days and times: 
Sunday through Thursday from 11:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. 
Friday and Saturday from 11:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. 
(f)  HDEP permittees may utilize exterior speakers playing at low volume through a separate volume controlled system during the following days and times: 
On any day from 11:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. 
On Friday or Saturday from 11:00 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. through private patio speakers facing inwards only. 
(g)  HDEP permittees shall make the manager available to interact with residents and with non-resident neighbors concerning the establishment's operations whenever the establishment is open, occupied, or employees are on site. Residents or non-resident neighbors may utilize the public contact information made available by the City to contact the manager directly if any amplified entertainment is causing a disturbance. Repeated failure of the manager to speak with or otherwise respond to residents or non-resident neighbors within a reasonable time after a phone call that occurs when the establishment is open, occupied, or when employees are on site shall constitute a violation of this section. For purposes of this subsection, a failure is repeated when it occurs on three (3) or more days in any calendar month. 
(h)  If requested to do so by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, HDEP permittee s should engage in mediation with resident s or with non-resident neighbor s. Residents , or non-resident neighbors may decline to participate in mediation; however, willingness to participate in mediation on the part of the permittee is a requirement of issuance of an HDEP. To the extent possible, mediation shall be conducted in accordance with the Rules Implementing Statewide Mediated Settlement Conferences in Superior Court Civil Actions. Unless the parties to mediation otherwise agree and pay the costs of mediation, the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall appoint a mediator to conduct the mediation. 
(i)  The City shall establish a complaint registration system for complaints related to any HDEP permittee , and shall make this information available to the public. 
(j)  Every holder of an HDEP shall provide the required number of off-street parking spaces required in Part 10 of this Code or of the UDO, whichever applies, for the zoning district in which the establishment is located. All HDEP off-street parking areas and all HDEP establishment property abutting a public right-of-way shall be cleaned of all litter by 7:30 a.m. each morning. All off-street parking areas shall be lighted. Such illumination shall be a minimum average of two (2) maintained foot-candles. 
The holder of an HDEP shall provide at least one (1) uniformed sworn law enforcement officer or at least one (1) uniformed security guard furnished by a company licensed to provide security by the State of North Carolina continuously present in the parking area between 9:00 p.m. and until one (1) hour after closing to provide security and supervision of the parking area. Any establishment that has maintained a nine (9) month history of safe and effective operation shall be exempt from the security requirement. Safe and effective operation means that the establishment, either inside or in its parking area or lot, has had less than two (2) custodial arrests for felony drug offenses; less than seven (7) custodial arrests for misdemeanor drug offenses; less than two (2) custodial arrests for acts of violence; or no custodial arrests for acts of violence involving a deadly weapon. The persons arrested must be patrons of the establishment or on their way into or out of the establishment before the arrest limits will apply. For purposes of this ordinance a custodial arrest means a physical arrest that result in a finding of probable cause by a magistrate or judge. The City Manager will implement a system within the City administration to monitor such arrests and probable cause determinations. The safe and efficient requirement shall be retroactive to January 1, 2005. Any establishment that becomes subject to the security requirement can become exempt again if it operates in a safe and efficient manner for nine (9) months from the time it is placed into the program. No security will be required on days when the establishment is not providing amplified entertainment . Any establishment that applies for and receives a new HDEP after the effective date of this ordinance will be presumed to be a safe and efficient operator and will not be required to implement the security requirement until it fails to meet the safety requirements of this section. The security requirement will be waived if the establishment presents satisfactory evidence to the City showing that the parking area is leased from a third party who maintains personnel at the lot or deck or garage at all times during the establishment's hours of operation and that the personnel on duty have a wireless phone, radio, land line phone or other communications device capable of calling the 911 emergency number. 
( Ord. No. 2014-349, §10, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-370, §1, 12-2-14 )  
Sec. 12-2130. - TERMINATION OR AMENDMENT OF A HOSPITALITY DISTRICT. 
The City Council may amend, revise, or terminate any hospitality district by ordinance duly enacted after a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Any HDEP issued to an establishment that is no longer within a hospitality district as a result of an amendment, revision, or termination shall automatically convert to an amplified entertainment permit as of the ordinance's effective date and all provisions applicable to amplified entertainment permits shall thereafter apply. 
( Ord. No. 2014-349, §10, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
ARTICLE E. - MASSAGES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2001-935, §§2, 3, adopted Feb. 6, 2001, repealed the former §§12-2132—12-2145 of Art. E and enacted new §§12-2132—12-2144 as set out herein. The former §§12-2132—12-2145 pertained to massages and derived from Code 1959 , §§14-201—14-210, 14-212—14-214; Ord. No. 1991-715, §§1—7, adopted Jan. 5, 1991; Ord. No. 1992-924, §§1—5, adopted Feb. 4, 1992; and Ord. No. 1993-259, §1, adopted Sept. 7, 1993. 
 
Sec. 12-2131. - MASSAGES; PURPOSE. 
To protect public health, safety, welfare, and morals, and to the extent allowed under North Carolina law, the following privilege license provisions and regulations are ordained for the privilege of carrying on the business, trade, or profession of massagist and for the operation or carrying on of the businesses, trades, or professions commonly known as massage parlors, health salons, physical culture studios, or similar establishments by whatever name designated, wherein massage or other physical manipulation of the human body is carried on or practiced. 
( Code 1959 , §14-200; Ord. No. 2001-935, §1, 2-6-01) 
Cross reference: Massage of private parts of another, §13-3006.  
Sec. 12-2132. - EXEMPTIONS. 
The following classes of persons are exempted from this article: 
(a)  Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional, or professional athlete or athletic team within the framework of athletic participation. 
(b)  Massage practiced at any State accredited school, college, university, or seminary. 
(c)  Massage practiced at any hospital, clinic, nursing home, convalescent home, or sanitarium established and licensed pursuant to the laws of this State. 
(d)  Any person exempted from the requirement of a North Carolina massage and bodywork therapy license under G.S. §90-624. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2133. - DEFINITIONS. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Massage means any activity defined in G.S. §90-622 as "massage" or "bodywork therapy." 
(b)  Massage business means any establishment or business wherein massage is practiced including establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical culture studios, and massage studios. 
(c)  Business or profession of massage includes the massage or treatment of any person for a fee or in expectation of a gratuity from the person massaged , and includes the "practice of massage and bodywork therapy" as defined in G.S. §90-622. 
(d)  Massagist means any person engaged in the business or profession of massage . 
(e)  Conviction means the result of a criminal trial or plea arrangement that ends in a judgment that the defendant is guilty as charged. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2134. - LICENSING OF MASSAGE BUSINESS OPERATORS. 
(a)  No person , partnership, corporation, or association shall operate a massage business as herein defined unless such person , partnership, corporation, or association shall have first applied for and received the regulatory license provided by this section. 
(b)  Every application for the regulatory license prescribed herein shall be upon a form approved by the City Manager, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) to offset the cost of the investigation required, and shall be filed with the Revenue Collector. Every such application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is a person , the name and residence address of such person. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or association, the name, residence address, and social security number of all persons having any legal or beneficial interest in such applicant; 
(2)  The address of the premises where the massage business shall be located. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent a massagist employed by a licensed massage business from performing massages on behalf of that business at locations removed from the physical premises where the massage business is licensed; 
(3)  A complete statement of all convictions of any person(s) whose name(s) is (are) required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above, for any felony, for any offense involving the sale of narcotics or controlled substances, or for prostitution or any violation of any law relative to prostitution; 
(4)  A complete statement of any revocation, by any governmental unit, of any license to operate a massage business or to engage in the business or profession of massage held by any person(s) whose name(s) is (are) required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above; 
(5)  A complete statement of any conviction of any person(s) whose name(s) is (are) required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) above, for violation of any statute, law, ordinance, or regulation of any government concerning the operation of a massage business or the business or profession of massage ; 
(6)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person(s) whose name(s) is (are) required to be given in paragraph (b)(1) or profession of massage is carried on; 
(7)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; 
(8)  A list of the names, addresses, North Carolina massage and bodywork therapy license numbers, and home telephone numbers, of all employees of the establishment. The list shall indicate which employees will perform massage. 
(c)  The Revenue Collector shall transmit a copy of the application to the Police Department for an investigative report; to the inspections division to determine compliance with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances; and to the Fire Department to determine compliance with any law relating to fire protection. The Police and Fire Departments and the inspections division shall , within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, report the results of their examinations to the Revenue Collector. An applicant who, consistent with zoning regulations, lawfully operates the massage business out of the applicant's home and who signs a statement under oath that the applicant will not perform massage within the home or allow the public to enter the home in connection with the massage business is not required to submit to a building or fire prevention inspection. 
(d)  The application shall be approved if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application contains no misstatement of fact; 
(2)  All persons employed as massagists or who will perform massage hold a valid license to practice massage and bodywork therapy issued by the State of North Carolina. 
(3)  The massage business operator agrees to supervise adequately the activities of the massagists who work in the massage business. 
(4)  The applicant, or any person having any legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to a violation of: G.S. 14-177—14-202.4 (offenses against public morality and decency); G.S. 14-203—14-208 (prostitution); §§13-3002 and 13-2015 of this Code; any Federal statute relating to prostitution; any crime involving the sale of narcotics or controlled substances, or any law or ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or profession of massage ; 
(5)  The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning, building, and fire prevention codes, unless the applicant is exempt from building and fire prevention inspections as set out above. 
(6)  The applicant or any person having a legal or beneficial ownership interest in the applicant has not, for the three- year period preceding the application, had a previously issued license for engaging in the business or profession of massage revoked; and 
(7)  The business, by reason of the manner or place in which it is to be conducted, will not constitute a nuisance or in any other manner amount to a menace to good order, the public health, safety or morals. 
(e)  Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of a fifty-dollar license fee, the collector of revenue shall issue a regulatory license to applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2135. - REVOCATION OF MASSAGE BUSINESS OPERATOR'S LICENSE. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to §12-2134 may be revoked if any of the following is determined: 
(1)  That the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  That the licensee, or any agent of the licensee, employs or permits to be on the premises of the applicant's massage business any person practicing the business or profession of massage who has not been licensed by the State of North Carolina or who has not been issued the regulatory license required by this article, or whose license under this article or under North Carolina General Statutes has been revoked or is currently suspended; 
(3)  That the licensee, or the legal or beneficial owner of any interest in the licensee, is convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to a violation of: G.S. 14-177—14-202.4 (offenses against public morality and decency); G.S. 14-203—14-208 (prostitution); §§13-3002 and 13-2015 of this Code, a Federal prostitution statute; or any other governmental units' regulations of massages ; 
(4)  That any current employee of the licensee is convicted of any felony in connection with his or her employment, or is convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to, a violation of G.S. 14-177—14-202.4 (offenses against public morality and decency); G.S. 14-203—14-208 (prostitution); §§13-3002 and 13-2015 of this Code; any Federal prostitution statute; or any governmental units' regulations of massage ; 
(5)  That the licensee violates any zoning, building, or fire prevention ordinance, or if exempted from building or fire prevention inspections, performs massage to a client or for a fee within the home or allows the public to enter the home in connection with the massage business ; 
(6)  That the licensed business is conducted or allowed to be conducted in a manner constituting a public nuisance; or 
(7)  That the licensee has failed to supervise an employee and the employee has, in connection with the massage business , been convicted of a violation of G.S. 14-177—14-202.4 (offenses against public morality and decency), G.S. 14-203—14-208 (prostitution); §§13-3002 and 13-2015 of this Code, a Federal prostitution statute, or any other governmental units' regulations of massages. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this article is void if the licensee moves or ceases operating a massage business at the location required to be stated in the application for license pursuant to this article. A licensee may transfer the massage business license to a new location once in any calendar year upon payment of a fifty-dollar ($50.00) nonrefundable transfer fee and upon confirmation from the inspections division that the new location complies with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances, and from the Fire Department that the new location complies with all laws relating to fire prevention. A licensee who, consistent with zoning regulations, lawfully operates the massage business out of the licensee's home and who signs a statement under oath that the licensee will not perform massage within the home or allow the public to enter the home in connection with the massage business is not required to submit to a building or fire prevention inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2136. - LICENSING OF MASSAGISTS. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business or profession of massage unless such person shall have first applied for and received the regulatory license provided by this section. 
(b)  The application for the license required by this section shall be upon a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed with the Revenue Collector. Such application shall be given under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, age, social security number, and current business and residence addresses of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's North Carolina Massage license number; and 
(3)  A statement that the applicant is in good standing with the North Carolina Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy. 
The applicant shall submit a copy of the applicant's current North Carolina massage license with the application. 
(c)  The application shall be approved if it is determined that the applicant possesses a current, valid license to practice massage and bodywork therapy issued by the State of North Carolina and has not been previously convicted of any violation of any provision of this article or misstated any information submitted in the application. Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) license fee, the collector of revenue shall issue a regulatory license to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2137. - REVOCATION OF MASSAGIST'S LICENSE. 
A license issued pursuant to §12-2136 may be revoked if any of the following is first determined: 
(a)  That the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter; or 
(b)  That the licensee's North Carolina massage and bodywork therapy license has been suspended or revoked, has expired, or for any reason is no longer valid or in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2138. - EMPLOYER TO USE ONLY LICENSED EMPLOYEES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person , corporation, partnership or association licensed under this chapter to allow or permit any person to massage or treat any person upon the premises operated by the licensee unless the person giving such massage or treatment has complied with all requirements of licensing under this chapter. Violation of this section shall also be grounds for revocation of the license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2139. - POSTING OF LICENSE. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any massagist to fail to post the license required by this article in his or her work area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person , corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this article not to display such license in a prominent place. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2140. - EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person , corporation, partnership, or association licensed pursuant to this article to employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in the operation of a massage business. A violation of this section shall also be grounds for revocation of any license issued to such violator pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2141. - HOURS OF OPERATION. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a massagist to massage or treat any person between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person , corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this article to admit customers or prospective customers, or remain open for business, or allow, permit, or condone any massage or treatment of any person upon the premises between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be deemed sufficient grounds for revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2142. - APPEALS. 
Anyone denied a license or anyone whose license is revoked pursuant to this article may file, within thirty (30) days of such final determination, an appeal to the City Council . All filings shall be dated and submitted to the City Clerk. The City Council shall consider the matter de novo , and if after a review of the applicable testimony, facts, and code provisions the City Council determines that proper grounds exist for the denial or revocation of the license, the appeal will not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2143. - ANNUAL REGULATORY LICENSE. 
The licenses required under this chapter are annual regulatory licenses. Such licenses shall be due and payable in the same manner as prescribed for other licenses issued by the City pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 12-2144. - PENALTIES. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by fine or imprisonment as provided by law for violation of municipal ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2001-935, §3, 2-6-01)  
Secs. 12-2145 — 12-2154. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE F. - SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1987-915, §1, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, repealed §§12-2155—12-2161 of Article F, pertaining to precious metal dealers, as derived from Ord. No. 1980-511, adopted Nov. 4, 1980, and Ord. No. 1981-603, §1, adopted Mar. 17, 1981. §1 of Ord. No. 1992-31, adopted Aug. 11, 1992, effective Oct. 31, 1992, added a new article, §§12-2155—12-2160. 
 
Sec. 12-2155. - DECLARATION OF NECESSITY. 
It is deemed necessary in order to promote good order and safety of the City and its residents that owners of rooming businesses be licensed. A system of licensing will: 
(a)  Reduce the likelihood that these residential housing accommodations will become public nuisances in violation of G.S. 19-1(b). 
(b)  Promote responsible management of these housing accommodations. 
(c)  Assist in providing a safe habitat for residents and neighbors of these facilities. 
(d)  Safeguard property values. 
(Ord. No. 1992-31, §1, 8-4-92)  
Sec. 12-2156. - LICENSE REQUIRED. 
(a)  A "rooming house" is defined as a house, dwelling, building or structure, which was constructed originally as a single-family dwelling and now contains a type of equivalent dwelling unit as defined in Part 10, Chapter 2 consisting of a room or rooms without cooking facilities or private baths that are rented to the general public as a whole. 
Every rooming house operator engaged in the business of renting any room or equivalent dwelling unit to another person for accommodation shall first apply for and procure from the City Revenue Collector a City license for the privilege of transacting or engaging in such business within the City. 
The tax shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per business location. Such license shall be due and payable in the same manner as prescribed for other privilege licenses issued by the City pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
No license shall be required for the following : 
(1)  The owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as his residence and there are no more than four (4) living quarters on the premises. 
(2)  The business is paying the State sales tax imposed under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(3). 
(c)  Every application for the privilege license prescribed herein shall be upon a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed with the City Revenue Collector. Every application shall be made under oath and shall contain sufficient information to enable the City to determine that the standards of §12-2157 are being met. 
(d)  For purposes of this article, it is immaterial whether payments are called rent, finance charge, or any other name, and it is immaterial whether the occupants are limited to any particular room in the living quarter. 
(Ord. No. 1992-31, §1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 1994-340, §1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 1997-49, §1, 2-4-97)  
Sec. 12-2157. - STANDARDS. 
(a)  A resident manager shall reside on the licensed premises. The residential manager shall be able to be at the rooming house within thirty (30) minutes after being summoned by the Raleigh Police Department. A telephone shall be located in the resident manager's living quarters. The resident manager or the licensee shall at least once during the license period attend one of the quarterly classes conducted by the City for residential management. 
(b)  The licensee shall post a copy of this license in the resident manager's living quarter at a location visible from the entrance way of the living quarter. 
(c)  All sleeping quarters shall be served by working heating facilities and a bed with a mattress. 
(d)  The licensee shall meet each prospective tenant to determine that such tenant does not intend to use the living quarters for illegal activities. 
(e)  The licensee shall commence eviction proceedings against any tenant who engages in unlawful activity in or on the leased premises. 
(f)  The business location is not in violation of any applicable zoning, minimum housing code, and fire prevention code regulation. 
(g)  An up-to-date floor plan and current list of occupants shall be maintained by the resident manager. This floor plan shall be posted in a conspicuous location. 
(Ord. No. 1992-31, §1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 1997-49, §2, 2-4-97)  
Sec. 12-2158. - COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS. 
All persons required by this article to have a license that are operating a business shall have thirty (30) days from the application of this article to file for any required license. The Inspection Department shall inspect each rooming business annually to determine compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1992-31, §1, 8-4-92) 
Cross reference: Compliance with fair housing and landlord and tenant laws, §12-2160.  
Sec. 12-2159. - ENFORCEMENT. 
Enforcement may be by any one (1) or a combination of the following methods, and the institution of an action under any of these methods shall not relieve any party from any other criminal or civil proceeding prescribed for violations of this article. 
(a)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall operate a business without first applying for and obtaining the license required in §12-2156 shall be subject to a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
(2)  Any licensee who after receiving written notice by the City violates §12-2157 shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Thereafter, each and every subsequent single violation occurring on the same business location, within the same two- year period shall be assessed a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  Equitable remedies, including injunctions. 
As authorized by the City Council , the City may apply for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this article, including mandatory or prohibitory injunctions commanding the party to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the business. 
(c)  Criminal offense. 
A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor offense as provided by G.S. 14-4, and the maximum fine or term of imprisonment or both as authorized by law is hereby imposed. 
(d)  Revocation of license. 
Following a written recommendation of the City Manager which describes the nature of any violation, the City Council may revoke a license issued pursuant to §12-2156 if it determines that the licensee has violated any provision of this article and other means of enforcement have failed to deter the licensee from operating in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1992-31, §1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 1994-340, §2, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 1997-49, §3, 2-4-97)  
Sec. 12-2160. - RELATION TO OTHER LAWS. 
Nothing in this article shall authorize or condone any violation of Federal, state, and City fair housing laws and state landlord and tenant laws. This article shall not diminish any private right of action of any person . 
(Ord. No. 1992-31, §1, 8-4-92) 
State law references: State Fair Housing Act, G.S. Ch. 41A; landlord and tenant, G.S. Ch. 42.  
Sec. 12-2161. - REGISTRATION OF SUPPORTIVE HOUSING RESIDENCES AND MULTI-UNIT SUPPORTIVE HOUSING RESIDENCES. 
(a)  No supportive housing residence or multi-unit supportive housing residence as defined in Part 10 chapter 2 of this Code shall operate until it has registered its location with the Zoning Enforcement Administrator, and all supportive housing residences and multi-unit supportive housing residences that remain in operation shall re-register no later than March 31, 2012 and annually thereafter by January 31 of each year, so long as the residence continues to operate. The registration shall include: 
(1)  The address of the residence , 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the "operator representative," 
(3)  The number of occupants permitted to dwell there, and 
(4)  For an initial registration, an affirmation that the residence is not located in violation of applicable radius separation requirements for such facilities. 
For purposes of this section, "operator representative" shall mean an individual who represents the operator or residents of a supportive housing residence or a multi-unit supportive housing residence who is responsible for addressing problems with the operation of such a facility, if any, whenever they arise. The "operator representative" may live on-site at the facility or off-site, but must be available to the public. 
(b)  Supportive housing residences or multi-unit supportive housing residences must obtain and maintain any and all applicable federal, state, local or other licenses required for such facilities before registering. 
(c)  Any changes in licensure status or in designated "operator representative" must be reported to the Zoning Enforcement Administrator immediately. 
(Ord. No. 1994-365-TC-71, §21, TC-22-93, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 2011-953, §§1, 2, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 2012-16, §1, 2-21-12) 
Cross reference: Radius requirements for multi-unit supportive housing residences and supportive housing residences, §10-2072(b).  
ARTICLE G. - PROBATIONARY RENTAL OCCUPANCYPERMIT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Article G. is effective Feb. 7, 2005. 
 
Sec. 12-2162. - FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF NECESSITY. 
(a)  Findings: Housing in the City consists of owner occupied and tenant occupied properties and the two types of housing are in general parity. The substantial majority of complaints about and violations of the Code provisions adopted to assure minimum adequate housing arise from tenant occupied property . State law and this Code impose the responsibility to provide minimally adequate housing for tenants on the property owner. Existing remedial measures in the Code are insufficient to achieve prompt Code compliance resulting in significant adverse impacts on the public health, safety, and welfare of the City including the quality of life for tenants, affected neighborhoods and the City . To expedite compliance with the Code at such properties and thereby assure better quality housing for tenants and the neighborhood, the Council finds it necessary to adopt additional remedial measures for more effective compliance with the Code at such properties. 
(b)  Declaration of necessity: It is deemed necessary in order to promote public health, welfare, good order and safety of the City and its residents that person s renting residential properties where there exist certain unsafe building , minimum housing, zoning or nuisance Code violations should be subject to a permit ting system. Permit ting will: 
(a)  Reduce the likelihood that these residential housing accommodations will become public nuisances in violation of G.S. 19-1(b). 
(b)  Promote responsible management of these housing accommodations. 
(c)  Assist in providing a safe habitat for residents and neighbors of these facilities. 
(d)  Safeguard property values. 
(e)  Reduce the likelihood that housing accommodations where such problems most frequently have arisen and which are unfit for human habitation, dangerous, or injurious to the public will exist or be occupied. 
(f)  Expedite repair of residential housing accommodations where such problems arise. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2008-415, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2163. - DEFINITIONS. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Business affiliate: A person who directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, the owner of a probationary residential rental dwelling of any property . Solely for purposes of this definition, the terms "owns," "is owned," and "ownership" mean ownership of an equity interest, or the equivalent thereof, of ten (10) per cent of [or] more. 
(b)  Dwelling: A dwelling unit used for residential purposes other than a dwelling unit in a bed and breakfast inn; hotel or motel; guest house; rest home; rooming house, boarding house, lodging house; or tourist home. 
(c)  Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms physically arranged as to create an independent housekeeping establishment with separate facilities for cooking, sleeping, and toilet. A dwelling unit can be occupied by only one (1) family. A dwelling unit can also contain a utility apartment or rented rooms in accordance with §10-2072(b). 
(d)  Fifth degree of kinship: Collateral kin within five degrees of kinship removed from the owner with the degree of kinship to be computed as provided in N.C.G.S. §104A-1. 
(e)  Housing Code: The provisions of the Raleigh City Code codified at §§10-6121 through 10-6137. 
(f)  Inspections Department: The Inspections Department of the City of Raleigh. 
(g)  Licensed rental agency: A rental agency holding a current privilege license issued by the State of North Carolina pursuant to N.C.G.S. §105-41(a)(8) or (9). 
(h)  Notice of violation: A City issued list of failures to comply with the City Code at the dwelling included in the notice sent to the owner(s) pursuant to N.C.G.S. §§160A-428 and 160A-429; §§10-6126, 10-6127, 10-2152, and 12-6003. 
(i)  Owner: Any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if the person were the owner; or 
(3)  For violations of the Housing Code , shall be a mortgagee of record. 
(j)  Person: Associations, corporations, limited liability companies, company, firm, partnerships, joint ventures, public or private institutions, corporations, trusts, estates, utilities, cooperatives, commissions, boards, condominiums, interstate bodies and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals or other legal entities. 
(k)  Probationary rental occupancy permit: A permit issued to the owner of a probationary rental residential dwelling pursuant to this article. 
(l)  Probationary rental residential dwelling: A dwelling unit, other than a utility apartment, including the premises of the dwelling unit which is the site of: 
(1)  A violation of §10-6058 by reoccupancy of a dwelling previously found unsafe; 
(2)  A violation of §10-6137 by reoccupancy before certification of compliance with the Housing Code by the Inspections Department; 
(3)  Activities resulting in (a) a third conviction for violation of §13-3017 the Nuisance Party ordinance, within the twenty-four (24) month period following notice from the PROP Team of the Police Department of the first conviction or (b) a third civil penalty for violation of §13-3017, within the twenty-four (24) month period following notice from the PROP Team of the Police Department of the first notice of violation; 
(4)  Activities resulting in (a) a third conviction for violation of §12-5007, the Prohibited Noises ordinance, within the twenty-four (24) month period following notice from the PROP Team of the Police Department of the first conviction or (b) a third civil penalty for violation of §12-5007, within the twenty-four (24) month period following notice from the PROP Team of the Police Department of the first notice of violation; 
(5)  A violation of §10-6058 by the failure to repair, vacate or demolish within the time provided for compliance with the Code in the order issued by the Inspections Department pursuant to N.C.G.S. §160A-429; 
(6)  A violation of §10-6137 by the failure to repair, vacate or demolish the dwelling within the time provided for compliance with the Code in the order issued by the Inspections Department pursuant to §10-6127; 
(7)  A violation of §10-2151 by housing more inhabitants than permitted in the zoning Code section applicable to the dwelling; 
(8)  A zoning vehicle violation by the failure to comply in a timely manner with an order issued by Inspections Department due to the unlawful storage of unlicensed, uninspected, wrecked, crushed, dismantled, or partially dismantled automotive vehicles on the premises; 
(9)  A second nuisance abatement pursuant to §12-6003 within a twenty-four (24) month period; 
(10)  A fourth notice of violation within a twenty-four (24) month period, when the prior notices of violations were resolved by corrective action and without issuance of any order or mandate for corrective action, of any of the following sections §§10-2151, 10-6058, 10-6137 and 12-6003 of the City Code. 
(11)  Activities resulting in a third conviction for a criminal activity on the premises of the dwelling following notice from the PROP Team of the Police Department within the twenty-four (24) month period following notice from the first conviction for a criminal activity on the premises of the dwelling. 
(m)  Public nuisance violation: A determination by a Code enforcement official that any of the nuisances listed in §12-6002 exists at a property which determination is included in a notice sent to the property owner pursuance to §12-6003(a). 
(n)  Violation: A determination by a Code enforcement official or a judge, after a notice of violation of the City Code and an opportunity for response to the noticed alleged failures, that an order or other mandate should issue to the owner or any other person imposing a sanction or requiring further actions to comply with the City Code , including without any limitation the payment of civil penalties or administrative fees, implementation of corrective measures, or cessation of activities which are not authorized by the City Code , or conviction of a criminal Code offense for failure to comply with the Code provisions listed in (l) of this section. 
(o)  Zoning vehicle violation: A determination that unlicensed, uninspected, wrecked, crushed, dismantled, or partially dismantled automotive vehicles are present on the premises in violation of the zoning Code including the provisions at §§10-2015(c), 10-2016(c), 10-2017(c), 10-2018(c), 10-2019(c), 10-2020(c), 10-2021(c), 10-2022(c), 10-2023(c), 10-2024(c), 10-2025(c), 10-2030(c), 10-2031(c), 10-2032(c), 10-2035(c), 10-2036(c), 10-2037(c), 10-2040(c), 10-2041(c), 10-2042(c), 10-2043(c), 10-2045(c) and 10-2050(c). 
(p)  Criminal Activity: Means conviction of a tenant or tenant guest for conduct on the premises of the dwelling under any of the following: (i) N.C.G.S. 14-204; (ii) N.C.G.S. 14-71.1 on the premises; (iii) N.C.G.S. 18B-300; (iv) N.C.G.S. 14-409 or N.C.G.S. 14-415.1; (v) N.C.G.S. 14-292; or (iv) N.C.G.S. 14-288.2. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §§1—8, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 2008-415, §§2—4, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2164. - PERMITTING OF PROBATIONARY RENTALRESIDENTIALDWELLINGS. 
(a)  Unless compliance with this article is deemed pursuant to §12-2166, it shall be unlawful for an owner to rent, to receive rental income from, or to offer for rent, any probationary rental residential dwelling required to be permitted under this part without first obtaining a permit for the dwelling under this part or when the permit issued under this part is revoked. The owner of a probationary rental residential dwelling shall hold a permit under this part for each probationary rental residential dwelling and shall abide by the Standards in §12-2165 in order to be eligible to retain the permit . Each probationary rental residential dwelling is a separate dwelling for fee purposes and for the requirement to be permitted. When an apartment house consisting of multiple dwelling units is required to have a probationary rental occupancy permit as a result of a violation which applies to the building as a whole, a single permit will be required for the building as a whole which permit will be issued to the owner of the building , however each dwelling unit within the building which separately qualifies as a probationary rental residential dwelling shall be subject to separate permit fees and the requirement to be permitted. The Department of Inspections shall assign violations in common areas of an apartment complex to the apartment house nearest to the common area where the violation occurred. 
(b)  Every application for the probationary rental occupancy permit prescribed herein, or a permit amendment to add another probationary rental residential dwelling to the permit , shall be upon a form approved by the Director of the Inspections Department and shall be filed with the Inspections Department. Every application shall be made under oath and shall contain the information required to show the owner is eligible for a permit under this article and sufficient information to enable the Inspections Department to determine that the standards of §12-2165 are being, or will be, met at any probationary rental residential dwelling to be permitted. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application and a non-refundable application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the Inspections Department shall review each application and determine whether the application should be approved. The Inspections Department shall deny any application which does not satisfy the minimum requirements of this article and any application submitted by an owner during a period of permit revocation. 
(c)  The permit fee shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first year of the permit . The annual fee for subsequent year s shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fee shall be due and payable when the permit issues with annual fees for subsequent year s due and payable annually. 
(d)  Any person required to have a probationary rental occupancy permit shall be permitted for two (2) year s. If a violation of the permit occurs, the permit requirement is extended for the probationary rental residential dwelling covered by the permit for two (2) year s following the date of the violation. To be released from the requirement for a probationary rental occupancy permit , the owner must have had no violation of any of the Code provisions listed in §12-2163(l) and the standards in §12-2165 for the two (2) year period immediately before the permit period ends and the dwelling must be approved as compliant with the Code in a final inspection. Final inspections will be conducted only upon the request of the owner. When the owner fails to request an inspection within ninety (90) days after the date the permit requirement was due to expire, the Department of Inspections, after written notice to the owner and tenant, shall inspect the permitted dwelling for compliance with the Code provisions listed in §12-2163(l) and the standards in §12-2165. 
(e)  Any person taking title to a permitted probationary rental residential dwelling shall be the holder of the probationary rental occupancy permit . Any person taking title to a probationary rental residential dwelling not previously holding a permit shall apply for a probationary rental occupancy permit . The new owner of the dwelling unit, who is not a prior owner or related by marriage or within the fifth degree of kinship to the seller, may request that the Director of the Inspections Department remove the requirement that the dwelling have a probationary rental occupancy permit . For the request to be eligible for consideration, the new owner must: 
(1)  Have paid all outstanding fees and civil penalties for the dwelling; 
(2)  Have no violations or pending violations of this article issued to the new owner; 
(3)  Obtain from the Inspections Department a determination that the dwelling complies with the standards in §12-2165; and 
(4)  Submit an affidavit which shows proof of title transfer, that the new owner is not a prior owner, not related by marriage or within the fifth degree of kinship to the seller, is not a business affiliate of the prior owner, and that the lease for the dwelling includes a provision making violations of the City Code by the tenant grounds for eviction. 
(f)  A temporary permit shall be issued by the Inspections Department if the final decision on a complete application is not made at the end of the thirty (30) day review period. The temporary permit will expire thirty (30) days following an inspection which finds the dwelling to be ineligible to hold a permit under this article; upon issuance of the Probationary Rental Occupancy Permit for the dwelling; or upon denial of the application for a Probationary Rental Occupancy Permit . The Inspections Department shall not charge a fee for a temporary permit . 
(g)  An application shall be accompanied by a notarized statement from a competent person agreeing to appointment as process service agent for receipt of a notice of violation or order from the City for all violations at the dwelling unless each notice of violation or order previously sent from the City to the owner of the dwelling was delivered and no such notices of violation or orders returned to the City . The refusal of service by the process service agent of a notice of violation or order, or a notice of violation or orders returned undelivered, shall be grounds to revoke the permit . When a notice or order under this Article is returned undelivered, the Inspections Department may require the appointment of a process service agent as a condition for continuing to hold the permit . Failure by the owner to maintain a duly appointed process service agent, or to appoint a process service agent within thirty (30) days of being so ordered, shall be grounds to revoke the Probationary Rental Occupancy Permit . 
(h)  The Inspections Department shall maintain a list of all dwellings and dwelling units which are probationary rental residential dwellings and subject to the permit requirements of this article. The Inspections Department shall send a copy of the list of probationary rental residential dwellings, which shows whether each listed dwelling is permitted, to the Office of the City Clerk, for public inspection, at least once every thirty (30) days. The Inspections Department shall use other reasonable means to make the list publicly available including the information systems for public access to City information. 
(i)  Reserved. 
The Council , by ordinance, may add the dwelling to the PROP Program upon finding that existing remedial provisions have been inadequate to abate the detrimental impact on the tenants, the adjacent properties, the dwelling and the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2005-770, §1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 2006-54, §§14, 15, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 2008-415, §5, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2165. - STANDARDS. 
(a)  The permittee shall respond to the Department making contact, either in person or by telephone within two (2) business days after being contacted at the telephone number provided in the application, to the Raleigh Police Department, the Fire Department, or the Inspections Department. The permittee shall submit to the department making the contact, within three (3) days of the response, written documentation of the response. The permittee may designate a licensed rental agency as the person responsible for responding to calls for assistance from the Raleigh Police Department, the Fire Department, or the Inspections Department. The designated agency must have at least one agent located in the City or within twenty-five (25) miles of the City 's planning jurisdiction who is authorized by it to respond to calls. The designation shall be effective only after a notarized statement is submitted to the Inspections Department in which the responsible employee is identified and agrees to accept the duty. 
(b)  The permittee at least once during the first year of the permit period shall attend one residential management course conducted or approved by the City . The Inspections Department shall maintain a list of approved courses. 
(c)  The permittee shall maintain the dwelling so that it does not violate any applicable provision of the zoning Code , minimum housing Code , or other Code provision listed in the definition of probationary rental residential dwelling at §12-2163. 
(d)  The permittee shall maintain a current list of occupants. Upon request, by City inspectors, police, and fire and emergency response personnel investigating violations or potential violations of this article, the permittee shall present the list of occupants to the investigating personnel. 
(e)  The permittee shall obtain a §10-6125(c) certificate of housing Code compliance before a vacant probationary rental residential dwelling with an unresolved notice of violation of the Housing Code is occupied by another tenant. 
(f)  The permittee shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(g)  The Public Utilities Department shall not provide water service to a vacant probationary rental residential dwelling which is in violation of the Housing Code until a certificate of housing Code compliance has been issued for the dwelling pursuant to §10-6125(c), unless the Director of the Public Utilities Department determines such service is necessary for public health reasons and will not be used by occupants of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
(h)  Within thirty (30) days of the designation of a dwelling as probationary residential rental dwelling, the owner shall deliver a written notification, using the form approved by the Department of Inspections, to each tenant that the dwelling is a probationary rental residential dwelling. Prior to entering into a rental agreement, whether oral or written , the permittee shall provide written notification, using the form approved by the Department of Inspections, to each prospective tenant that the dwelling is a probationary rental residential dwelling. In the notification, the permittee shall explain the possible enforcement actions which can be applied for violations of the probationary rental occupancy permit . The permittee shall provide proof of the delivery to the Inspections Department along with a copy of the notification within ten (10) days of receipt of proof of delivery. 
(i)  Within thirty (30) days of the designation of a dwelling as probationary residential rental dwelling, the owner of a condominium or a dwelling in a townhouse development , shall deliver a written notification, using the form approved by the Department of Inspections, to the association or governing body which controls the property commonly owned and associated with the dwelling, that the dwelling is a probationary rental residential dwelling. In the notification, the permittee shall explain the possible enforcement actions which can be applied for violations of the probationary rental occupancy permit on the common property of the association. The permittee shall provide proof of the delivery to the Inspections Department along with a copy of the notification within ten (10) days of receipt of proof of delivery. 
(j)  Within thirty (30) days of the designation of an apartment house as probationary residential rental dwelling and when the person s owning the apartment house and the apartment complex are not the same person , the owner of an apartment house , shall deliver a written notification, using the form approved by the Department of Inspections, to the owner of the apartment project which controls the property commonly owned and associated with the apartment house , that the apartment house is a probationary rental residential dwelling. In the notification, the permittee shall explain the possible enforcement actions which can be applied for violations of the probationary rental occupancy permit on the common property of the apartment complex. The permittee shall provide proof of the delivery to the Inspections Department along with a copy of the notification within ten (10) days of receipt of proof of delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §§9, 14, 15, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-2166. - COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Any person required by this article to have a permit for a probationary rental residential dwelling who files a complete application for any required permit within ten (10) days following notice from the Inspections Department that this article applies to the dwelling shall be deemed compliant with this article unless and until the application is denied. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to rent, to receive rental income from, or to offer for rent a dwelling subject to the permit requirements of this article beginning ten (10) days after service of notice by the Inspections Department that a permit is required under this part unless a complete application for a §12-2164(a) permit has been submitted for the dwelling. 
(c)  Any person who holds a N.C. Gen. Stat. 105-41(a)(8) or (9) privilege license as a rental agency and is not the record owner of the probationary rental residential dwelling shall be deemed compliant with this article upon filing with the Inspections Department an affidavit or other notarized statement that the agency relationship has been terminated and that the failure to comply with the noticed violations was caused by the record owner's refusal to comply with the article. 
(d)  Any person who has been designated as a process service agent and is not the record owner of the probationary rental residential dwelling shall be deemed compliant with this article upon promptly notifying the Inspections Department that the notice or order delivered for service cannot be delivered to the owner and upon filing with the Inspections Department an affidavit or other notarized statement that the agency relationship has been terminated and that all prior notices and orders were delivered to the owner. 
(e)  If the activities, violations or abatements which individually or cumulatively could cause a property or dwelling to be deemed a probationary rental residential dwelling under §12-2163(l) are the result of tenant behavior or actions, an owner shall be entitled to relief from any such violation(s) [i.e. the violation(s) shall not be counted as a strike against the owner] by evicting or removing the tenant, so long as the owner can show that the tenant behavior or action is the basis of the eviction or removal of the tenant. No owner may obtain relief for more than two (2) violations in any three (3) year period per dwelling under this subsection. Any owner who evicted or removed the tenant as a result of the tenant causing such violation(s), whether such removal is the result of a tenant voluntarily vacating the dwelling or as a result of court action, shall be deemed compliant with this Article upon filing with the Inspections Department an affidavit or other notarized statement stating that (1) the tenant cited for the violation no longer resides at the dwelling , or (2) the attached complaint was filed to evict the tenant and listing the actions showing diligence in effecting the eviction and attaching a copy of the signed lease with the required right to evict. An owner shall also be entitled to relief from any subsequent violation(s) that occur while the action to evict the tenant is pending upon a similar showing to the Inspections Department. 
If the court has denied the owner 's diligent pursuit to evict the tenant, it shall be sufficient if the owner does not renew the tenant's lease at the end of the then current term and instead terminates the lease. 
When an owner shows an inability to access to dwelling for purposes of effecting remedial activity as ordered by the Inspections Department pursuant to §10-6058 or §10-6137 due to a court order in an eviction proceeding, the failure to complete the required remedial activity as previously ordered by the Inspections Department is not a violation for purposes of determining whether the dwelling is a probationary rental residential dwelling until thirty (30) days after the expiration of the court order barring access or within such additional time for compliance as is provided by the Inspections Department. 
(f)  Any mortgagee of record, not otherwise defined as an owner, shall be deemed compliant with this article unless and until the other owners of the probationary rental residential dwelling fail to comply with notices of violations or orders, including for the payment of civil penalties. A mortgagee of record, not otherwise defined as an owner, shall not be liable for civil penalties or administrative fees in excess of the liability of the other owners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §§10, 14, 15, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-2167. - ENFORCEMENT. 
Enforcement may be by any one (1) or a combination of the following methods, and the institution of an action under any of these methods shall not relieve any party from any civil proceeding prescribed for violations of this article. When a violation continues from day to day without interruption, a new and separate violation occurs when the violation continues after service of the notice or order of the immediately preceding violation for the unlawful activity. 
(a)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall rent, or offer for rent, a probationary rental residential dwelling without first applying for and obtaining a permit as required in §12-2164 or who shall rent, or offer for rent, a probationary rental residential dwelling permitted under this article in violation of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 
(a)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation, and each continuing day of noncompliance following written notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day; 
(b)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second violation, and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day; 
(c)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third violation, and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day; 
(d)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a violation during a period of revocation, and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day; 
(e)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) against the owner of common property in a condominium or townhouse development for each violation occurring on the common area of a dwelling subject to this article, and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day; and 
(f)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) against the owner of an apartment project with common property used by an apartment house for each violation occurring on the common area of an apartment house subject to this article, and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(2)  Any duly appointed licensed rental agency employee who, after receiving written notice of a violation by the City , violates §12-2165(a) shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Thereafter, each and every subsequent single violation occurring on the same probationary rental residential dwelling shall be assessed a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
(3)  Any duly appointed process service agent who, after receiving written notice of a violation or an order from the City , refuses to accept service of process or delivery of notices of violation or orders from the City in accordance with the agent's notarized statement attached to the application submitted for the dwelling shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Thereafter, each and every subsequent single violation occurring on the same probationary rental residential dwelling shall be assessed a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. 
(b)  Equitable remedies, including injunctions. 
As authorized by the City Council , the City may apply to the courts for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this article, including mandatory or prohibitory injunctions commanding the party to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the business. 
(c)  Revocation of permit . 
(1)  For each dwelling where a second violation of this article occurs within twenty-four (24) month s of the most recent violation of this article, the Department of Inspections shall issue an order revoking the residential rental occupancy permit for a period of two (2) year s, or when no permit had been issued the dwelling, making the probationary residential rental dwelling ineligible for a permit for a period of two (2) year s. 
(2)  For each dwelling where a third violation of this article occurs within twenty-four (24) month s of the most recent violation of this article, the Department of Inspections shall issue an order revoking every probationary rental occupancy permit issued to, or held in the name of the owner of the dwelling where the violation occurred, for a period of two (2) year s, and making the owner ineligible to hold a probationary rental occupancy permit for a period of two (2) year s. 
(3)  Ten (10) days following the service on the permittee of a written recommendation by the Director of the Inspections Department which describes the nature of any violation, the Director of the Inspections Department may revoke a permit issued pursuant to §12-2164 if it is determined that the permittee has violated any provision of this article and other means of enforcement have failed to deter the permittee from operating in violation of this article. 
(d)  Probationary status. 
Following a determination that a permittee under this article has violated the provisions of this article, the permittee shall be sent a notice that the permit is on a probationary status and will be revoked for a period of twenty-four (24) month s if the permittee commits a second violation during the twenty-four (24) month period following the first violation. Following a determination that a permittee under this article has violated the provisions of this article a second time within any twenty-four (24) month period, the permittee shall be sent a notice that the permit is on a probationary status and if the permittee commits a third violation during the twenty-four (24) month period following the first violation, every probationary rental occupancy permit issued to, or held in the name of the owner where the violation occurred, will be revoked for a period of twenty-four (24) month s. 
(e)  Cancellation of revocation orders. 
The Director of the Inspections Department shall cancel an order revoking a probationary rental occupancy permit when the owner requesting cancellation of the revocation order has paid all outstanding fees and civil penalties for the dwelling and the owner has no pending appeals of any notices or orders and: 
1.  Within five (5) working days of the service of the order, the owner obtains approval from the Inspections Department of a management plan for the dwelling to achieve full compliance with the standards in §12-2165 within the time otherwise provided by the Code , or such time as the Inspections Department finds reasonable and; 
2.  The owner by power of attorney appoints a licensed rental agency to manage the property for the two (2) year period following the approval; or 
3.  Within fifteen (15) days of the service of the order, the new owner of the dwelling unit, who is not a prior owner, not related by marriage or within the fifth degree of kinship to the seller, is not a business affiliate of the prior owner, submits an affidavit so attesting along with proof of title transfer, pays all outstanding fees and civil penalties, and shows the Inspections Department that the dwelling complies with the standards in §12-2165. 
(f)  Not a criminal violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the civil penalties and permit revocations set forth. Any violation of this article shall be deemed a non-criminal violation and shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to G.S. 14-4 or §14-1005(a) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §§14, 15, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-2168. - APPEAL. 
Any permittee, owner or other person served with notice or an order under the provisions of this article, including denial of a request pursuant to §12-2164(e), may appeal the notice or order in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the Director of the Inspections Department within thirty (30) days after service of the written notice or order of the Director of the Inspections Department on the petitioner. The written appeal shall identify the application of the article at issue and provide the reasons the petitioner contends that it was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. An appeal challenging a notice that a dwelling is qualified as a " probationary rental residential dwelling " pursuant to §12-2163(l)(10) may include an appeal of the basis for the citations resulting in the determination that the dwelling is qualified as a " probationary rental residential dwelling " pursuant to §12-2163(l)(10). 
(2)  Unless the Director of Inspections decides to allow the requested relief based on the appeal request, the Director of the Inspections Department shall send each appeal request to arbitration. The Director of Inspections and the appealing party shall select an arbitrator from the Wake County District Court list of arbitrators. The arbitration shall be conducted, to the extent practicable, in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules for Court-Ordered Arbitration in North Carolina. The arbitrator shall be paid a fee equal to the maximum fee specified in such Rules. The arbitrator shall consider both the applicable code provisions and equitable factors in resolving the appeal. If the person who files an appeal of a notice that a dwelling is qualified as a " probationary rental residential dwelling " pursuant to §12-2163(l)(10) shows that the owner did not cause and, with the use of reasonable measures, could not have prevented the actions or activities leading to the citations which qualified the dwelling as a " probationary rental residential dwelling " pursuant to §12-2163(l)(10), the arbitrator may reverse the order. 
(3)  An appeal may be taken from any decision of arbitrator by giving notice of appeal to the City Council within thirty (30) days after service of the written decision of the arbitrator. Notice of appeal shall be given by delivery of a written statement to the City Manager stating the grounds for the appeal and providing the City Manager with a copy of the written decision of the arbitrator. The written appeal shall identify the application the article at issue and provide the reasons the petitioner contends that it was wrongly applied. The Director of the Inspection Department shall transmit to the City Manager all documents constituting the record upon which the decision by the arbitrator was made. 
(4)  The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the presentation of oral arguments by the parties and shall give due notice to the petitioner and the City Manager. After consideration of the arbitrator's decision, including any equitable factors applied by the arbitrator, and the record of the proceeding, the City Council shall issue a written determination, within a reasonable time, stating whether the disputed application of the article will be approved without change or modified or reversed. 
(5)  All decisions of the Director of the Inspections Department and City Council shall be served on the petitioner. 
(6)  The enforcement of an order issued by the Inspections Department which includes the revocation of a residential rental occupancy permit shall be stayed upon the filing of an appeal and until a final order is issued by the Director of the Inspections Department or City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §§11, 14, 15, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-2169. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEE AND ARBITRATION FEE. 
(a)  Fee for each violation. 
Any person who violates this article shall pay an administrative fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation and the costs to the City of service of orders and notices. 
(b)  Fee for arbitration. 
Any person who files an appeal shall pay an administrative fee of two hundred ($200.00) to the City at the time the appeal request is made. Failure to pay the administrative fee shall cause the appeal to be denied. The person who filed the appeal shall be responsible for paying one-half of the costs of the arbitration fee. If the person who appeals is the prevailing party , the administrative fee and the portion of the arbitration fee shall be reimbursed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §12, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 12-2170. - METHODS OF SERVICE. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, notices, orders or other documents issued pursuant to this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notices, orders or other documents may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used , a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. 
(b)  If the identities of any owners or whereabouts of persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Inspection Department or the PROP Team of the Police Department in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if the owners are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and the Inspections Department shall make an affidavit to that effect, stating the steps taken to determine and locate the persons in interest, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such owners or persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City at least once no later than time at which person al service would be required under this article. Where such service is by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. 
(c)  In order to assist the Inspections Department and the PROP Team of the Police Department with the service of notices, orders and other documents pursuant to this Article, an owner who submits an affidavit showing a failure to receive a notice of violation and who affirms in the affidavit submitted to the Inspections Department or the PROP Team of the Police Department that the address listed in the Wake County tax records has been changed to the correct address at which the owner can receive further notices, shall have the prior violation removed from consideration for the Probationary Rental Residential Dwelling determination so long as the owner continues to maintain a correct address with the Wake County tax records and does not refuse to accept service of any notice at the address listed with the Wake County tax records. 
(d)  In order to assist owners who desire to better monitor activities at their properties, the PROP Team of the Police Department shall notify an owner as provided in (a) of this Section within ten (10) business days of an activity at the property by a tenant or a guest of a tenant that can or will cause the property to be qualified as a probationary rental residential dwelling. In addition and to the extent practicable, a notice to the owner shall be provided in the most expeditious manner available, including notice sent by electronic mail or facsimile to the locations provided in the Rental Registration. Failure to send or deliver the more expeditious notice shall not impede the enforcement of the PROP program against the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-54, §13, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 2008-415, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2171. - RELATION TO OTHER LAWS. 
Nothing in this article shall authorize or condone any violation of Federal, state , and City fair housing laws and state landlord and tenant laws. This article shall not diminish any private right of action of any person . 
(Ord. No. 2004-720, §1, 10-19-04) 
State law references: State Fair Housing Act, G.S. Ch. 41A; landlord and tenant, G.S. Ch. 42.  
Secs. 12-2172—12-2174. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE H. - RENTAL DWELLING REGISTRATION AND PROP NOTIFICATION 
 
Sec. 12-2175. - FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF NECESSITY. 
(a)  Findings: Housing in the City consists of owner occupied and tenant occupied properties and the two types of housing are in general parity. The substantial majority of complaints about and violations of the Code provisions adopted to assure minimum adequate housing arise from tenant occupied property . State law and this Code impose the responsibility to provide minimally adequate housing for tenants on the property owner . A significant obstacle to effecting prompt and efficient enforcement of the minimum housing code is accuracy of the information in the public record for making contact with the owner of such tenant occupied properties and for the delivery of notifications of activity at the property which may result in the dwelling being required to be licensed under Article G, the Probationary Rental Occupancy Permit. In addition, the effectiveness of responses by the Fire Department and the Police Department to multiple incidents at such properties can be improved by contact with the owners or managers of such properties. Existing contact information is insufficient to achieve prompt City response to matters adversely impacting the public health, safety, and welfare of the City including the quality of life for tenants, affected neighborhoods and the City . To expedite Fire and Police response as well as compliance with the Code at such properties and thereby assure better quality housing for tenants and the neighborhood, the Council finds it necessary to adopt a registration requirement for residential rental properties. 
(b)  Declaration of necessity: It is deemed necessary in order to promote public health, welfare, good order and safety of the City and its residents that persons renting residential properties should be subject to a registration system. Registration will: 
(1)  Promote responsible management of these housing accommodations. 
(2)  Assist in providing a safe habitat for residents and neighbors of these facilities. 
(3)  Safeguard property values. 
(4)  Expedite repair of residential housing accommodations where such problems arise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2176. - DEFINITIONS. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Apartment house: Any dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units . 
(b)  Apartment project: A systematically built group of apartment houses . 
(c)  Business affiliate: A person who directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, the owner of a probationary residential rental dwelling of any property . Solely for purposes of this definition, the terms "owns," "is owned," and "ownership" mean ownership of an equity interest, or the equivalent thereof, of ten (10) per cent of [or] more. 
(d)  Dwelling: A dwelling unit used for residential purposes other than a dwelling unit in a bed and breakfast inn; hotel or motel; guest house; rest home; rooming house , boarding house, lodging house; or a tourist home. 
(e)  Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms physically arranged as to create an independent housekeeping establishment with separate facilities for cooking, sleeping, and toilet. A dwelling unit can be occupied by only one (1) family. A dwelling unit can also contain a utility apartment or rented rooms in accordance with §10-2072(b). 
(f)  Inspections Department: The Inspections Department of the City of Raleigh. 
(g)  Manager: Any person who has been hired and is paid by the owner to manage any dwelling or dwelling unit which is rented or offered for rent as a residential dwelling . 
(h)  Owner: Any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit , with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit , as owner or agent of the owner , or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner . Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if the person were the owner . 
(i)  Person: Associations, corporations, limited liability companies, company, firm, partnerships, joint ventures, public or private institutions, corporations, trusts, estates, utilities, cooperatives, commissions, boards, condominiums, interstate bodies and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals or other legal entities. 
(j)  Property: A parcel of land, either vacant or occupied by one or more principal buildings, as identified by the Wake County Register of Deeds tax records. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2011-980, §1, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 12-2177. - REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT. 
(a)  Unless compliance with this article is deemed pursuant to §12-2180, it shall be unlawful for an owner to rent, to receive rental income from, or to offer for rent, any rental residential dwelling required to be registered under this part without first registering the dwelling under this part or when the permit issued under §12-2164 is revoked. The owner of a rental residential dwelling shall hold a registration under this part for each rental residential dwelling located on a separate tax parcel and shall abide by the Standards in §12-2179 in order to be eligible to retain the registration. When a manager is contracted to manage multiple dwellings in a single townhouse development or apartment house , a single registration will be required which registration will be issued to the manager of the dwelling units . 
(b)  Every application for rental registration shall be filed on a form approved by the Director of the Inspections Department and shall be filed with the Inspections Department. Every application shall be made under oath and shall contain the information required to identify the owner of the dwelling(s) to be registered, contact information including a street address and telephone numbers, and identification and contact information for any manager or other alternate contact person for the dwelling(s) . Every application shall include the registration fee as applicable for the property . The owner shall also provide an electronic mail address and a facsimile number in the registration application. Each rented dwelling unit must be registered, however, an owner of multiple units may register all units using one registration form. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application and a non-refundable application fee of thirty dollars ($30.00), the Inspections Department shall review each application and determine whether the application should be approved. The Inspections Department shall deny any application which does not satisfy the minimum requirements of this article and any application submitted by an owner during a period of permit revocation pursuant to §12-2167. 
(c)  The registration fee for rental registration shall be due and payable when the renewal registration issues. The registration fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a property with twenty (20) or more residential rental dwellings, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(2)  For a property with fewer than twenty (20) but more than three (3) residential rental dwellings, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); and 
(3)  For a property with three or fewer residential rental dwellings, the fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2011-980, §§2, 3, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 12-2178. - REGISTRATION UPDATES. 
(a)  Any person taking title to a rental residential dwelling shall be the holder of the registration held by the prior owner for thirty (30) days after the transfer of title is recorded in the Wake County Registry or otherwise becomes legally binding. Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period a new registration shall be required. 
(b)  The owner of a registered dwelling shall update annually the information previously provided, or sooner as required by the Director of the Inspections Department. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 2011-980, §4, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 12-2179. - STANDARDS. 
(a)  The owner shall respond to each department making contact, either in person or by telephone, within two (2) business days after being contacted at the telephone number provided in the application or renewal application by the Raleigh Police Department, the Fire Department, or the Inspections Department. The owner shall designate an alternate person as responsible for responding to calls for assistance from the Raleigh Police Department, the Fire Department, or the Inspections Department when the department is unable to be in contact with the owner within two (2) business days of the initial contact. The designated alternate must be located in the City or within twenty-five (25) miles of the City's planning jurisdiction and be authorized by it to respond to calls. The designation shall be effective only when the responsible person is identified and agrees to accept the duty by signature on the application or renewal application. 
(b)  The owner shall maintain a current list of occupants. Upon request, by City inspectors, police, and fire and emergency response personnel investigating violations or potential violations of the City Code or State law, the owner shall present the list of occupants to the investigating personnel. 
(c)  The Public Utilities Department shall not provide water service to a vacant rental residential dwelling which is not registered in compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2180. - COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS. 
(a)  Any person required by this article to register a rental residential dwelling who files a complete application for registration within ten (10) days following notice from the Inspections Department that this Article applies to the dwelling shall be deemed compliant with this article unless and until the application is denied. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to rent, to receive rental income from, or to offer for rent a dwelling subject to the registration requirements of this Article beginning ten (10) days after service of notice by the Inspections Department that registration is required under this Article unless a complete application for a §12-2177 registration has been submitted for the dwelling . 
(c)  Any mortgagee of record, not otherwise defined as an owner , shall be deemed compliant with this article unless and until the other owners of the rental residential dwelling fail to comply with the registration requirement of this Article. A mortgagee of record, not otherwise defined as an owner , shall not be liable for civil penalties or administrative fees in excess of the liability of the other owners . 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2181. - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall rent, or offer for rent, a rental residential dwelling without first applying for and registering the dwelling as required in §12-2177 shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: 
(a)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation, and each continuing day of noncompliance following written notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day; 
(b)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation, and each continuing day of noncompliance following notice thereof shall result in the assessment of an additional civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day; 
(c)  The maximum civil penalty for any calendar month shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2000.00). 
(b)  Equitable remedies, including injunctions. As authorized by the City Council , the City may apply to the courts for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this article, including mandatory or prohibitory injunctions commanding the party to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the business. 
(c)  Not a criminal violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the civil penalties and permit revocations set forth. Any violation of this article shall be deemed a non-criminal violation and shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to G.S. 14-4 or §14-1005(a) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2182. - APPEAL. 
Any owner served with notice or an order under the provisions of this article, including denial of a request pursuant to §12-2177, may appeal the notice or order in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the Director of the Inspections Department within thirty (30) days after service of the written notice or order of the Director of the Inspections Department on the petitioner. The written appeal shall identify the application of the article at issue and provide the reasons the petitioner contends that it was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. 
(2)  Unless the Director of Inspections decides to allow the requested relief based on the appeal request, the Director of the Inspections Department shall send each appeal request to arbitration. The Director of Inspections and the appealing party shall select an arbitrator from the Wake County District Court list of arbitrators. The arbitration shall be conducted, to the extent practicable, in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules for Court-Ordered Arbitration in North Carolina. The arbitrator shall be paid a fee equal to the maximum fee specified in such Rules. The arbitrator shall consider both the applicable code provisions and equitable factors in resolving the appeal. If the person who files an appeal of a notice that a dwelling is qualified as a "rental residential dwelling" pursuant to §12-2177 shows that the owner did rent the dwelling while it was not registered, the arbitrator may reverse the order. 
(3)  An appeal may be taken from any decision of arbitrator by giving notice of appeal to the City Council within thirty (30) days after service of the written decision of the arbitrator. Notice of appeal shall be given by delivery of a written statement to the City Manager stating the grounds for the appeal and providing the City Manager with a copy of the written decision of the arbitrator. The written appeal shall identify the application the article at issue and provide the reasons the petitioner contends that it was wrongly applied. The Director of the Inspection Department shall transmit to the City Manager all documents constituting the record upon which the decision by the arbitrator was made. 
(4)  The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the presentation of oral arguments by the parties and shall give due notice to the petitioner and the City Manager. After consideration of the arbitrator's decision, including any equitable factors applied by the arbitrator, and the record of the proceeding, the City Council shall issue a written determination, within a reasonable time, stating whether the disputed application of the article will be approved without change or modified or reversed. 
(5)  All decisions of the Director of the Inspections Department and City Council shall be served on the petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2183. - ARBITRATION FEE. 
Any person who files an appeal shall pay an administrative fee of two hundred ($200.00) to the City at the time the appeal request is made. Failure to pay the administrative fee shall cause the appeal to be denied. The person who filed the appeal shall be responsible for paying one-half of the costs of the arbitration fee. If the person who appeals is the prevailing party, the administrative fee and the portion of the arbitration fee shall be reimbursed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2184. - METHODS OF SERVICE. 
(a)  Notices, orders or other documents issued pursuant to this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by first class regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. 
(b)  If the identities of any owners or whereabouts of persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Inspections Department in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if the owners are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and the Inspections Department shall make an affidavit to that effect, stating the steps taken to determine and locate the persons in interest, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such owners or persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City at least once no later than time at which personal service would be required under this article. Where such service is by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 12-2185. - RELATION TO OTHER LAWS. 
Nothing in this article shall authorize or condone any violation of Federal, state , and City fair housing laws and state landlord and tenant laws. This article shall not diminish any private right of action of any person . 
(Ord. No. 2008-415B, §1, 7-1-08)  
CHAPTER 3. - ANIMALS  
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12-3001. - DIVISION OF ANIMAL CONTROL CREATED; COMPOSITION; RESPONSIBILITY. 
The presence of animals at large, stray animals, nuisance animals, and diseased animals within the corporate limits of the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such animals are a threat to the health of the community and to the safety of persons and property alike. In order to abate and control this nuisance, there is hereby created within the Police Department of the City an animal control division, to be constituted and composed of such sworn officers of the Police Department as the Council and the City Manager may determine. 
( Code 1959 , §4-1) 
Cross reference: Police Department, Part 5, Ch. 1. 
State law references: Animal shelters, G.S. 160A-493; regulation of wild and domestic animals, G.S. 160A-186, 187.  
Sec. 12-3002. - GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIVISION; PERSONAL LIABILITY OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS, AGENTS, EMPLOYEES. 
(a)  The animal control division shall be charged with the responsibility of: 
(1)  Seeing that all dogs in the City are adequately inoculated against rabies; 
(2)  Cooperating with the health director and County health officers and assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the State with regard to the control of animals and especially with regard to the vaccination of dogs against rabies and the confinement of vicious dogs; 
(3)  Investigating all complaints with regard to animals covered by this chapter; 
(4)  Making such canvasses of the City , including the homes in the City as it deems necessary and practical, for the purpose of ascertaining that all dogs are vaccinated against rabies; 
(5)  Enforcing within the City all of the State laws and City ordinances for the care, control and custody of animals covered by this chapter. 
(b)  Except as may be otherwise provided by statute or local law or ordinance, no officer , agent or employee of the municipality charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties. 
( Code 1959 , §4-2; Ord. No. 1991-850, §1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2012-59, §1, 6-5-12, eff. 1-1-13)  
Sec. 12-3003. - MEMBERS OF DIVISION TO HAVE POWER, AUTHORITY AND IMMUNITY OF PEACE OFFICERS, DUTY TO WEAR BADGE; FIREARMS. 
(a)  In the performance of their duties, members of the division shall have the power, authority and immunity of peace officers as described in G.S. 15-41 and 160A-285, but only in regard to enforcing the provisions of this Code and the General Statutes of North Carolina which relate to the care, treatment and impounding of animals and making arrests for violations of such provisions. As members of the division shall only have that limited authority described in this section, a member shall not be considered a "policeman" for purposes of the Code relating to the policemen's and firemen's special relief fund, and shall not be eligible for benefits thereunder. 
(b)  Each member of the division, while performing his respective duties, shall wear a badge of a size and design to be determined by the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section, members of the division shall not and are not hereby authorized to carry on their persons any firearms of any kind unless specifically authorized by the Chief of Police. However, members of the division may store at animal shelters or carry in department vehicles, firearms approved for use by the Chief of Police and use such firearms when necessary to enforce sections of this chapter or other applicable law for the control of wild, vicious, diseased or potentially dangerous animals when the officer in charge of the animal control division deems the action necessary. 
( Code 1959 , §4-3)  
Sec. 12-3004. - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Animal at large. Any animal off the premises of its owner and not under sufficient physical restraint such as a leash, cage, bridle, or similarly effective device allowing the animal to be controlled. For purposes of this article, voice command is not recognized as sufficient physical restraint. This definition does not apply to any areas in City parks that have been delineated by the City Council as dog exercise and play areas. Any such areas so designated shall be securely separated from the rest of the park by a physical barrier sufficient to prevent any animal from leaving the area unless under its owner's restraint and control. 
Animal control shelter. Any holding or other facility designated by the City Council for the detention of animals. 
Animal control warden. A person designated as such to perform duties described by this chapter. 
Animal under restraint. Any animal confined within a vehicle, confined within the real property limits of its owner or secured by leash or lead. 
Anti-climber. A device consisting of angled metal braces and barbed wire, which wire is stretched between each angled metal brace, all of which is attached to the top of a fence. The wire shall be at least three (3) strands, separated evenly, the furthest being no less than eighteen (18) inches from the top of the fence. It shall extend inwards at an angle of not less than forty-five (45) degrees, nor more than ninety (90) degrees, measured from perpendicular or, in lieu of barbed wire, an electrically charged wire attached to the top of the fence. 
Cattery. A commercial establishment wherein any person , for profit, buys, sells, boards, breeds or grooms cats. 
Dangerous dog. Any dog that the animal control division has determined: has killed or inflicted serious injury on a person without provocation ; is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting; has inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization; has killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not on the owner's real property ; or has approached a person when not on the owner's property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack. This definition shall not apply to a dog that has been subject to provocation nor shall it apply to any dog responding to a trespass upon the animal owner's premises, if the victim is the trespasser. Provocation must be clearly established. 
Domesticated animal. An animal such as is accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men, including but not limited to cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, and domesticated wild animals. This definition does not include hogs, pigs, swine, or any other member of the Suidae family if the animal weighs more than one hundred (100) pounds or is more than twenty-two (22) inches high when measured at the shoulder and the definition does not include any member of the Ursidae or Felidae families of the Carnivora order if the animal weights more than thirty-five (35) pounds. No more than two (2) hogs, pigs, swine or other Suidae allowed by the above criteria shall reside or be maintained at any dwelling unit or at any non-residentially zoned parcel. 
Holding facility. Any pet shop, kennel, cattery, or combination thereof. 
Inoculation or inoculation against rabies. These terms shall mean the vaccination or inoculation of a dog or a cat with an antirabic vaccine approved by the United States Bureau of Animal Industry, the North Carolina State Department of Agriculture and the North Carolina State Board of Health and/or the local health director, as defined in G.S. 106-364(2). 
Kennel. A commercial establishment wherein any person , for profit, buys, sells, boards, breeds, grooms, lets for hire, or trains for a fee, dogs. This shall not include the ownership of dogs which are not a part of the household or which are maintained adjoining a private residence for hunting, tracking practice, exhibition, or the guarding or protection of the owner's property when no more than five (5) dogs per year are sold by such owner ; provided, that all dogs trained or sold for attack and security shall be trained by a trainer licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
Owner. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, possessing, or acting as custodian, however temporarily, of an animal; provided, however, that a person having temporary custody or possession of an animal for the sole purpose of turning over such animal to a member of the animal control division or other peace officer shall not be deemed the owner of the animal. 
Pet. A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals and other animals associated with man's environment. 
Pet shop. A commercial establishment, which offers for sale two (2) or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
Provocation. Conduct or actions on the part of any person or animal that is likely to arouse a violent or aggressive response by an animal. This term does not include any action on the part of an individual or animal that pertains to reasonable efforts of self-defense. 
Public nuisance animal. Any animal or group of animals which: 
(a)  Is repeatedly found at large. 
(b)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner . 
(c)  Is vicious. 
(d)  Causes fouling of the air by odors. 
(e)  Causes unsanitary condition of enclosures or surroundings. 
(f)  By virtue of number or type is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(g)  Excessively makes disturbing noises. 
(h)  Is diseased and dangerous to the public health. 
Serious injury. Physical injury that results in broken bones, disfiguring lacerations, or requires cosmetic surgery or hospitalization. 
Tether Tying out or fastening a dog outdoors on a rope, chain or other line for restraining a dog. The term does not mean the restraint of a dog on an attended leash. 
Trainer. Any individual who holds himself available to the general public for the purpose of training attack and security dogs. This does not include individuals who are in the business of obedience training only. 
Vicious animal. Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of attacks of such number and severity as to cause property damage or physical injury. 
Weekdays. Monday through Saturday inclusive, excluding local, state and national legal holidays. 
( Code 1959 , §4-4; Ord. No. 1980-502, §1, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1996-833, §1, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 2000-843, §1, 7-18-00; Ord. No. 2003-400, §1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 2009-552, §1, 3-3-09, eff. 7-1-09; Ord. No. 2013-157, §1, 2-19-13, eff. 3-1-13; Ord. No. 2016-552, §§1—5, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 )  
Sec. 12-3005. - BIRD SANCTUARY; AREA DESIGNATED; HUNTING, TRAPPING, SHOOTING THEREIN; POSTING OF REGULATIONS. 
(a)  The area embraced within the corporate limits of the City and all land owned or leased by the City outside the corporate limits is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful intentionally to trap, hunt, shoot, or otherwise kill, within the sanctuary hereby established, any native wild bird; provided, it shall be lawful to trap starlings or similar birds or fowl specifically declared a nuisance by the City Council when such birds or fowl are found to be congregating in such number in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property . 
(c)  The bird clubs of the City are hereby granted permission to erect artistic signs, giving notice of the regulations therein provided, at such places and of such design as may be approved by the City Manager. 
( Code 1959 , §4-5) 
State law reference: Bird sanctuary establishment, G.S. 160A-188.  
Sec. 12-3006. - ANIMALS OR FOWL BANNED FROM SALE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or permit to be sold or offered for sale, within the corporate limits of the City , baby chickens, baby ducklings, or baby rabbits less than six (6) weeks of age; provided, this section shall not apply to hatcheries raising chickens or ducks expressly for the broiler market or for sale to farms. 
( Code 1959 , §4-6)  
Sec. 12-3007. - RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to allow such animal to be at-large within the corporate limits of the City or on any City property. 
(b)  No person shall tether a dog to a tree, fence, post, dog house, or other stationary object for more than three (3) hours total in any twenty-four-hour period. Any device used to tether shall be at least ten (10) feet long and attached in such a manner as to prevent strangulation or other injury to the dog and entanglement with other objects. A cable trolley system may be used to tether for the allowed period so longs as the stationary cable is at least ten (10) feet long and the dog can perpendicularly move at least ten (10) feet away from the stationary line. The line should be attached to the dog with a buckle type collar or a body harness. The device used to tether shall weigh no more than ten (10) percent of the animal's body weight and must allow the dog access to food and water. In addition to being a misdemeanor, a violation of this section is subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day of violation. 
( Code 1959 , §4-7; Ord. No. 1982-941, §1, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 2009-552, §2, 3-3-09, eff. 7-1-09)  
ARTICLE B. - DOGS AND CATS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1984-307, §1, adopted March 20, 1984, retitled Art. B from "Dogs" to "Dogs and Cats" and moved the article title from immediately preceding §12-3011 to immediately preceding §12-3008. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-3008. - INOCULATION OF DOGS, CATS AND OTHER PETS. 
(a)  Inoculation. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to provide current inoculation against rabies (hydrophobia) for any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older. A rabies inoculation shall be deemed current for a cat if the inoculation has been given within the preceding twelve (12) months . A rabies inoculation shall be deemed current for a dog if two (2) inoculations have been given one year apart and booster doses of rabies vaccine administered every three (3) years thereafter. 
State law reference: Rabies vaccination, G.S. 130A-185. 
(b)  Proof of inoculation. 
(1)  Any person inoculating an animal against rabies shall issue to the owner of the animal inoculated a numbered metallic tag, stamped with the number and the year for which it is issued, and indicating that the animal has been inoculated against rabies . 
(2)  The metal inoculation tag shall be securely fastened to the dog's choke chain collar or harness and it shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow such dog to be within the City without the inoculation tag. 
(3)  Cats shall not be required to wear the metallic inoculation tag, but the owner of a cat shall maintain the tag or the rabies vaccination certificates as written evidence to prove the cat has a current rabies inoculation . 
(Ord. No. 1980-502, §2, 10-21-80) 
State law reference: Rabies vaccination tags, G.S. 130A-190.  
Sec. 12-3009. - ADEQUATE FEED, WATER AND SHELTER. 
(a)  All dogs and cats shall be given adequate feed, adequate water and adequate shelter. Adequate shelter is defined as an enclosure of at least three (3) sides, a roof and a floor. The enclosure shall be ventilated and must have sufficient room for the animal(s) to move around freely and to lie down comfortably. 
(b)  Animals housed under the following conditions shall not constitute adequate shelter: 
(1)  Underneath outside steps, decks and stoops; or 
(2)  Inside of vehicles; or 
(3)  Underneath vehicles; or 
(4)  Inside metal or plastic barrels or cardboard boxes; or 
(5)  Rooms, sheds or other buildings without windows or proper ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-411, §1, 3-18-03)  
Sec. 12-3010. - RESERVED.  
Sec. 12-3011. - DOGS AT LARGE; DEFECATION ON STREETS AND PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such animal to be at large in the City or on any City property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog to fail to remove feces deposited by the dog on any street, sidewalk, park or other publicly owned area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog to fail to remove feces deposited by the dog on any private property unless the owner of the property has given permission allowing such use of the property . 
( Code 1959 , §4-8; Ord. No. 1979-184, 8-21-79; Ord. No. 1982-941, §2, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 1984-307, §2, 3-20-84)  
Sec. 12-3012. - CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT. 
Every female dog, while in heat, shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that she will not be in contact with another dog, nor create a nuisance by attracting other animals; provided, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an animal being bred. 
( Code 1959 , §4-9)  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2012-59, §2, adopted June 5, 2012, effective Jan. 1, 2013, repealed §§12-3013—12-3018, which pertained to licenses and derived from Code 1959 , §§4-10—4-12; Ord. No. 1984-307, §3, adopted March 20, 1984. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Secs. 12-3013—12-3020. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE C. - NUISANCE ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS DOGS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2016-552, §6, adopted March 1, 2016, effective March 15, 2016 , amended the title of Art. C to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article was entitled "Nuisance Animals." 
 
Sec. 12-3021. - PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMALS. 
(a)  Prohibited generally; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to own, keep, or harbor a public nuisance animal within the City . Provided, however, it shall not be unlawful to own or keep a dog of vicious tendencies for the protection of persons or property , if such dog is securely confined in a manner not to expose it to the general public. This exception for dogs of vicious tendencies does not extend to dogs which excessively make disturbing noises. 
(b)  Complaint and notice. 
Upon receipt of a written detailed and signed complaint being made to the animal control division of the Police Department by any resident or residents that any person is maintaining a public nuisance as defined in §12-3004 of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall cause the owner of the animal or animals in question to be notified that a complaint has been received and shall cause the situation complained of to be investigated and a report and findings thereon to be reduced to writing by the investigating animal control officer . 
(c)  Abatement. 
If the written findings of the investigating officer indicate that the complaint is justified, then the Chief of Police shall cause the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question to be so notified in writing , by registered mail, return receipt requested, ordered to abate such nuisance within seven (7) days after notification, and issued a citation for the violation. In the event the owner of the animal or animals is unknown and cannot be ascertained, the notice and order, along with a general description of the animal or animals shall be published within a local newspaper. 
(d)  Impoundment upon failure to abate. 
If any person receiving notice in the manner hereinabove described shall fail or refuse to abate the nuisance upon order of the Chief of Police within the specified time, the Police Chief may cause the animal or animals in question to be apprehended and impounded in accordance with the provisions of Article E of this chapter. 
(e)  Right of appeal. 
Within the seven-day period mentioned in subsection (c) above, the owner of the nuisance animal may appeal the findings of the Chief of Police to the City Manager by giving written notice of appeal to the Chief of Police, the appeal to stay the abatement of the nuisance until a final determination by the City Council . 
(f)  Redemption; destruction. 
If the owner shall so request, the animal or animals may be redeemed pursuant to the provisions of §12-3064 and upon the further condition that the owner execute a written agreement to comply with the abatement order. If no redemption and execution is made by the owner within the time specified under §12-3063, then the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of §12-3065 hereunder. 
( Code 1959 , §4-13; Ord. No. 1984-307, §4, 3-20-84)  
Sec. 12-3022. - PRECAUTIONS AGAINST DANGEROUS DOGS. 
(a)  When a dog has been determined to be a dangerous dog by the animal control division it shall be unlawful for the owner to: 
(1)  Leave a dangerous dog unattended on the owner's real property unless the dog is confined indoors, in a securely enclosed and locked pen, or in another structure designed to restrain the dog. Any secure enclosure or locked pen shall be constructed in such a manner that a dog cannot escape by means of digging under or jumping over the enclosure or pen, or otherwise becoming free unless freed by the owner ; 
(2)  Permit a dangerous dog to go beyond the owner's real property unless the dog is leashed and muzzled or is otherwise securely restrained and muzzled. Voice command is not recognized as secure restraint under this Article. 
(b)  If the owner of a dangerous dog transfers ownership or possession of the dog to another person , the owner shall provide written notice to: 
(1)  The animal control division of the City of Raleigh, stating the name and address of the new owner or possessor of the dog; and 
(2)  The person taking ownership or possession of the dog, specifying the dog's dangerous behavior and the fact that the animal control division of the dog has been determined dangerous. 
(c)  A dog that has been determined dangerous and subsequently is found at large will be impounded for not less than five (5) days at the owner's expense. If all reasonable attempts to seize the dangerous dog are unsuccessful, the animal control division or the police department may humanely tranquilize and seize the animal, without prior notice to the owner . 
(Ord. No. 2013-157, §2, 2-19-13, eff. 3-1-13; Ord. No. 2016-552, §7, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 )  
Sec. 12-3023. - APPEAL OF A DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION. 
(a)  A request for appeal of a determination that a dog is dangerous must be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk within five (5) business days of the action or decision complained of and must state with particularity the grounds of the appeal. An appeal hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager or his designee. 
(b)  The City Manager or his designee shall render a decision within three (3) business days of the hearing. 
(c)  The decision of the City Manager or his designee is subject to appeal in Superior Court in the nature of certiorari. Any and all sanctions or penalties imposed and upheld by the City Manager or his designee shall be enforceable during the pendency of any appeal. 
(d)  If the decision is in favor of the owner , efforts to implement the sanction(s) shall cease. Decisions rendered by the City Manager or his designee apply only to the violation(s) and sanction(s) appealed and do not prevent the animal control division from enforcing subsequent violations of the same provision or any other provision. 
( Ord. No. 2016-552, §8, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 )  
Sec. 12-3024. - SUMMARY DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS THAT CANNOT BE SEIZED BY REASONABLE MEANS. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any animal that is determined to be dangerous or who is attacking a human being or pet and that cannot be seized, retrieved, humanely trapped, or tranquilized through reasonable means may be summarily destroyed, if such destruction is necessary for the protection of life or property or for the public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. 2016-552, §8, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 )  
Sec. 12-3025. - ANIMAL BITE NOTIFICATION. 
(a)  Bites Unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for an animal to bite a human being who does not ordinarily reside on the premises of the animal unless the animal has been subject to provocation , or unless the victim was trespassing at or near the time of the bite. 
(b)  Reporting Bite. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to report to animal control as soon as possible that an animal has bitten a person . It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to inform the animal control division of the location to which an animal that has bitten a human being has been taken if the owner has given the animal away, or caused in any way the animal to be taken from the owner's premises. 
( Ord. No. 2016-552, §8, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 )  
Secs. 12-3026—12-3030. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE D. - STABLES AND HOLDING FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 12-3031. - STABLES FOR CATTLE, GOATS, AND HORSES; GENERALLY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or place, erect or maintain on any property within the corporate limits of the City , a stable for housing cattle, non-pygmy goats, or horses unless such stable is located at least two hundred (200) feet from all neighboring residences . Not more than one head of cattle, one non-pygmy goat or one horse may be kept on a lot less than one acre. A pygmy goat is defined as a goat classified as Capra Hircus and weighing no more than eighty-five (85) pounds and standing no higher than twenty-one (21) inches when measured at the withers. For lots dimensioned one acre and no more than five (5) acres in size, a maximum of three (3) head of cattle, or three (3) goats, or three (3) horses per acre may be kept. More than three (3) head of cattle, three (3) goats, or three (3) horses per acre, but not more than ten (10) head of cattle, or ten (10) goats, or ten (10) horses per acre may be kept on lots containing more than five (5) acres. Every part of a lot set aside for the use of cattle, goats or horses shall be completely enclosed. Stables used for housing cattle, goats, or horses shall comply with all local zoning ordinances and shall be constructed and maintained in conformity with the requirements of the Wake County Board of Health. 
( Code 1959 , §4-14; Ord. No. 1982-47-TC-173, §1, 12-21-82; Ord. No. 2012-108, §1, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 12-3032. - PERMIT TO LOCATE, ERECT OR PLACE. 
Before any person shall locate, erect or place any stable on any lot within the corporate limits of the City , he shall make application to the Wake County Health Department and the City Inspection Division. Such permits may be issued, upon compliance with this chapter and with standards and procedures of those agencies . 
( Code 1959 , §4-15)  
Sec. 12-3033. - REMOVAL, RELOCATION FOR VIOLATION. 
The Wake County Health Department and City Inspection Division, upon complaint or otherwise, may after investigation notify the owner or person controlling any stable who has violated any health requirement or provision of this chapter, to remove or relocate the stable so that the same shall conform to the applicable health regulations and requirements of this chapter. Such stable owner or controller shall thereupon bring his stable into compliance or vacate and remove the same within five (5) days after the receipt of such notice. 
( Code 1959 , §4-16)  
Sec. 12-3034. - MANURE, REFUSE BINS. 
Every person owning or controlling any stable or stable yard in the City on a lot less than one (1) acre in size shall provide and maintain, in connection therewith, a bin or pit which is watertight, flyproof and otherwise constructed and maintained so as to prevent the entrance or egress of flies and so as to be easily emptied and cleaned. All droppings, manure, and other refuse accumulating each day shall be placed in such containers; and the accumulation must be sterilized each day. Authorized agents of the City may immediately remove the contents and assess the actual and reasonable costs of such removal to the owner , upon discovering fly maggots in any such receptacle. 
( Code 1959 , §4-17)  
Sec. 12-3035. - PET SHOP STANDARDS. 
All pet shops , as defined herein, including pet shops run in conjunction with another holding facility, shall , in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Willful failure of the owner or operator to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license and shall be unlawful. 
Standards. 
(a)  Water. 
There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of 140 degrees for washing cages and disinfecting them, and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water will be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be mounted so the animal cannot turn them over, and be removable for cleaning. 
(b)  Room temperature. 
The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
(c)  Cages and enclosures. 
All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that any animal will have room to stand, turn, and stretch out to his full length. 
(d)  Feeding. 
All animals under three (3) months old are to be fed at least three (3) times per 24 hours. Food for all animals shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animals cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate therein. 
(e)  Birds. 
Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed horizontal to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds. 
(f)  Bedding. 
There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet the needs of each individual animal. 
(g)  Fish. 
The temperature of water in which fish are kept shall be maintained at a constant temperature that is healthful. 
(h)  General feeding, watering, sanitation requirements. 
All animals must be fed, watered and cages cleaned every day, including Sundays and holidays. 
( Code 1959 , §4-18)  
Sec. 12-3036. - KENNEL STANDARDS. 
All kennels , as defined herein, shall , in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Willful failure of the owner or operator to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license and shall be unlawful. 
Standards: 
(a)  Building temperature. 
Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting. Healthful building temperatures shall be maintained. 
(b)  Cages and runs. 
Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages. Cages are to be of material and construction that permits cleaning and sanitizing. Cage floors of concrete, unless radiantly heated, shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface. All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition. 
(c)  Feeding. 
The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(d)  Watering of animals. 
All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. Water vessels shall be mounted or secured in a manner that prevents tipping and be of the removable type. 
( Code 1959 , §4-19)  
Sec. 12-3037. - STANDARDS FOR TRAINERS OF ATTACK AND SECURITY DOGS. 
All trainers as defined herein, shall , in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the standards of this section, whenever any dog is being or is to be trained as an attack and security dog. Willful failure of the trainer to comply with these standards shall be unlawful and shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a license. 
Standards: 
(a)  Fencing of runs. 
Runs must have at least six (6) foot high fences completely surrounding them. 
(b)  Locking of gates and entrances. 
All gates and entrances to the runs, kennel , and training area must be kept locked when not in use. 
(c)  Perimeter fences; anti-climbers. 
A perimeter fence of at least six (6) feet high must be installed to encircle the training and kennel areas to which are to be added anti-climbers . Fences must be maintained in escape-proof condition. 
(d)  Confinement of dogs. 
A dog in training as an attack and security dog shall at all times be confined to its kennel , run, training, or other confined area. 
( Code 1959 , §4-20)  
Sec. 12-3038. - STANDARDS FOR CATTERIES. 
The standards for catteries , as defined herein, shall be the same as those required for kennels as defined and prescribed above. The word "cat" shall be substituted for the word "dog" when applying kennel standards to catteries . 
( Code 1959 , §4-21)  
Sec. 12-3039. - GENERAL HEALTH CONDITIONS IN HOLDING FACILITIES. 
Any animal in a holding facility which shows signs of illness or contagious disease shall be isolated in such manner as to prevent the spread of such illness or disease to other animals. All sick, diseased or injured animals in such facilities shall be provided appropriate veterinary care; and areas where said animal has been shall be decontaminated. All holding facilities shall , in addition to complying with other applicable provisions of this chapter, provide for healthy and comfortable temperatures, in accordance with the age and species of animals, in areas outside building where animals are kept. 
( Code 1959 , §4-22)  
Sec. 12-3040. - PET SHOPS LICENSE; REQUIRED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pet shop in the City without possessing a valid pet shop license. 
( Code 1959 , §4-23)  
Sec. 12-3041. - APPLICATION. 
An application for a pet shop license shall be on a form provided by the City and shall state the name and address of the pet shop , its owner and its operator. 
( Code 1959 , §4-24)  
Sec. 12-3042. - FEE; SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH FACILITY OPERATED. 
The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of Part 2, Chapter 2 of this Code relating to merchants. Pet shop licensees shall be required to obtain a separate license for each other holding facility operated on the same premises as the pet shop . 
( Code 1959 , §4-25)  
Sec. 12-3043. - KENNEL LICENSE; REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a kennel in the City without possessing a valid kennel license. 
(b)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, research facilities where bona fide medical or related research (dental, veterinary, pharmaceutical or biological) is being conducted, humane shelters, and other animal establishments operated by state or local governments or which are licensed by Federal law are excluded from the kennel licensing requirements of this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §4-26)  
Sec. 12-3044. - APPLICATION. 
An application for a kennel license shall be on a form provided by the City and shall state the name and address of the kennel , its owner and its operator, and the maximum number of dogs to be housed in the kennel . 
( Code 1959 , §4-27)  
Sec. 12-3045. - FEE. 
(a)  The annual license fees for kennel operators shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of Part 2, Chapter 2, Article B, of this Code. 
(b)  The fee requirements of this section shall be waived if the applicant has been granted a cattery license where the cattery is authorized to house the same number or less cats as dogs applied for by the applicant. If the application is for authorization to house more dogs than the applicant is authorized to house cats under a cattery license, the difference in license fees shall be the amount of the annual fee. 
( Code 1959 , §4-28)  
Sec. 12-3046. - ATTACK AND SECURITY DOG TRAINER'S LICENSE; REQUIRED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to train in the City any dog to be used as an attack and security dog without possessing a valid attack and security dog trainer's license; provided, this section shall not apply to the City government or any of its agencies . 
( Code 1959 , §4-29)  
Sec. 12-3047. - APPLICATION. 
An application for an attack and security dog trainer's license shall be on a form provided by the City and shall state the name and address of the trainer's locality, its owner and its trainer and the maximum number of dogs housed and trained in the trainer's facility. 
( Code 1959 , §4-30)  
Sec. 12-3048. - FEE. 
The fee for attack and security dog trainer's license shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of Part 2, Chapter 2, Article B, of this Code. The license fee shall be in addition to any kennel license fee required under this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §4-31)  
Sec. 12-3049. - CATTERIES LICENSE; REQUIRED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cattery in the City without possessing a valid cattery license. 
( Code 1959 , §4-32)  
Sec. 12-3050. - APPLICATION. 
An application for a cattery license shall be on a form provided by the City and shall state the name and address of the cattery , its owner and its operator, and the maximum number of cats to be housed in the cattery . 
( Code 1959 , §4-33)  
Sec. 12-3051. - FEE. 
(a)  The annual fee for a cattery license shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of Part 2, Chapter 2, Article B of this Code. 
(b)  The fee requirements of this section shall be waived if the applicant has been granted a valid kennel license where the kennel is authorized to house the same number or less dogs as cats applied for by the applicant. If the application is for authorization to house more cats than the applicant is authorized to house dogs under a valid kennel license, the difference in license fee shall be the amount of the annual fee. 
( Code 1959 , §4-34)  
Secs. 12-3052—12-3060. - RESERVED.  
ARTICLE E. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION 
 
Sec. 12-3061. - IMPOUNDMENT. 
Domesticated animals may be impounded when found at large. 
( Code 1959 , §4-35)  
Sec. 12-3062. - NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL. 
Upon impounding an animal with an identification tag, the animal control warden shall cause a prompt and reasonable effort to be made to locate and notify the animal's owner . 
( Code 1959 , §4-36)  
Sec. 12-3063. - PERIODS OF IMPOUNDMENT. 
(a)  Domesticated animals , other than dogs, shall be impounded for no less than five (5) weekdays . Such animals shall be impounded in a humane manner. 
(b)  Dogs shall be impounded for no less than five (5) weekdays. Such animals shall be impounded in a humane manner. 
( Code 1959 , §4-37; Ord. No. 2012-59, §3, 6-5-12, eff. 1-1-13)  
Sec. 12-3064. - REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMAL. 
(a)  The owner of an impounded animal shall be entitled to redeem such animal, except as provided in this article, upon the payment of all redemption fees, and upon furnishing proof of ownership. Any dog or cat redeemed which has not been inoculated against rabies shall be so inoculated within two (2) weekdays of redemption, and failure of the owner of the dog or cat to cause the dog or cat to be so inoculated shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Redemption fees as provided in this section shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each animal and the expense incurred for feeding and sheltering. The redemption fee for an animal which has once previously been impounded within the last six (6) months shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) and feeding and sheltering expenses. The redemption fee for an animal which has previously been impounded more than once within six (6) months shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) and feeding and sheltering expenses. 
( Code 1959 , §4-38; Ord. No. 1980-502, §3, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1988-212, §1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 2012-59, §4, 6-5-12, eff. 1-1-13)  
Sec. 12-3065. - DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS. 
At the end of the minimum time period indicated herein, unclaimed animals shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of in a humane manner. 
( Code 1959 , §4-39)  
Sec. 12-3066. - SUMMARY DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS FOR HUMANE REASONS. 
When, in the judgment of the person in charge of impoundment facility, it is determined that any impounded animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, or to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property , such animal may be destroyed without regard to any time limitations otherwise established herein. 
( Code 1959 , §4-40)  
Sec. 12-3067. - CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS WITH HISTORY OF BITING PEOPLE. 
In addition to the requirements for securing a dangerous dog in accordance with §12-3011, all fierce, dangerous or vicious animals , including dogs that have a history of unlawful biting of humans, shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure or by the animal control warden in the animal control shelter . Such animals shall not be released from confinement unless securely muzzled. 
( Code 1959 , §4-41; Ord. No. 2016-552, §9, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 )  
Sec. 12-3068. - DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES. 
The Solid Waste Services Director, upon request of any person , or otherwise, may pick up and dispose of any animal carcass within the area of his jurisdiction. When the owner of an animal, the carcass of which is disposed of by a public agency , can be identified, he shall be billed for the cost of the disposition. 
( Code 1959 , §4-42; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98)  
Sec. 12-3069. - FINES AND PENALTIES. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter is both a civil offense and a misdemeanor criminal offense. The fine for a criminal violation of this chapter shall be up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or larger if allowed by G.S. 14-4. Misdemeanor violations shall be enforced by the issuance of citations or by arrest according to the same procedures used for other criminal violations. 
(b)  The first violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00); the second violation during a twelve- month period shall be subject to a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) penalty; the third violation during a twelve- month period shall be subject to a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) penalty; the fourth and subsequent violations shall be subject to a five hundred dollar ($500.00) penalty. Civil citations shall be served personally upon the violator by an animal control officer, by a member of the Raleigh Police Department, or by any other means authorized for the service of civil process by the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(c)  Failure to pay any license fee established by this chapter will constitute both a civil offense and a criminal misdemeanor. The violator will be subject to the amount of the license fee in addition to the civil and criminal penalties set out in subsection (b) above. A civil collection of the fee will be in the nature of a collection for debt. 
(Ord. No. 2003-433, §2, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 2016-552, §10, 3-1-16, eff. 3-15-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-433, §1, adopted April 15, 2003, repealed the former §12-3069 which pertained to license tax deemed a debt to City, liability for tax and penalty, and action to recover moneys, and derived from Code 1959 , § 4-43; Ord. No. 1977-615, §1, adopted Sept. 6, 1977; and Ord. No. 1984-307, §5, adopted March 20, 1984. Section 2 of Ord. No. 2003-433 enacted a new §12-3069 as set out herein.  
Sec. 12-3070. - RESERVED. 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 2003-433, §1, adopted April 15, 2003, repealed the former §12-3070 which pertained to notice of violations and derived from Code 1959 , §4-44.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-3071. - REFUSAL TO ISSUE LICENSE WHEN APPLICANT IN VIOLATION OF LAW. 
Any license provided for in this chapter may be denied on the recommendation of the City administration where the applicant is or would be in violation of any law. 
( Code 1959 , §4-46)  
Sec. 12-3072. - REVOCATION OF HOLDING FACILITY LICENSES. 
Any holding facility license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked on the recommendation of the City administration if the licensee fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §4-47)  
Sec. 12-3073. - NOTICE OF AND APPEALS FROM DECISION OF AGENCIES. 
Notice of recommendation not to issue a license under this chapter or to revoke a license shall be given to the licensee. Administrative appeals shall be, first, to the Director of Finance and then to the City Manager. An appeal of a decision to recommend the revocation of a license shall suspend the operation of that decision. 
( Code 1959 , §4-48)  
Sec. 12-3074. - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF LICENSE RECEIPTS OR INOCULATION CERTIFICATES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any dog, attack and security dog training facility, or holding facility , a license receipt, or a rabies inoculation certificate issued to another person , dog, cat, or facility. 
( Code 1959 , §4-49; Ord. No. 1980-502, §4, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 2012-59, §5, 6-5-12, eff. 1-1-13)  
CHAPTER 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REGULATION 
 
Sec. 12-4001. - CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON CITY PROPERTY OR PUBLIC VEHICULAR AREAS. 
Except as provided by this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to consume malt beverages or unfortified wine on any City street and it shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of malt beverages or unfortified wine on any property owned, occupied, or controlled by the City. It shall also be unlawful to possess malt beverages and unfortified wine on any street , alley or parking lot which is temporarily closed to regular traffic for a special event unless the permit approved by the City Manager or designee in accordance with the policies set forth in City Council's Special Event Policy closing the street , alley, or parking lot makes other provisions for the possession of malt beverages or unfortified wine. An open container is one whose seal has been broken or a container other than the manufacturer's unopened original container. 
(Ord. No. 1995-686, §1, 7-18-95; Ord. No. 2014-343, §14, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 ) 
Editor's note: Ord. No. 1995-686, §1, adopted July 18, 1995, set out provisions repealing the old §12-4001, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959 , §6-9; Ord. No. 1978-727, §1, adopted Jan. 21, 1978; Ord. No. 1978-757, §1, adopted April 4, 1978; Ord. No. 1978-810, §1, adopted June 6, 1978; Ord. No. 1982-883, §1, adopted April 6, 1982; Ord. No. 1983-108, §1, adopted May 3, 1983; and Ord. No. 1988-270, §3, adopted Nov. 15, 1988. 
Cross reference: Beer and wine licenses and taxes, §2-2041 et seq. 
State law reference: G.S. 18B-300(c).  
Sec. 12-4002. - CONSUMPTION OF MALT BEVERAGES AND UNFORTIFIED WINE IN CITY PARKS. 
The consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine, as defined by Chapter 18B of the North Carolina General Statutes, is permitted in Mordecai Square Historic Park, Raleigh Little Theater, Theater in the Park, Lake Wheeler, Lake Johnson, Durant Park, Millbrook Exchange Park, Anderson Point, Walnut Creek Wetland Park, Shelley Lake, Five Points Center for Active Adults, Compiegne Park, Dorothea Dix Park, Fletcher Park, Pullen Arts Center, Pullen Amusement Park, John Chavis Memorial Park, Raleigh City Museum, Nash Square and Moore Square. Any such consumption shall be allowed only after the Issuance of a permit from the Parks and Recreation Director. The permit can include all or a part of the grounds and buildings of any of the named parks. The permit may be issued only to groups sponsored by the City of Raleigh or groups renting park facilities. The Parks and Recreation Director shall establish and promulgate rules and regulations for the Issuance of any such permits. Consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine at other parks and consumption of other alcoholic beverages at any park may only be done with the express prior approval of the City Manager . 
(Ord. No. 2001-961, §2, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2012-100, §1, 9-18-12; Ord. No. 2014-343, §15, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-502, §1, 10-20-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-607, § 1, 6-21-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-688, §1, 3-21-17 ) 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2001-961, §1, adopted March 20, 2001, repealed the former §12-4002 which pertained to consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine in Raleigh Little Theatre Building and derived from Code 1959 §6-10, Ord. No. 1980-509, adopted Oct. 21, 1980; Ord. No. 1983-108, §2, adopted May 3, 1983; and Ord. No. 1989-400, §1, adopted July 5, 1989. Section 3 of Ord. No. 2001-961 provided also for a new §12-4002, as set out herein.  
Sec. 12-4003. - SUNDAY SALES. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87 any establishment located in Raleigh and holding an ABC permit issued pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays. 
( Ord. No. 2017-725, §1, 7-5-17 ) 
Editor's Note: Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 2017-725, §1, adopted July 5, 2017 , Ord. No. 2001-961, §1, adopted March 20, 2001, repealed the former §12-4003 which pertained to consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine in Theatre in the Park and derived from Code 1959 §6-11, Ord. No. 1978-757, §2, adopted April 4, 1978; Ord. No. 1983-108, §2, adopted May 3, 1983; and Ord. No. 1989-425, §1, adopted Sept. 5, 1989.  
Sec. 12-4004. - RESERVED. 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2001-961, §1, adopted March 20, 2001, repealed the former §12-4004 which pertained to consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine in Mordecai Square and derived from Code 1959 §6-12, Ord. No. 1978-810, §2, adopted June 6, 1978; Ord. No. 1983-108, §2, adopted May 3, 1983; and Ord. No. 1989-425, §1, adopted Sept. 5, 1989.  
Sec. 12-4005. - PASSENGER STATIONS; OFFENSES THEREAT. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any intoxicating liquors on or in any railroad or bus station premises. 
( Code 1959 , §15-34)  
Sec. 12-4006. - WHOLESALE BEER DELIVERY ON SUNDAY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make wholesale delivery of beer between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturdays and 12:00 midnight on Sundays within the corporate limits of the City . Any person , firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
( Code 1959 , §15-46)  
Sec. 12-4007. - CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR ON PEDESTRIAN MALLS. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of §12-4001 of this Code, the consumption of alcoholic beverages, as defined by G.S. Chapter 18B, shall be lawful upon those areas of the City's pedestrian malls for which outdoor dining permits have been issued pursuant to §9-7007 of the City Code. 
The consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine by pedestrians shall be permitted along the rights-of-way of Blake, Wolfe and Parham Street so long as the beverages were purchased or dispensed by a business, lessee, or other person or entity lawfully occupying space in the City market project. The City Manager may direct that the above referenced streets be closed to vehicular traffic for periods not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours so long as the City Manager determines that no unreasonable inconvenience will be suffered by the public or by adjoining property owners . 
(Ord. No. 1983-98, §3, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 1988-232, §1, 8-31-88; Ord. No. 2002-194, §1, 4-16-02)  
Sec. 12-4008. - RESERVED. 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2001-961, §1, adopted March 20, 2001, repealed the former §12-4008 which pertained to consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine in the Tucker House and derived from Ord. No. 1988-113, §1, adopted Jan. 19, 1988.  
Sec. 12-4009. - CONSUMPTION OF MALT BEVERAGES AND UNFORTIFIED WINE IN CITY HALL. 
Consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine, as defined by G.S. Chapter 18B, shall be lawful in City Hall at special events with the prior approval of the City Council . 
(Ord. No. 1989-389, §1, 6-20-89) 
Editor's note: Provisions designated as §12-4008 in Ord. No. 1989-389, §1, adopted June 20, 1989, have been redesignated as §12-4009 at the discretion of the editor to avoid duplication of section numbers.  
Sec. 12-4010. - RESERVED. 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2001-961, §1, adopted March 20, 2001, repealed the former §12-4010 which pertained to consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine in the Borden House at Fletcher Park and derived from Ord. No. 1993-135, §1, adopted Feb. 16, 1993.  
Sec. 12-4011. - RESERVED. 
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2001-961, §1, adopted March 20, 2001, repealed the former §12-4011 which pertained to consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine within the boundaries of Lake Wheeler Park and Camp Durant Nature Park and derived from Ord. No. 1995-623, §1, adopted May 2, 1995 and Ord. No. 1998-309, §§1, 2, adopted April 21, 1998.  
CHAPTER 5. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 12-5001. - DEFINITIONS. 
In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions shall be used in interpreting §§12-5001 through 12-5011 of this Code. 
"A" weighting scale . The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured with the sound level meter using the "A" weighted network (scale). The standard unit notation is dB(A). 
Ambient base noise level . The average sound pressure level in dB(A) during a reasonable period of time, as determined by employing a sound level meter as described in §12-5002 and excluding impulsive sounds. 
ANSI . American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies. 
Construction . On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration, demolition or removal of any structure, facility or addition thereto, including all related activities, including, but not restricted to, clearing of land, earth moving, blasting and landscaping. 
Daytime hours . 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., local time. 
dB(A) . Sound level in decibels, determined by the "A" weighting scale of a standard sound level meter having characteristics defined by the American National Standards Institute, Publication ANSI, S 1.4-1971, for a Type 2 instrument. 
Decibel (dB) . A unit of measure, on a logarithmic scale, of the ratio of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to a standard reference pressure, which for purposes of §§12-5001 through 12-5011 shall be 0.0002 microbars. 
Emergency work . Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition, work required to protect, provide or prevent persons or property from danger or potential danger; or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Nighttime hours . 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., local time. 
Person . Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency , political subdivision of this State , any other state or political subdivision or agency thereof or any legal successor, representative, agent or agency of the foregoing. 
Sound level . In decibels, a weighted sound pressure level determined by the use of a sound level meter whose characteristics and frequency weightings are specified in ANSI standards. 
Sound level meter . Any instrument certified to meet or exceed ANSI standards which includes an omnidirectional microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting network(s) for the measurement of sound level. 
Sound-magnifying device . Any device or machine for the magnification of a human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound-magnifying device" shall not include emergency warning devices on police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicles, nor shall it include horns or steam whistles which are used for purposes authorized by §12-5007. 
Sound pressure level . In decibels, twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to the standard reference pressure. The standard reference pressure is 0.0002 microbars. 
Sound source . Any person , animal, device, operation, process, activity, or phenomenon which emits or causes sound. 
Unnecessary noise . Any excessive or unusually loud sound or any sound which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which does annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities or causes damage to property or business. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §1, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1978-773, §1, 4-18-78; Ord. No. 1980-508, §1, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1993-240, §2, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 2014-349, §11, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 ) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate noise, G.S. 160A-184.  
Sec. 12-5002. - MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES. 
(a)  Noise measurements shall be made at the property line of the property where the noise to be measured is being generated. If measurement on private property is not possible or practical, noise measurements may be made at the boundary of the public right-of-way which adjoins the complaining property. Such noise measurements shall be made at a height of at least four (4) feet above the ground and at a point approximately ten (10) feet away from walls, barriers, obstructions (trees, bushes, etc.) on a sound level meter operated on the "A" weighting network (scale) . In the case of noises within multi-family or multi-tenanted structures, noise measurements shall be made in the complaining unit at a height of at least four (4) feet above the floor and at a point approximately equi-distant from all walls on a sound level meter operated on the "A" weighting network (scale) . 
(b)  No individual other than the operators shall be within ten (10) feet of the sound level meter during the sample period. 
(c)  Sound measurements shall be conducted at that time of day or night when the suspect noise source is emitting sound. 
(d)  The sound level measurement shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Calibrate the sound level meter within one (1) hour before use. 
(2)  Set the sound level meter on the "A" weighted network at slow response. 
(3)  Set the omnidirectional microphone in an approximately seventy-degree position in a location which complies with subsections (a) and (b) above. The operator of the sound level meter shall face the noise source and record the meter's instantaneous response (reading) observed at consecutive ten-second intervals until one hundred (100) readings are obtained. 
(4)  Recalibrate the sound level meter after use. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, through the use of sound or otherwise, with the taking of sound level measurements. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §2, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1978-773, §2, 4-18-78; Ord. No. 1980-508, §§2—5, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1981-725, §§1—3, 8-4-81; Ord. No. 1003-240, §1, 7-20-93)  
Sec. 12-5003. - SOUND EMISSION STANDARDS AND LIMITATIONS. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically indicated, it shall be unlawful for anyone to cause or allow the emission of sound from any source or sources which when measured pursuant to §12-5002 exceed the maximum decibel limits specified in Table 1. Ten (10) readings above the allowed decibel limits attributed to the sound source or sources shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this ordinance. The sound meter operator may cease taking readings as soon as the readings already taken show a violation of this ordinance. It shall not be necessary to complete all one hundred (100) readings if a fewer number have already indicated a violation of the ordinance. 
Table 1. Maximum Noise Limitations 
dB(A) 
Zoning districts 	Daytime 
(7:00 a.m. 
to 
11:00 p.m.) 	Nighttime 
(11:00 p.m. 
to 
7:00 a.m.) 
Residential 	55 	45 
Residential Business Office and Institution, Buffer Commercial, Shopping Center and Neighborhood Business 	60 	55 
Thoroughfare, Industrial 	70 	65 
 
(b)  When a noise source can be identified and its sound is measured in more than one district, the average of the noise limitations of the two (2) districts shall apply. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the location of hospitals, rest homes, family care homes, group care facilities, public or private or parochial school or day care facilities, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the emission of sound onto the structures of such uses which exceeds the maximum noise limitations for residential zoning districts. 
(d)  For activities which are necessary for railroad operations it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the emission of sound from the boundaries of railroad rights-of-way which exceeds eighty (80) dB(A) for daytime and seventy-five (75) dB(A) for nighttime, without regard for the zoning district of the abutting property . 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1980-508, §§6—10, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1983-153-TC-190, §15, 7-19-83; Ord. No. 1988-291-TC-327, §14, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 1993-240, §§3—5, 7-20-93)  
Sec. 12-5004. - EXCEPTION TO LIMITATION STANDARDS. 
The maximum noise limitation standards defined in §12-5003 shall not apply to the following sources: 
(a)  Emergency warning devices or safety signals; 
(b)  Lawn care equipment and agricultural field equipment used during the daytime hours ; 
(c)  Equipment being used for construction , provided that all equipment is operated with all standard equipment manufacturer's mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. 
(d)  Parades, fairs, circuses, other similar public entertainment events, sanctioned sporting events, sporting activities taking place in areas set aside for such activities, or any activities normally associated with any of the above; 
(e)  Bells, chimes and similar devices which operate during daytime hours for a duration of no longer than five (5) minutes in any given period; 
(f)  Emergency work ; 
(g)  Sixty-cycle electric transformers; or 
(h)  Emission of sound from any source or sources on public rights-of-way. 
(i)  Excavation and loading of spoil and excavation materials from sites located within the boundaries of the secondary fire district as described in §5-2034. 
(j)  Excavation and loading of spoil and excavation materials from sites located on City owned sanitary landfill sites. 
(k)  Properly installed and operating residential heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1980-508, §§11, 12, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 2005-785, §1, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2011-867, §1, 4-19-11)  
Sec. 12-5005. - VEHICULAR NOISE LIMITS. 
(Reserved)  
Sec. 12-5006. - UNLAWFUL NOISE. 
In addition to any other violation of this Code, it shall be unlawful to emit, or to cause or permit to be made, any unreasonably loud, annoying, frightening, loud and disturbing or unnecessary noise . Specifically, it shall be unlawful to emit noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
Factors to consider in determining whether a violation exists include, but are not limited to: 
a)  The volume of the noise; 
b)  The intensity of the noise; 
c)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
d)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
e)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
f)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
g)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
h)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
i)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
j)  The duration of the noise; and, 
k)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 2014-349, §12, 10-7-14, eff. 10-12-14 )  
Sec. 12-5007. - PROHIBITED NOISES. 
Except when specifically allowed as a part of a permitted event, in addition to any other violations of this Code, the following acts are specifically declared to be unreasonably loud, annoying, frightening, loud and disturbing or unnecessary noise , the emission of which shall be unlawful. Such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(a)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(b)  The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicles. 
(c)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, amplifier, television, tape deck, tape recorder, or musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume during the nighttime hours as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person or persons in any dwelling, hotel, motel or other type of residence . 
(d)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(e)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as warning of danger. 
(f)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(g)  The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or other structure in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m., except by permit from the building inspector when, in his opinion, such work will not create objectionable noise; upon complaint in writing of the occupant of property near the location of the work, the building inspector shall immediately revoke the permit and the work shall be immediately discontinued. The building inspector may permit emergency work in the preservation of public health or safety at any time. 
(h)  The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court, while the same are in session, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital. 
(i)  The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicles or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(j)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers or vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(k)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(l)  The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling station, or the repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle in any residential district, so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom during the nighttime hours . 
(m)  The firing or discharging of firearms in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making noise or disturbance, except by permit from the Police Department. 
(n)  The creation of excessive noise by the operation of an airplane over the City by stunting, diving or otherwise operating an airplane for the purpose of advertising or otherwise. 
(o)  No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, on any premise, owned, leased; occupied or controlled by such person , any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by habitual or frequent sound, cry, howling, barking, squawking, meowing or other noise, shall disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person . 
(p)  The operation on public property or on public vehicular areas of any sound amplifier which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located is prohibited and is a violation of this section. 
The provisions of this section shall apply neither in the secondary fire district as described in §5-2034 of this Code nor on publicly owned sanitary landfill property. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1980-508, §13, 10-21-80; Ord. No. 1999-538, §1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 2005-785, §2, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2014-343, §16, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 )  
Sec. 12-5008. - SOUND MAGNIFICATION. 
Except for parades, events operated in accordance with a permit issued under the City Council 's Special Event Policy, and other related activities, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate on or over any street within the City any radio, phonograph or other similar mechanical device to produce sound or any mechanical loudspeaker or other sound-magnifying device at a level of volume greater than fifty-five (55) dB(A) . Any such operation shall be unlawful unless such loudspeaker or other mechanical sound-magnifying device shall be equipped with a meter by which the power output can be registered and determined, so that the volume shall be limited in accordance with the restrictions hereinbefore specified; and it shall be unlawful to operate any such equipment or device without a license from the City as provided by this Code. No such equipment or device shall be used or operated on the streets of the City during the period between sunset and 9:00 a.m. Further, no such equipment or device shall be operated to produce magnified sounds along that portion of any street within the block where there is located any school, institution of learning, or court, while the same are in session, or where any hospital, funeral home, undertaking establishment is located, or where a funeral is being conducted at any place. Further, no such equipment or device shall be operated on the streets of this City on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1978-773, §3, 4-18-78; Ord. No. 2014-343, §17, 9-16-14, eff. 9-21-14 ) 
Cross reference: Sound amplification or musical instruments, 9-7026.  
Sec. 12-5009. - PRESUMPTION IN PROSECUTION FOR NOISE VIOLATION. 
The complaints of two (2) or more persons , at least one (1) of whom resides in a different home from the other complaining person or persons , or the complaint of one or more persons , when combined with the complaint of a duly authorized investigating person , shall be prima facie evidence that such sound is a loud and annoying, frightening, loud and disturbing, unreasonably loud or unnecessary noise . 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77)  
Sec. 12-5010. - BURDEN OF PERSUASION REGARDING EXCEPTIONS TO NOISE RESTRICTIONS. 
In any proceeding pursuant to §§12-5001 through 12-5011 of this Code, if an exception stated in §§12-5001 through 12-5011 would limit an obligation, limit a liability or eliminate either an obligation or a liability, the person who would benefit from the application of the exception shall have the burden of persuasion that the exception applies and that the terms of the exception have been met. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77)  
Sec. 12-5011. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF NOISE RESTRICTIONS. 
(a)  Civil Penalties: 
(1)  Any person violating any of the provisions of §§12-5001 through 12-5009 shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each calendar day on which a continuing violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation under this subsection. For each subsequent violation occurring within twelve (12) months of any other violation, the violator shall be subject to a civil penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within thirty (30) days after it is assessed, the City may recover the penalty, together with all costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. The Police Department is authorized to issue civil penalty citations to enforce this section. 
(2)  Appeal of civil penalties: Any person issued a civil penalty under the provisions of this section may appeal by filing an appeal in writing with the Police Department within ten (10) calendar days after the civil penalty is issued. The written appeal shall state all reasons that the civil penalty was wrongly applied and shall include all supporting documentation that the appellant contends supports the appeal. If a person files a written appeal within the time provided in this section, the penalty being appealed shall be stayed pending the decision of the Chief or arbitrator. Unless the Chief of Police, or the delegate of the Chief of Police, decides to allow the requested relief based on the appeal request, the Chief of Police shall send each appeal request to arbitration. The Chief of Police shall select an arbitrator other than an employee of the City of Raleigh. The arbitration shall be conducted, to the extent practicable, in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules for Court-Ordered Arbitration in North Carolina. The arbitrator shall be paid a fee equal to the maximum fee specified in such Rules. The arbitrator shall issue a written determination, within a reasonable time, stating whether the disputed civil penalty will be approved without change or modified or reversed. 
All decisions of the Chief of Police and arbitrator shall be served on the petitioner. 
(b)  Injunctive and Equitable Relief: 
As an additional remedy, this chapter may be enforced, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this subsection, by an action for injunctive relief to restrain the violation. The action shall be brought in the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice. The institution of an action for injunctive relief shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this chapter. This chapter may also be enforced through any appropriate equitable remedy. 
(c)  Criminal Penalties: 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation under this subsection. 
(d)  [Enforcement:] 
This chapter may be enforced by any one, all, or a combination of the remedies set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 1977-580, §3, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 1978-773, §4, 4-18-78; Ord. No. 1995-763, §1, 11-8-95; Ord. No. 2009-583, §2, 5-19-09, eff. 7-1-09) 
Cross reference: Violations of this Code, §14-1005. 
State law reference: Violations of municipal ordinances, enforcement alternatives, G.S. 160A-175.  
CHAPTER 6. - HEALTH, SANITATION AND PUBLIC NUISANCES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note: Former Ch. 5 of Part 7 was renumbered as Ch. 6 of Part 12 by §51 of Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, adopted Dec. 6, 1983. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1995-785, §1, adopted Nov. 21, 1995, set out a new Ch. 6 and repealed the old Ch. 6, §§12-6001—12-6004, which had pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959 , §§12-1—12-3; Ord. No. 1977-511, §§1—12, adopted May 3, 1977; Ord. No. 1985-577-TC-232, §34, adopted March 5, 1985; Ord. No. 1991-747, §§2, 3, adopted March 19, 1991; and Ord. No. 1995-573, §1, adopted March 7, 1995. 
 
Sec. 12-6001. - ENFORCEMENT BY INSPECTION DEPARTMENT. 
The Department of Inspections is charged with the duty of full enforcement of this chapter and any inspector thereof is clothed with full power and authority imposed by this chapter and is hereby authorized and directed to proceed to carry out its provisions; provided that the identification of nuisance s as described in §12-6002(p) shall be the responsibility of the Public Works Director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1995-785, §1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 12-6001.1. - DEFINITIONS. 
The following words, terms and phrases, and their derivatives, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Building materials. Lumber, brick, stone carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor coverings, gutters or other materials or substances suitable for or commonly used in the construction or repair of houses, commercial buildings and other structures, driveways, fences, decks, landings, patios, porches or carports. 
Building rubbish. As defined at §7-2001(f). 
Combustible refuse. As defined at §7-2001(g). 
Dwelling. As defined at §10-2002. 
Firewood. Parts of trees cut into logs suitable for use in fireplaces or for use in wood-burning heaters which are not rotten or decayed. 
Garbage. As defined at §7-2001(c). 
Greenway property. Any interest in real property owned by the City , leased to the City , or any dedicated greenway easement to the City which: 
(1)  Is actually used as a linear park network and is primarily left in its natural state except for the introduction of a connector system of trails for use by pedestrians and bicyclists; and 
(2)  Appears on the Council approved Greenway Plan which is on file in the office of the City Clerk and Treasurer. 
Harmful insects. Mosquitoes, ticks, fleas and flies and other arthropods which can be living transporters and transmitters of a causative agent of a disease. 
Heavily wooded lot. A lot so densely covered with trees and undergrowth that equipment cannot maneuver. 
Junk. Any furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, building fixture, automotive parts, tires, or other similar items which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative condition. 
Litter. Any discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage , rubbish , trash, refuse, can, bottle, box, container, wrapper, paper, paper product, tire, appliance, mechanical equipment or part, building or construction material, tool, machinery, wood, or motor vehicle part, solid waste materials, industrial materials and hazardous waste, or discarded material in any form resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, medical or agricultural operations. 
Lot. As defined at §10-2002. 
Natural protective yard. As defined at §10-2002. 
Natural resource buffer yard. As defined at §10-2002. 
Noxious vegetation. Plants that cause dermatitis through direct or indirect contact or plants that cause internal poisoning if eaten or ingested including but not limited to poison sumac, poison ivy or poison oak. 
Nuisance. Any condition that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public safety. 
Open place. A yard area, a vacant lot; a deck, landing, patio, porch or carport not totally enclosed by a roof, walls, screens or glass windows; or the parkway between the sidewalk and the street curb or pavement edge. The term does not included lands zoned for agriculture, wildlife sanctuary , or research farm . 
Ornamental grasses. True grasses (Gramineae) including close relatives such as sedges (Cyperaceae), rushes (Juncaceae), hardy bamboos (particularly the genus Phyllostachys ), and others. 
Pest. Any destructive or troublesome insect or small animal. 
Rear yard area. As defined at §10-2002. 
Research farm. As defined at §10-2002. 
Rubbish. As defined at §7-2001(e). 
Side yard area. As defined at §10-2002. 
Stream. A natural or a modified natural water course with intermittent or perennial flow as evidenced by topographic alterations within the immediate watershed with the typical biological, hydrological, and physical characteristics commonly associated with the continuous conveyance of water. 
Unhealthy. As defined at §10-2002. 
Weed. Any undesired, uncultivated plant. 
White goods. As defined at §7-2001(k). 
Wildlife sanctuary. As defined at §10-2002. 
Yard area. As defined at §10-2002. 
Yard waste. Grass, weed s, leaves, tree trimmings, plants, shrubbery prunings, and such other similar materials which are generated in the maintenance of yards and gardens. 
(Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 12-6002. - NUISANCES PROHIBITED AND ENUMERATION. 
Any of the following enumerated and described conditions occurring in an open place is hereby found, deemed and declared to constitute a detriment, danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and is found, deemed and declared to be public nuisances wherever the same may exist and the creation, maintenance, or failure to abate any nuisances is hereby declared unlawful. The natural conditions on greenway property and on other lands dedicated to and accepted by the City as natural stream corridors, floodplain or open space, which dedications were established in order to preserve natural greenways, vegetative stream buffers, or natural connecting networks along floodways, stream s and creeks, are deemed and declared as exceptions for the purpose of enforcement of this section. Natural resource buffer yards along streams within the Neuse River Basin are exempted from this Chapter to the extent that the State rules or City Code provisions governing such buffers conflict with this section. 
(a)  Any condition which creates or provides a breeding ground or harbor for rodents, harmful insects , or other pest s. 
(b)  A place of dense growth of weeds or grasses, other than ornamental grasses , over eight (8) inches in height, which: 
(1)  Lies less than one hundred (100) feet from any abutting open street, or 
(2)  Lies less than one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining property which contains a dwelling or commercial building; or 
(3)  Lies within fifty (50) feet of any dwelling or commercial building; or 
(4)  Is a focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this Code. 
(c)  A place of shrubs or other similar vegetation over eight (8) inches in height when any of such shrubs or vegetation is: 
(1)  Encroaching upon the sidewalk, the parkway, or the curb or edge of the pavement of any abutting street , or 
(2)  A focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this code. 
(d)  A place of vines, including but not limited to honeysuckle or vegetation when any of such vines or vegetation is: 
(1)  Encroaching upon the sidewalk, the parkway, or the curb or edge of the pavement of any abutting street , or 
(2)  Encroaching upon any adjoining property , or 
(3)  A focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this code. 
(e)  A concentrated growth of kudzu, poison sumac (Rhus vernix), poison ivy (Rhus radicans), poison oak (Rhus toxicodendron), or other noxious vegetation , other than kudzu or noxious vegetation growing in a heavily wooded lot unless such growth from the heavily wooded lot is: 
(1)  Encroaching upon any adjoining property with a dwelling or a commercial building, or 
(2)  Encroaching upon the sidewalk, the parkway, or the curb or edge of the pavement of any abutting street, or 
(3)  A focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this code. 
(f)  A collection or ponding of stagnant water with conditions causing, or likely to cause, mosquitoes or other harmful insects to breed. 
(g)  Any concentration of combustible refuse . 
(h)  Any concentration of building materials or building rubbish which are not suitable for building construction, alteration or repair, or any concentration of building materials which becomes a focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this Code. 
(i)  Any concentration of collection of garbage, animal waste, yard waste or any rotten or putrescible matter of any kind which is not maintained for collection in accordance with Solid Waste Collection Code; however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the generally accepted use of a properly maintained compost pile sited in the side or rear yard area being used for fertilizer for lawns and gardens and for other agricultural or horticultural purposes and in accordance with Solid Waste Services yard waste guidelines, unless such concentration becomes a focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this Code. 
(j)  Household or office furniture, any household fixtures, white goods or other appliances, metal products of any kind and similar items not designed to withstand the elements or for outdoor use. This subsection shall not prevent: 
(1)  The use of household furniture on a totally enclosed porch having a roof, walls, screens, or glass windows; or 
(2)  The use of furniture in good condition which is designed for outdoor use such as patio or lawn furniture, on porches or landings or in yard area s or other open places . 
(k)  Any junk or any concentration of litter . 
(l)  Flooding caused by improper or inadequate drainage from private property which interferes with the use of, or endangers in any way the streets , sidewalks, parks or other City owned property of any kind provided that such determination shall be made by the Department of Public Works. 
(m)  Any condition including, but not limited to stumps, brush, junk, litter or other materials within or along the banks of such stream or drainage, which blocks or obstructs the natural flow of a stream, creek, or defined ditches or drains to the extent that impounded water is outside the banks of such stream or drainage. 
(n)  Any collection of stagnant water for which no adequate drainage is provided and which is, or is likely to become, a nuisance . 
(o)  Any stormwater retention or impoundment device determined to be operating improperly by the Storm Water Management Division. 
(p)  Any condition whereby any person owning or having the legal control of any land within the corporate limits of the City maintains or permits upon any such land any fence, sign, billboard, shrubbery, bush, tree, mailbox, or other object or combination of objects which obstructs the view of motorists using any street , private driveway, or approach to any street intersection adjacent to and abutting such land so as to constitute a traffic hazard as a condition dangerous to public safety upon any such street , private driveway, or at any such street intersection. 
(q)  Nuisance vehicle violation as defined by Part 12, Chapter 7 of this Code; provided, the process for abating the nuisance vehicle shall be as provided for in Part 12, Chapter 7 of this Code. 
(r)  A concentration of firewood or logs when: 
(1)  Such firewood or logs are not free from rot and decay, or 
(2)  Such concentration of logs is a focal point for any other nuisance in this Code. 
(s)  Any tree or tree limb or any concentration of branches which have fallen due to an act of nature or have been cut, except in a heavily wooded lot or a maintained natural protective yard unless such tree or tree limb or concentration of branches becomes a focal point for any other nuisance in this Code. 
(t)  Any unhealthy plant or tree which has not been removed or altered within fifteen (15) days of the notice of such determination from the Parks Department. 
(u)  Any other condition specifically declared to be a danger to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of inhabitants of the City and public nuisance by the Council , which proceeding may be initiated by the Department of Inspections before the Council after giving written notice in conformity with §12-6003(a) hereof, which notice will state the condition existing, the location, and that the Council will be requested on a day certain, after a public hearing at which the person notified may appear and be heard, to declare that the conditions existing constitute a danger to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and a public nuisance , and that after such declaration by the Council in the form of an ordinance the condition will be abated as provided for in §12-6003(b) hereof; provided no appeal shall lie from a proceeding initiated by the Department of Inspections before the Council of the City as provided in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1995-785, §1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2004-629, §1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 12-6003. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES. 
When any public nuisance as set out in §12-6002 is found to exist on any property , including rights-of-way and easements within the City and one (1) mile beyond the City limits, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(a)  The Department of Inspections of the City shall notify the owner of the premises where the nuisance is located that: 
1.  The conditions identified in the notice of violation exist which constitute a public nuisance ; 
2.  The Code provision(s) identified by Code section number are violated by the stated conditions on the property; 
3.  The Department of Inspections will assess civil penalties and administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for second and subsequent notice of violation of the Nuisance Code provisions occurring within twelve (12) months of the first such notice of violation; 
4.  The property may have been posted on the date of the nuisance notice of violation, in a prominent location on the street facing facade of any building, with a placard or other appropriate means of notice declaring the property is a public nuisance property; 
5.  Unless the public nuisance is abated within ten (10) calendar days from the mailing of the notice, the Department of Inspections will initiate the procedures to abate the conditions constituting a nuisance ; 
6.  The cost of abatement, including an administrative fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00), also including the cost, if any to reseed areas which were formerly a nuisance , shall constitute a lien against the premises. Provided, the costs of abating nuisance s so declared by §12-6002(l) and (n) under the condition described in subsection (d) hereof shall be limited to the amounts indicated therein. 
The City Manager shall make, and may from time to time alter and amend, guidelines to be used by the Department of Inspections in the implementation of the procedures to be used for posting nuisance notices of violation. The Department of Inspections, to the extent required by law, shall make application for and obtain any permit required prior to undertaking the activities to abate the nuisance, provided the Stormwater Management Division shall design the abatement measure and obtain any permit required to resolve drainage nuisances. 
(b)  The Department of Inspections is hereby given full power and authority to enter upon the premises involved for the purpose of posting the property as a public nuisance and of abating the nuisance found to exist as herein set out. Within the ten-day period mentioned in subsection (a) hereof the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the Department of Inspections made pursuant to subsection (a) hereof to the Council by giving written notice of appeal to the Department of Inspections, the appeal to stay the abatement of the nuisance s by the Department of Inspections until a final determination by the Council . In the event no appeal is taken, the Department of Inspections may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(c)  The Council in the event an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (b) hereof may , after hearing all interested persons and reviewing the findings of the Department of Inspections, reverse the finding made pursuant to subsection (a) hereof; but if the Council shall determine that the findings of the Department of Inspections made pursuant to said subsection is correct and proper it shall adopt an ordinance specifically declaring the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and a public nuisance and directing the Department of Inspections to cause the conditions to be abated. 
(d)  After the abatement of the nuisance as provided in subsection (a), (b) or (c) hereof the cost of such abatement shall become a lien against the premises upon confirmation of the cost thereof by the Council , which said confirmation shall take place only after then (10) days' written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance existed of the proposed confirmation. All other project costs, including the full labor costs, permit fees, and engineering and design costs of the project shall also be assessed to the owner . Upon confirmation the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the premises from which the nuisance was abated the same to be recorded as provided in G.S. 160A-216 et seq. and to be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1995-785, §1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2002-331, § 1, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 2003-388, §§1—3, 2-18-03; Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-126, §1, 11-7-06, eff. 1-1-07; Ord. No. 2016-612, §1, 6-21-16, eff. 6-26-16 )  
Sec. 12-6004. - NUISANCES PROHIBITED; ENUMERATION; ABATEMENT IN GREENWAY PROPERTIES. 
(a)  The following enumerated and described conditions occurring on any greenway property in an open place are hereby found, deemed, and declared to constitute a detriment, danger, and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and are found, deemed, and declared to be public nuisances wherever the same may exist and the creation, maintenance, or failure to abate said nuisances is hereby declared unlawful. 
(1)  Any concentration of combustible refuse. 
(2)  Any concentration of building materials or building rubbish , which are not suitable for building construction, alteration or repair, or any concentration of building materials which becomes a focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this Code. 
(3)  Any concentration of collection of garbage , food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter which is not maintained for collection in accordance with Solid Waste Collection Code; however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the generally accepted use of a properly maintained compost pile sited in the side or rear yard area being used for fertilizer for lawns and gardens and for other agricultural or horticultural purposes and in accordance with Solid Waste Services yard waste guidelines, unless such concentration becomes a focal point for any other nuisance enumerated in this Code. 
(4)  Household or office furniture, any household fixtures, white goods or other appliances, or metal products of any kind and similar items not designed to withstand the elements or for outdoor use. This subsection shall not prevent: 
a.  The use of household furniture on a totally enclosed porch having a roof, walls, screens, or glass windows; or 
b.  The use of furniture in good condition which is designed for outdoor use such as patio or lawn furniture, on porches or landings or in yard area s or other open places . 
(5)  Any junk or any concentration of litter. 
(6)  Flooding caused by improper or inadequate drainage which , interferes with the use of or endangers in any way City -owned streets, sidewalks; provided, that such determination shall be made by the Director of Public Works; or 
(7)  Any other condition specifically declared to be a danger to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of inhabitants of the City and a public nuisance by the governing body of the City which proceeding may be initiated by the Department of Inspections before the Council after giving written notice in conformity with subsection (c) hereof, which notice will state the condition existing, the location, and that the City Council will be requested on a day certain, after a public hearing at which the person notified may appear and be heard, to declare that the conditions existing constitute a danger to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and a public nuisance , and that after such declaration by the Council in the form of an ordinance the condition will be abated as provided in subsection (d) hereof; provided no appeal shall lie from a proceeding initiated by the Department of Inspections before the Council of the City as provided in this subsection. 
(b)  When any public nuisance as set out in subsection (a) hereof is found to exist on any greenway property including rights-of-way and easements within the City and one (1) mile beyond the City limits, the Department of Inspections of the City shall notify the owner of the premises where the nuisance is located that conditions exist which constitute a public nuisance and unless the condition is abated within ten (10) days from the mailing of the notice, which shall be sent by first class mail, the conditions constituting a nuisance will be abated and the cost of abatement including an administrative fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00), also including the cost, if any, to reseed areas which were formally a nuisance shall constitute a lien against the premises. 
(c)  The Department of Inspections is hereby given full power and authority to enter upon the premises involved for the purpose of abating the nuisance found to exist as herein set out. Within the ten-day period mentioned in subsection (b) hereof the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the Department of Inspections made pursuant to subsection (a) hereof to the Council by giving written notice of appeal to the Department of Inspections, said appeal to stay the abatement of the nuisance s by the Department of Inspections until a final determination by the Council . In the event no appeal is taken, the Department of Inspections may proceed to abate the nuisance . 
(d)  The Council in the event an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (c) hereof may after hearing all interested persons and reviewing the findings of the Department of Inspections, reverse the finding made pursuant to subsection (a) hereof; but if the Council shall determine that the findings of the Department of Inspections made pursuant to said subsection are correct and proper, it shall adopt an ordinance specifically declaring the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City and a public nuisance and directing the Department of Inspections to cause said conditions to be abated. 
(e)  After the abatement of the nuisance as provided in subsection (b), (c), or (d) hereof the cost of such abatement shall become a lien against the premises upon confirmation of the cost thereof by the Council, which confirmation shall take place only after ten (10) days' written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance existed of the proposed confirmation. Upon confirmation, the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the premises from which the nuisance was abated, the same to be recorded as provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes and to be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1995-785, §1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 1998-454, §19, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06)  
Sec. 12-6005. - CIVIL PENALTY. 
(a)  Any owner of a property within the City and one (1) mile beyond the City limits notified pursuant to §12-6003 that the property is a public nuisance as provided in §§12-6001 through 12-6004 of this Code shall , upon the issuance of the second nuisance notice of violation within twelve (12) months of the first nuisance notice of violation, be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). For each subsequent nuisance notice of violation occurring prior to the expiration of a twelve (12) month period following issuance of the first nuisance notice of violation, the owner shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within thirty (30) days after being notified of the amount due, the City may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(b)  An appeal of a civil penalty must be filed in writing with the Director of the Inspections Department within ten (10) days after service of the written demand for payment of the Director of the Inspections Department on the petitioner. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the civil penalty was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. 
(Ord. No. 1995-785, §1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 2004-629, §2, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2005-870, §2, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-126, §2, 11-7-06, eff. 1-1-07)  
Sec. 12-6006. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. 
(a)  Any owner of a property within the City and one (1) mile beyond the City limits notified pursuant to §12-6003 that the property is a public nuisance as provided in §§12-6001 through 12-6004 of this Code shall , upon the issuance of the second nuisance notice of violation within twelve (12) months of the first nuisance notice of violation, be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to any other charge. For each additional nuisance notice of violation occurring prior to the expiration of a twelve (12) month period following issuance of the first nuisance notice of violation, the owner shall be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The property owner may also be assessed any costs incurred in obtaining service of the public nuisance notice including legal publication. 
(b)  An appeal of an administrative fee demand for payment must be filed in writing with the Director of the Inspections Department within ten (10) days after service of the written demand for payment of the Director of the Inspections Department on the petitioner. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the administrative fee was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-718-TC-258, §5, TC-17-04, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 2005-870, §1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 2006-27, §1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-126, §3, 11-7-06, eff. 1-1-07) 
Cross reference: Administrative fees, §14-1012.  
Sec. 12-6007. - METHODS OF SERVICE. 
(a)  Nuisance notices of violation issued by an inspector shall be served upon persons personally, by first class mail, or by posting on the property in conjunction with first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. Service by posting shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is returned and notice of the pending proceedings was posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected on the day the first class mail notice was sent. 
(b)  Abatement notices, assessments of civil penalties and administrative fees, and appeal decisions shall be served upon persons personally or by first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10) days after the mailing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-126, §4, 11-7-06, eff. 1-1-07)  
Sec. 12-6008. - APPEALS OF CIVIL PENALTY ASSESSMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES. 
(a)  Any person assessed a civil penalty or an administrative fee may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of the Inspections Department within ten (10) days after service of the written demand for payment of the assessment. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the administrative fee was wrongly applied and any supporting documentation. Failure to file a notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the civil penalty or the administrative fee. 
(b)  Using the information provided, the Director of the Inspections Department shall conduct a review of the appeal. The Director of Inspections may amend or reverse the assessment. 
(c)  Unless the Director of Inspections resolves the appeal, the Director of Inspections shall schedule the appeal for determination by the City Council if the person who filed the appeal so requests. The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, shall give due notice of such hearing to the petitioner and the City Manager, and shall render its decision in a reasonable time. 
(d)  The City Council 's decision on a civil penalty appeal or an administrative fee is subject to further review in the superior court of the county by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of certiorari shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days after the date that the City Council 's decision is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2006-126, §5, 11-7-06, eff. 1-1-07)  
CHAPTER 7. - REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED AND NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 12-7001. - ADMINISTRATION. 
The Police Department and Inspections Department of the City shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets and highways within the City , and property owned by the City . The Inspections Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of "abandoned" and "nuisance" vehicles located on private property . The City may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles and nuisance vehicles in compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the City Police Department and Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7002. - DEFINITIONS. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as follows: 
(a)  Abandoned vehicle. 
An abandoned motor vehicle is one that is: 
(1)  Left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or 
(2)  Left on a public street or highway for longer than seven (7) days; or 
(3)  Left on property owned or operated by the City for longer than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
(4)  Left on private property without the consent of the owner , occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two (2) hours. 
(b)  Authorizing official. 
The supervisory employee of the Police Department or the Inspections Department, respectively, designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Motor vehicle or vehicle . 
A machine designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
(d)  Nuisance vehicle. 
A motor vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be: 
(1)  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects or a breeding ground or harbor for rats or other pests; or 
(2)  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height; or 
(3)  A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or 
(4)  A point of concentration of combustible items such as gasoline, oil, other flammable or explosive materials including but not limited to boxes, paper, old clothes, rags, refuse, or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature; or 
(5)  One which has parts thereof which may fall and injure members of the public or one which may have parts which fall or be closed and become an area of confinement which may not be released for opening from the inside; or 
(6)  One which is so situated and located that there is a danger of the vehicle falling, rolling, turning over, or creating an unsafe movement such as unattended, blocked or jacked vehicles; or 
(7)  One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; or 
(8)  One which has parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
(9)  Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the City Council . 
(e)  Non-consensual towing. 
Non-consensual towing means motor vehicle towing performed by a tow truck if such transportation is performed without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle . This definition shall not include non-consensual tows that occur at the direction of a Raleigh Police Officer or other Raleigh City Official or as a result of a vehicle seizure or repossession by a lien holder. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 1986-837-TC-271, §§3—5, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 2004-736, §1, 11-16-04)  
Sec. 12-7003. - ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED. 
It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined herein. 
Upon investigation, proper officials of the City may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7004. - NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED. 
It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle , or for the owner , lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle . 
Upon investigation, proper officials of the Inspections Department may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7005. - REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR NUISANCE VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS. 
Except as set forth in §12-7006 below, a vehicle to be removed because it has been abandoned or declared to be a nuisance vehicle shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle . In such instances, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the City on a specified date (no sooner than seven (7) days after the notice is affixed), unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to this time. 
With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property and nuisance vehicles , if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned or a nuisance vehicle , such appeal shall be made to the City Council in writing , heard at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Council , and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7006. - EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT. 
The requirement that notice be affixed to an abandoned or nuisance vehicle at least seven (7) days prior to removal may , as determined by the authorizing official , be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall , in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include: 
(a)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. 
For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, such circumstances include, and the City Council hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
(1)  Obstructing traffic (Code §11-2171(a)), 
(2)  Parked at the designated places identified in Code §11-2171(b)(1)—(11), 
(3)  Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone (Code §11-2173), 
(4)  Parked in loading zones (Code §11-2177), 
(5)  Parked in bus zones (Code §11-2178), 
(6)  Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under Code §11-2181. 
(b)  Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. 
With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on City -owned property other than the streets and highways, and on private property , such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration but not limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property . 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7007. - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS. 
Any vehicle which has been determined to be an abandoned or a nuisance vehicle may , as directed by the City , be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services for the City . Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing City official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle , such notice to include the following : 
(a)  The description of the removed vehicle ; 
(b)  The location where the vehicle is stored; 
(c)  The violation with which the owner is charged, if any; 
(d)  The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle ; and 
(e)  The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal. 
The City shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (a) through (e) above, shall , unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his agent, also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address. 
If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the State , notice shall be given to the registered owner within seventy-two (72) hours from the removal of the vehicle . 
Whenever an abandoned or nuisance vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plate, the authorizing City official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information as set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7008. - RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE. 
After the removal of an abandoned motor vehicle or vehicle declared to be a nuisance vehicle , the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle . A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the Wake County magistrate designated by the Chief district court judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within seventy-two (72) hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-222, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7009. - REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS. 
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle . 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7010. - SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE. 
Any vehicle declared to be an abandoned or a nuisance vehicle under this chapter which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle; . Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the City through a procedure similar to that provided in G.S. Chapter 44A, Article 1. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 1992-46, §1, 9-1-92)  
Sec. 12-7011. - CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
As a general policy, the City will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner , occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the City from private property without a written request of the owner , occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is declared a nuisance vehicle . The City may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned or nuisance vehicle from private property to indemnify the City against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale thereof. Any owner , occupant or lessee of a property requesting removal of an abandoned or nuisance vehicle from private property shall be required to pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative fee upon written request for removal of said vehicle . 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 2004-629, §3, 5-4-04)  
Sec. 12-7012. - PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY. 
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned or nuisance vehicle , for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7013. - EXCEPTIONS. 
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the City . 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7014. - UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the City any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code, unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 1984-294, §2, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 12-7015. - IMPROPER TOWING. 
(a)  It is a misdemeanor offense to tow a motor vehicle from a lot that is subject to the provisions of N.C.G.S 20-219.2 unless the lot and individual parking spaces are properly designated as mandated by that statute. 
(b)  Any towing or storage firm engaged in the business of providing non-consensual motor vehicle towing services shall not charge the owner or operator of the towed vehicle in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the non-consensual removal of the motor vehicle or in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for storage fees; however, no storage fees shall be charged for the first twenty-four (24) hour time period from the time the vehicle is removed from the property. The fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be all inclusive. The fees referred to in this section shall be payable by cash, debit card or major national credit card at no extra cost. Failure to accept credit or debit cards for payment is a violation of this section and is punishable as a misdemeanor. No additional fees may be charged for using dollies, trailers, lifts, Slim jims or any other equipment or service. However, the maximum fees in this section shall not apply to the non-consensual towing of vehicles weighing in excess of two (2) tons. Non-consensual towing fees and storage rates shall be established biannually by the City Council . 
(c)  The operator of any wrecker removing a private vehicle at the request of any person, other than a police officer on duty shall report to the Raleigh Police Department the fact that the vehicle was towed and its present storage space, together with a description of the vehicle and the tag number. The report shall be made by telephonic communication within one hour after the vehicle is deposited at the storage site. Any person, operating an impound lot within the City shall maintain an attendant on call twenty-four (24) hours every day capable of acknowledging requests for vehicle release within fifteen (15) minutes of receiving a call and of releasing the vehicle within forty-five minutes (45) of receiving the call. The attendant shall be clothed with the authority to release any vehicle upon the legal conditions of release being fulfilled. Lighting in the lot shall be provided at a minimum average maintained footcandle value of two (2) at the surface level. Vehicles towed shall be secured in a fenced storage lot within the City and in such a manner as to keep the vehicles safe from harm. All tow trucks performing non-consensual tows shall display the name and telephone number of the towing company on each side of the tow truck. 
(d)  The operator of any tow truck summoned to tow away any vehicle in a non-consensual towing shall not tow the vehicle away and shall release the vehicle for a charge not to exceed fifty (50) per cent of the non-consensual towing rate set out in paragraph (b) herein if the operator of the vehicle returns prior to the tow truck having left the location to which summoned and moves the vehicle immediately and prior to the tow truck having left the location to which it was summoned. The tow truck operator shall permit the owner of a towed vehicle to remove personal property from a vehicle in the custody of the tow truck operator without any charges or fees. If the tow truck operator has removed personal property from the vehicle it shall be returned to the owner of the property at no charge upon request made to the tow truck operator. 
(Ord. No. 2002-350, § 1, 12-18-02; Ord. No. 2004-736, §§2—4, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 2008-469, §1, 10-7-08)  
Sec. 12-7016. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. 
Any owner of a property within the City whose property has a nuisance vehicle on it as defined by City Code §10-7002(d)(1)—(9) shall be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per vehicle . The property owner may also be assessed any costs in obtaining service of the nuisance vehicle notice including legal publication. 
(Ord. No. 2004-671, §1, 7-6-04)  
CHAPTER 8. - AUTOMOBILE REPAIR BUSINESSES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— At the city's direction, the provisions of Ord. No. 2005-838, §1, adopted May 17, 2005, have been designated herein as Part 12, Chapter 8. 
 
Sec. 12-8000. - DEFINITIONS. 
Automobile repair facility. Any motor vehicle dealership, garage, body shop or any other business at which repairs and replacements are made to the bodies and windshields of motor vehicles. 
Owner or operator. Anyone owning or operating an automobile repair facility or anyone in their employ or any independent contractor engaged in working on automobile bodies or windshields in an automobile repair facility. 
Bullet hole. Any indentation or penetration of an automobile body or windshield whose size shape or fracture pattern indicates that it was more than likely caused by a bullet or other projectile fired by any type rifle, pistol, shotgun or any other type of gun whether manually operated or automatic. 
(Ord. No. 2005-838, §1, 5-17-05)  
Sec. 12-8001. - AUTOMOBILE REPAIR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. 
The owner or operator of any automobile repair facility shall report to the Raleigh Police Department any motor vehicle brought to their business for repair or repair estimates if the motor vehicle appears to have bullet hole s in the body or windshield or any other part of the motor vehicle that the owner or operator may have cause to examine. The information shall be reported on a form to be provided to the repair facility by the City of Raleigh. The form may be delivered by hand or electronically transmitted to the City so long as the delivery is completed as soon as possible but no later than the close of business on the day on which the car is first examined by the owner or operator . The form shall contain at a minimum the name, if known, of the registered owner of the vehicle; the name of the person presenting the vehicle for repair; the address of the owner or other person presenting the vehicle for repair and a description of the size, number and location of the suspected bullet hole s. Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-838, §1, 5-17-05)  
PART 13 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross references: Offenses in City parks, §9-2011 et seq. ; City lakes, Part 9, Ch. 5; licensing and regulation for categorical areas of regulation, Part 12. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 13-1001. - SIGNBOARDS, POSTS, UTILITY FIXTURES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or deface any signboard, signpost, gas fixture, or gas pipe, water fixtures, or water pipe, lamp or lamppost, or any other property of the City .  
Sec. 13-1002. - REWARD FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO APPREHENSION AND CONVICTION OF CERTAIN PERSONS. 
(a)  For information furnished to the Police Department leading to the apprehension and conviction of persons guilty of taking or maliciously damaging property of the City , there shall be adequate reward given by the Council of the City , the amount thereof to be determined by the Council upon the final conviction of the defendant. 
(b)  In no event shall the amount of a reward exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the determination of such amount in each case by the Council shall be final. 
(c)  For information relating to each event of malicious taking or damaging property of the City , there is hereby offered a reward of one hundred dollars ($100.00) when such information, furnished to the Police Department, leads to the apprehension and conviction of any person or persons for the malicious taking or damage reported. 
( Code 1959 , §15-24.1) 
Charter reference: Authority to offer and pay rewards, §2.14(66). 
Cross reference: Police Department, Part 5, Ch. 1.  
Sec. 13-1003. - PUBLIC RECORDS, REMOVAL FROM CITY HALL. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any books, vouchers, checks, warrants, or any other financial records of the City from the City hall, except that the records shall be removed through or in response to order of court as provided by law for the production of such books, papers or vouchers in a trial or proceeding; or, except at the specific request of the State local government commission; or, except, as the same may be needed and used by the City Attorney in connection with litigation or proving claims or controversies affecting the City ; or, upon the authority of the Council given, in which event the same shall be removed only after written request shall have been given to the Council stating the purpose for the removal, the place that the books are to be removed to and the period of time that they shall remain out of the City hall, and in this event permission to remove the books shall be granted only after a majority vote of the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §15-39) 
State law reference: Public records, G.S. Chapter 132.  
Sec. 13-1004. - FIRE OR FLAMES ON CITY-OWNED OR CONTROLLED PROPERTY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, carry, transport or to cause to be ignited, carried or transported or to allow to burn on or across any sidewalk, street , easement, right-of-way, park or other property of any kind owned or otherwise controlled by the City , any flame, fire, or lighted nonelectric lantern, other than a match, cigarette lighter or lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette; provided the foregoing shall not apply to City employees or employees of a licensed utility company engaged in the performance of their duties; nor to workers engaged in the performance of their duties pursuant to a valid contract with the City ; nor to construction workers working under a valid permit issued by proper authorities; provided further, it shall not be unlawful to build or ignite fires in cooking pits, fireplaces or other areas on City -owned or controlled property designated by the City as areas for fires, cooking or burning. 
( Code 1959 , §15-49)  
CHAPTER 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC 
 
Sec. 13-2001. - ABANDONED ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door, or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of such icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or other device thereon without first removing the snap lock or doors from such icebox, refrigerator or container. 
( Code 1959 , §15-1) 
State law reference: Similar state law, G.S. 14-318.1.  
Sec. 13-2002. - ADVERTISING; POSTING OUTDOORS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to inscribe or post any outdoor advertising matter upon any public street or sidewalk or any post, tree, standard or other structure on the streets or public alleys of the City ; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the posting of signs in an effort to raise funds for a public charitable purpose. 
( Code 1959 , §15-2)  
Sec. 13-2003. - AIRCRAFT; DEFINITION; STUNT FLYING; MINIMUM ALTITUDE; PERMITS. 
(a)  The term aircraft as used in this section means any aeroplane, airplane, gas bag, glider, flying machine, balloon, any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used and designed for navigation of or flight in the air except a helicopter, a parachute, or other device used primarily as safety equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person , within or over the corporate limits of the City , to guide or operate an aircraft in any manner designed to give any demonstration of trick flying, or aerial acrobatics, or stunts, or to make or cause to make any manipulation of the control of any such aircraft as may tend to divert such aircraft from an otherwise normal flight. 
(c)  Except while taking off from or landing at an established landing field or airport, or pursuant to a permit under subsection (e) hereof, no person , firm or corporation shall fly or permit any aircraft to be flown over the corporate limits of the City or City -owned property except at a height sufficient to permit a reasonably safe emergency landing, which in no case shall be less than one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(d)  The term established landing field or airport shall include public airfields and airports and private airfields and landing strips authorized under the provisions of §10-2073(c)(15) of this Code. 
(e)  For the purpose of aerial photography or for other temporary, special purpose, a permit must be obtained from the City Manager in order to operate aircraft at an altitude lower than one thousand (1,000) feet or to take-off or land an aircraft at places other than established landing fields or airports. Such a permit will be granted only if proof is offered to the City Manager that: 
(1)  All applicable FAA standards and restrictions will be complied with; 
(2)  The proposed flight, take-off or landing will not conflict with other scheduled public or private activities; and 
(3)  The health, safety and welfare of the public will not be jeopardized. 
( Code 1959 , §15-5; Ord. No. 1980-443, §1, 9-2-80)  
Sec. 13-2004. - PARACHUTE JUMPS; PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  Except pursuant to a valid permit issued under this section, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make a parachute jump from an aircraft, balloon or helicopter over or within the corporate limits of the City . 
(b)  A permit may be issued by the City Manager for parachute jumps associated with public exhibitions, demonstrations, or for other temporary, special purposes or occasions. Such a permit will be granted only upon proof that: 
(1)  All FAA standards and restrictions will be complied with; 
(2)  The proposed parachute jump or jumps will not conflict with other scheduled public or private activities; and 
(3)  The health, safety and welfare of the public will not be jeopardized. 
( Code 1959 , §15-4; Ord. No. 1980-443, §2, 9-2-80)  
Sec. 13-2005. - HELICOPTERS; OPERATION REGULATED. 
It shall be unlawful, except in case of emergency, for a helicopter to take off from or land within the corporate limits of the City of Raleigh, except under the conditions set out herein. 
(a)  Definitions. 
The following words used herein shall have the meaning set out below: 
(1)  Heliport, unlimited use. 
The words heliport, unlimited use shall mean a landing area used by helicopters which, in addition, includes all necessary passenger and cargo facilities, maintenance and overhaul, fueling, service, storage, tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces. 
(2)  Heliport, limited use. 
The words heliport, limited use shall mean a landing area used for the landing and taking off of helicopters, including all necessary passenger and cargo facilities, fueling, and emergency service facilities. 
(3)  Helistop, unlimited use. 
The words helistop, unlimited use shall mean any land used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo, not including fueling, refueling, or service facilities. 
(4)  Helistop, limited use. 
The words helistop, limited use shall mean a landing area for the purpose of takeoff or landing of private helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo, and shall not be open to use by any helicopter without prior permission having been obtained. 
Helistops of both limited or unlimited use may be established on the tops of buildings. 
(b)  Area requirements. 
(1)  Area requirements for helicopters, whether for limited or unlimited use shall be as follows: The minimum landing area for each heliport shall be two hundred (200) feet by four hundred (400) feet, not including tie-down facilities, taxiways, terminal buildings, parking areas, service areas, and areas for other necessary facilities. 
(2)  The area requirements for helistops, whether for limited or unlimited use shall be as follows: The minimum landing area for helistops, whether for limited or unlimited use shall be one hundred (100) feet by one hundred (100) feet, but if the helistop is on a building, the minimum landing area shall be forty (40) feet by forty (40) feet. The landing area shall be surrounded by a fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(c)  Approach zones. 
Approach zones to a heliport or helistop must be sufficiently clear of obstructions to provide a slope of 8:1 (approximately seven (7) degrees measured from the horizontal). If necessary, a curved approach may be used. 
(d)  High voltage transmission lines. 
Heliports and helistops shall not be established in close proximity to high voltage transmission lines. 
(e)  Landing area alignment. 
The landing area shall be aligned to give maximum "into-the-wind" operation. 
(f)  Surfaces. 
The actual area used for landing must be made of such material that it will be free of dust, loose ground, and particles of concrete which may be blown about by the down blast of air of the rotor, and must be properly drained. 
(g)  Federal aviation agency standards. 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of sections 13-2003, 13-2004 and 13-2005 of this Code and the standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), such conflict shall be resolved in favor of the applicable FAA standards and regulations. 
(h)  Landings only at designated facilities. 
It shall be unlawful, except in cases of emergency, for a helicopter to take off or land within the corporate limits of the City except at a designated heliport or helistop, as defined in this Code; provided, infrequent, special take-offs or landings may be allowed pursuant to a permit from the City Manager under subsection (j) hereof. 
(i)  Location. 
Heliports and helistops may be established within the City limits of the City only as provided by §10-2144(b), airfield, landing strip and heliport for vertical landing aircraft. 
(j)  Special landing or take-off permits. 
The City Manager may issue special permits for the landing or taking off of helicopters within the corporate limits at other than designated heliports and helistops upon proof that: 
(1)  All FAA standards and restrictions will be complied with; 
(2)  The proposed take-off or landing will not conflict with other scheduled public or private activities; and 
(3)  The public health, safety and welfare will not be jeopardized. 
( Code 1959 , §15-4.1; Ord. No. 1980-443, §3, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 1991-879E-TC-388, §1, 11-19-91)  
Sec. 13-2006. - THROWING OR DROPPING MATTER. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any aircraft to throw or cause or permit to be thrown out, discharged, or dropped any ballast, instruments, tools, containers, posters, handbills, samples, or other material, unless it be directly over a place designated for the purpose; and all tools and equipment carried in or upon aircraft shall be adequately fastened in place before leaving the ground and shall so remain except when in actual use; provided, the Council , within its discretion, may , upon formal application made in writing to the Council , permit the distribution of such advertising matter as to the Council may appear consistent with the public interest. 
( Code 1959 , §15-5) 
State law reference: Regulation of aircraft overflight, G.S. 160A-180.  
Sec. 13-2007. - BEGGING. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or panhandle as defined in §13-2031 of this Code upon the streets or any other public property without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police or his designee. 
(b)  Application for the permit shall be in writing on a form furnished by the Chief and shall be submitted to the Police Department at least forty-eight (48) hours before the first day sought for begging. The application shall include the full legal name of the applicant, the applicant's address, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses, and any other information needed to establish the applicant's identity. The applicant shall also provide picture identification at the time the application is submitted or, if picture identification is impractical, the applicant shall provide other documentation that definitively establishes identity. The Chief shall grant the permit unless: 
(1)  The application contains a false or fraudulent statement; or 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of violating begging or panhandling ordinances within the twelve (12) months prior to the application date. 
The Chief shall grant or deny the permit within twenty-four (24) hours after a completed application is submitted. An applicant may appeal a denial of a permit to the City Manager if the appeal is taken within ten (10) days after receiving actual notice of the denial. 
(c)  A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance or until the permit holder is convicted of a violation of the City's begging and panhandling ordinances. If a permit holder is convicted of a violation of the begging and panhandling ordinances, the holder shall not be eligible for another permit for a period of one year from the date of conviction of the offense. Any revocation of a permit pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Chief of Police, or his designee, if the appeal is taken within ten (10) days of notice of the revocation. 
(d)  Issuance of a permit under this section does not authorize begging in locations where it is otherwise prohibited by law. 
( Code 1959 , §15-6; Ord. No. 2011-836, §1, 2-1-11, eff. 3-18-11; Ord. No. 2012-29, §1, 3-20-12, eff. 3-25-12) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate and prohibit begging, G.S. 160A-179.  
Sec. 13-2008. - CONTESTS; RADIO, TELEVISION AND NEWSPAPER; LIMITATIONS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to promote or advertise by radio, television, newspaper, or other advertising medium a treasure hunt or other similar contest or competition in which a prize or other thing of value is given or promised to the person who shall find such prize (or a token which would indicate that such finder was entitled to such prize), unless the prize or token is concealed on property owned or controlled by the promoter of the contest, or on private property within the written consent of the owner , and the boundaries of such property are clearly defined in the clues giving the location of the prize or token. 
(b)  This section shall apply only to contests or competitions in the advertisement of which it is indicated that the prize or token is or might be concealed within the City limits. 
( Code 1959 , §15-6.1)  
Sec. 13-2009. - FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES; SALE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within the corporate limits of the City , or within a radius of one mile thereof, any firecrackers, cannon, Roman candles, skyrockets, or other fireworks. Explosives as defined in the Fire Prevention Code may be sold only in conformity with the provisions of that Code. 
( Code 1959 , §15-20) 
Cross reference: Adoption of Fire Prevention Code, §5-2031. 
State law reference: Authority to regulate fireworks, G.S. 160A-183.  
Sec. 13-2010. - FIREARMS; DISCHARGE WITHIN CITY. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge within the corporate limits of the City , any air rifle, gun or pistol, or any spring gun, pistol, or other similar device which impels with force any shot or pellet of any kind. The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department is hereby authorized to seize and hold subject to order of court, any such air rifle, gun or pistol or spring gun or pistol, or other similar device which impels with force any shot or pellet of any kind, which shall be used, shot, or discharged within the City , in violation of this section. 
This subsection shall not become effective immediately with respect to property which meets the following criteria: (i) consists of one thousand (1,000) or more contiguous acres under common ownership; (ii) does not contain an occupied residence ; (iii) has been annexed by voluntary petition with an effective date on or after July 1, 1995; and (iv) the owner shows by satisfactory proof that there is an outstanding lease, for hunting purposes, to an organized hunting club. This subsection shall become effective with respect to such property on the earlier of three (3) years after the effective date of annexation or the date the hunting club lease, including allowable extensions, expires or is terminated. The property owner shall notify the City of the expiration or termination of the lease if within the three- year period. Between the effective date of annexation and the date this subsection becomes effective, firearms may be discharged on the property only for hunting purposes by persons who are members or permitted guests of the lessee hunting club, or otherwise as allowed by this section, but in no event within one thousand (1,000) feet of an occupied residence . 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a person over twenty-one (21) years of age using a .22 calibre rifle with blank or shot cartridges upon property owned or occupied by him from firing upon pigeons, squirrels or rats (when not in violation of state law) upon or around an apartment or dwelling or, with written permission of the owner and occupant, another occupied facility, if such person shall first procure a permit from the Chief of Police for such purpose. The permit shall run for not more than ninety (90) days, and shall authorize firing during daylight hours on weekdays only upon premises owned or occupied by the applicant, and shall be revocable by the Chief of Police upon a violation of its conditions or upon complaint that the permit holder is not exercising his privilege in a careful and prudent manner and with due regard to life and property . Permits shall not be issued for property located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a school or park. 
(c)  The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit the discharge of such devices either during a course of instruction in their use conducted by the Police Department of the City or on a firing range completely enclosed within a building in the City , after inspection of the building and approval of the use of such range by the Police Department from the standpoint of public safety. 
(d)  It shall be illegal to possess a firearm, including concealed handguns otherwise allowed by the provisions of G.S. article 54B, on or about the person on any City -owned or controlled property , whether real or personal. The City Manager is hereby directed to post an appropriate notice of the ban on concealed handguns at and in every lot or building owned or controlled by the City. This prohibition shall not apply to on-duty law enforcement personnel, active duty military personnel on assignment, or to any activities carried out on a City -owned or controlled fire range. 
( Code 1959 , §15-21; Ord. No. 1981-562, §1, 1-6-81; Ord. No. 1992-8, §1, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 1993-188, §1, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 1995-749, §1, 10-18-95; Ord. No. 1995-788, §1, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 2002-277, § 1, 9-3-02) 
Cross reference: Weapons prohibited, §9-2021. 
State law reference: Authority to regulate firearms, G.S. 160A-189.  
Sec. 13-2010.1. - SAME—DISPLAY ON PUBLIC PROPERTY WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF AN IMPAIRING SUBSTANCE. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display any air rifle, gun, or pistol or any spring gun, pistol, or other similar device which impels with force any shot or pellet of any kind on any street , sidewalk, alley, or other public property or within a motor vehicle on any street , sidewalk, alley, or other public property while under the influence of an impairing substance. Unless otherwise defined in Part 14 of this Code, all words and terms of this section shall have the same meaning as defined in G.S. chapter 20 and the offense of impairment shall be the same as impaired while driving a noncommercial vehicle as set forth in G.S. chapter 20. 
(b)  This section shall be enforced as provided in G.S. 160A-175 or as provided in this Code. Any criminal violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and thirty (30) days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 1993-267, §§1, 4, 9-21-93)  
Sec. 13-2011. - GASOLINE SALES TO PERSONS UNDER INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR DRUGS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City to sell, deliver or release any amount of gasoline to any person under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
( Code 1959 , §15-22)  
Sec. 13-2012. - MOLOTOV COCKTAILS AND FIREBOMBS; DEFINITIONS; PROHIBITED ACTS. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Molotov cocktail is defined as any breakable container or any container designed in such a manner that upon being propelled it will at impact empty its contents, filled with an inflammable fluid or substance, fitted with a fuse or wick. 
(2)  Firebomb is defined as any type of object designed or constructed so that upon being propelled it will explode or ignite its area of impact. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture, possess, transport or use any Molotov cocktail or other firebomb . 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to possess all the items needed to manufacture Molotov cocktails or other firebombs other than on his or their premises. 
( Code 1959 , §15-29.1)  
Sec. 13-2013. - SHOESHINING ON STREETS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shine shoes on the streets of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §15-40)  
Sec. 13-2014. - THROWING DEBRIS FROM WINDOWS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in the City to throw, pitch, or otherwise cast out of a window or other opening above the first story of a building into the street or on the awning, roof, or top of any other building, a lighted cigarette, cigar or match, or any drinking cup, glass bottle, or other debris or refuse whatsoever. 
( Code 1959 , §15-47)  
Sec. 13-2015. - TOILET FACILITIES; USE BY SEX FOR WHICH NOT INTENDED. 
On public or on private property used by the public or patrons of a business establishment where separate toilet facilities are provided for the use of different sexes and such facilities are conspicuously labeled to give notice of the sex for which the facility is set apart, it shall be unlawful for a member of one sex to enter or use a facility provided for members of the opposite sex. Provided this section shall not be construed to prevent the inspection of toilet facilities by the owner or person in charge thereof or the designated agent of either, nor to prevent the performance of janitorial services therein by the person or persons designated to perform such services when members of the opposite sex are not present. 
( Code 1959 , §15-48)  
Sec. 13-2016. - OBSTRUCTING RAILROAD CROSSINGS. 
No railroad company or employee shall allow any passenger train involved in switching operations or the embarking or debarking of passengers to continuously block the railroad crossing at Cabarrus Street for a period exceeding ten (10) minutes. No other street crossing in the City shall be continuously blocked by any train for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes. 
( Code 1959 , §18-2; Ord. No. 1981-785, §2, 11-3-81; Ord. No. 1981-786, §1, 11-3-81; Ord. No. 1986-866, §1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1987-6, §1, 6-16-87; Ord. No. 1990-642, §§1, 2, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 1997-182, §1, 9-2-97) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate railroads and trains, G.S. 160A-195.  
Sec. 13-2017. - MASKS—DECLARATION OF EXERCISE OF POWERS. 
The Council expressly declares that public appearances, whether in motor vehicles or otherwise, of persons who are masked or hooded and unidentifiable, threaten the supremacy of the law and cannot be permitted in the City . The City herein exercises its police power to protect its citizens from intimidation, the public from crime by masked and hooded persons , and to give to its police the fullest opportunity to detect, apprehend and bring to justice, violators of the law. 
( Code 1959 , §15-26)  
Sec. 13-2018. - SAME—DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of sections 13-2017, 13-2019 and 13-2020 the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
(a)  The term mask includes any mask, device or hood whereby any portion of the face is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity of the wearer. 
(b)  The term public place includes all walks, alleys, streets , boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads, highways or other ways or thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by public authority; all grounds and buildings owned or leased by, maintained or operated by public authority; all buildings owned, leased or operated for the use of organizations enjoying any tax-exempt privilege as a charitable use. 
( Code 1959 , §15-27)  
Sec. 13-2019. - SAME—MASKED PUBLIC APPEARANCE PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person , while masked, to be or appear on or in any public place in the City . 
( Code 1959 , §15-28)  
Sec. 13-2020. - SAME—EXCEPTIONS. 
The following are exempted from the provisions of sections 13-2017 and 13-2019: 
(a)  All children under the age of seventeen (17). 
(b)  All workers while engaged in a work wherein a covering is worn for physical safety and protection against occupation hazards or because of the nature of the occupation, trade or profession. 
(c)  Persons while wearing traditional holiday costumes. 
(d)  Persons while engaged in theatrical productions or masquerade balls. 
(e)  Persons wearing gas masks prescribed in civil defense drills and exercises or emergencies. 
( Code 1959 , §15-29)  
Sec. 13-2021. - CROSS BURNING, INTIMIDATING THREATS OR EXHIBITIONS—DECLARATION OF EXERCISE OF POWER. 
All persons residing in the City are entitled to the equal protection of their lives and property . It is the purpose of the law to protect all, not only against physical violence but also against threats and intimidation. The City Council finds that there arises a threat to the good order and peace of the City in the use of certain signs and symbols for the purpose of intimidating certain people and groups of people. The City and its duly constituted authorities cannot permit persons , known or unknown, to issue either actual or implied threats against other persons in the City by exhibiting any sign or symbol in the form of a burning or flaming cross, or otherwise, for the purpose of intimidation. Persons in this City are and shall continue to be answerable only to the established law as enforced by the legally appointed officers . 
( Code 1959 , §15-8)  
Sec. 13-2022. - SAME—DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of sections 13-2021 through 13-2026 the term public place includes all walks, alleys, streets , boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads, highways or other ways or thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by public authority; all grounds and buildings owned, leased by, operated or maintained by public authority. 
( Code 1959 , §15-9)  
Sec. 13-2023. - SAME—CROSS BURNING PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to cause to be placed in a public place in the City a burning or flaming cross or any manner of exhibit in which a burning or flaming cross, real or simulated, is a whole or a part. 
( Code 1959 , §5-10)  
Sec. 13-2024. - SAME—CROSS BURNING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place or cause to be placed on the property of another in the City a burning or flaming cross or any manner of exhibit in which a burning or flaming cross, real or simulated, is a whole or a part, without first obtaining written permission of the owner or occupier of the premises so to do. 
( Code 1959 , §15-11)  
Sec. 13-2025. - SAME—PARADING WITH BURNING CROSS PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, march or parade (on foot, in or upon any vehicle, or otherwise) in any public place in the City while displaying any flaming or burning cross, real or simulated. 
( Code 1959 , §15-12)  
Sec. 13-2026. - SAME—INTIMIDATING EXHIBITS PROHIBITED. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed anywhere in the City any exhibit of any kind whatsoever with the intention of intimidating any person , to prevent them from doing any act which is lawful or to cause them to do any act which is unlawful. 
( Code 1959 , §15-13)  
Sec. 13-2027. - ENDURANCE CONTESTS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, advertise, promote or in any way participate in any marathon dance or walking contest, walkathon, or similar physical endurance contest or performance continuing or intended to continue for a period of more than eight (8) hours, whether or not an admission fee is charged, or a prize awarded to one or more participants for participation therein, within the corporate limits of the City . 
( Code 1959 , §15-18)  
Sec. 13-2028. - OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOLS. 
Fence required. In the interest of public safety and particularly the safety of children, every outdoor swimming pool (except commercial pools and pools operated by hotels or motels under constant surveillance) in the City heretofore or hereafter constructed having a depth of water of eighteen (18) inches or greater at its deepest point which are designed to utilize mechanical filtering systems shall be enclosed with a wire fence or other equivalent type barrier designed to minimize the possibility of young children and other unwary persons from entering the pool area unsupervised. The fence or barrier may enclose either the pool area only or the full property boundary area or any part of the property which includes the pool. The fence or barrier shall be designed to meet the following criteria: 
(a)  The fence or barrier shall be at least forty-eight (48) inches in height. 
(b)  Entrances through the fence or barrier shall be provided with self-closing gates which have self-latching mechanisms. 
(c)  Openings under and through a fence or barrier with the gate(s) closed shall be sized so that a four-and-one-half-inch diameter sphere cannot pass through the openings. 
(d)  Shrubbery or plantings are not acceptable as a fence or barrier. 
(e)  A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. No person in possession of land in the City , either as owner , purchaser, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool shall fail to provide and maintain such barrier as herein provided. 
( Code 1959 , §7-116; Ord. No. 1983-245-TC-205, §49, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1992-898, §1, 1-7-92) 
Editor's note: This section was formerly numbered 7-4161.  
Sec. 13-2029. - BOWS AND ARROWS. 
(a)  The discharge of any bow, slingshot, crossbow or other such device shall be prohibited within the City limits unless carried out under the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  No arrow or other missile discharged in the City shall be tipped with a broadhead or hunting point. Only target or field points may be used. 
(2)  No arrow or other missile shall be discharged on a lot located in a zoning classification allowing residences unless the lot is at least twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet in size. 
(3)  Any arrow or other missile discharged shall only be aimed at a target backed by a backstop measuring at least six (6) feet high and six (6) feet wide and of sufficient thickness to stop the passage of the arrow or other missile. In no event shall the thickness of the backstop be less than one (1) inch. If the lot upon which the shooting takes place contains a structure, any backstop must either be a part of the structure or else located between the user and the structure. 
(4)  Anyone under the age of sixteen (16) years may use the implements regulated by this section only when supervised by someone at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the discharge of such devices at archery ranges approved by a written permit issued by the Raleigh Police Department. The Raleigh Police Department shall establish and promulgate regulations for approving such ranges within ninety (90) days from the adoption of this section. A copy of the regulations relating to archery ranges shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk. No archery range shall be approved in an area where such use is prohibited by the City's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1989-461, §1, 11-21-89)  
Sec. 13-2030. - ELECTRIC FENCES. 
The placement or maintenance of electrically-charged fences, barriers, partitions, or obstructions that persons or animals might come in contact with is unlawful unless the fence is erected pursuant to a fence permit, is approved by the Underwriters Laboratory or any other testing laboratory approved by the State of North Carolina, and carries a current which does not exceed one ampere in strength. 
(Ord. No. 1991-831, §1, 8-6-91)  
Sec. 13-2031. - PEDESTRIAN INTERFERENCE. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Aggressively beg or panhandle is defined as begging which intimidates another person into giving money or goods. 
(2)  Beg or panhandle means the act of in-person solicitation for an immediate donation of money or goods from passers-by whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other means. 
(3)  Obstruct pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized pursuant to the City's picketing and parade ordinances and regulations are exempt from the coverage of this ordinance. 
(4)  Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(b)  [Provisions.] 
A Person is guilty of pedestrian interference if, in a public place, that person intentionally obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic or if that person aggressively begs. 
(c)  Where and when prohibited. 
All begging and panhandling is prohibited at the following locations and times: 
a.  No person shall beg or panhandle between the hours of sunset and sunrise, but in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m. No person shall beg or panhandle in a school zone while students are beginning or ending the school day. 
b.  No person shall beg or panhandle in the following areas: 
(1)  Within twenty (20) feet of any bus stop, train station or taxi zone. 
(2)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any automated teller machine or any other machine at which money is dispensed to the public. 
(3)  Within one hundred (100) feet of the entrance to any financial institution which is open for business. 
(4)  Within twenty (20) feet of any commercial establishment which is open for business. 
(5)  Within twenty (20) feet of any duly permitted outdoor dining area during hours of operation. 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of the entrance to any residence or residential building. 
c.  No person shall beg or panhandle in the following manner: 
(1)  While under the influence of alcohol, illegal drug or prescription medication unless prescribed by a licensed physician. 
(2)  By coming within three (3) feet of the person being approached unless that person has clearly indicated a desire to make a donation. 
(3)  By blocking the path of any person along a sidewalk or street . 
(4)  By following the person who has been asked for a donation after that person has either declined the request or walked away. 
(5)  By using profane or abusive language during the request for a donation or after a donation has been refused. 
(6)  By approaching an individual or individuals for the purpose of begging or panhandling in a group of three (3) or more. 
(7)  By begging or panhandling in a manner which uses any statement, gesture or any other form of communication which a reasonable person would perceive as a threat. 
(8)  By using false or misleading information such as stating that the donation is needed to meet a specific need which does not exist, is already met, or the requestor already possesses the funds necessary to meet the stated need. 
(9)  By indicating that the requestor suffers from a physical or mental disability when the person making the request does not suffer from that disability. 
(d)  [Penalty.] 
Pedestrian interference is a misdemeanor which may be punished according to the North Carolina General Statutes with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 1994-495, §1, 10-19-94; Ord. No. 2001-970, §1, 4-3-01; Ord. No. 2011-836, §§2, 3, 2-1-11, eff. 3-18-11; Ord. No. 2012-29, §2, 3-20-12, eff. 3-25-12)  
Sec. 13-2032. - TRESPASS IN/ON A MOTORIZED VEHICLE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or on a motorized vehicle of another after that person has been notified not to enter or remain there by the owner, by a person in charge of the motorized vehicle, or by another authorized person. In accordance with section 14-1005(a) of this Code, violation of this section is a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 2018-881, §1, 10-2-18 )  
CHAPTER 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS 
 
Sec. 13-3001. - DISORDERLY HOUSES; REFUSAL TO ADMIT OFFICER. 
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any disorderly house to refuse to open doors and give entrance to any officer of the City or member of the police, demanding admission for the purpose of suppressing disorderly conduct therein. 
( Code 1959 , §15-16) 
State law reference: Prostitution offenses, G.S. 14-204 et seq.  
Sec. 13-3002. - EXPOSURE OF THE FEMALE BODY TO THE VIEW OF MINORS. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any female over age fourteen (14) or any other physically developed female to expose her breasts in such manner that they might be seen from, in or at any street or highway or place of entertainment or place of public assembly or any other public place of any kind whatsoever where any minor under the age of eighteen (18) is present or admitted or not prohibited from being present. 
(b)  The term expose her breasts , as used herein, is defined as the revealing of the female breast or breasts with less than a fully opaque covering on any portion thereof lower than the top of any part of the areola. 
( Code 1959 , §15-38.1)  
Sec. 13-3003. - EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE PROHIBITED. 
(a)  Ringelmann Chart adopted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person , firm or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke for periods longer than four (4) minutes out of any period of thirty (30) minutes from any source whatever of a density equal to or greater than that density described as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart published by U.S. Bureau of Mines, the standards of which are hereby fully adopted by the enactment of this section. The emission of such dense smoke is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Method of measurement. 
Use of the Ringelmann Chart will be made by placing it at such distance from the observer that the squares appear as even shades of coloring or when no white spaces between the lines are visible. Comparison of the smoke under observation with the various shades of the chart will then indicate the density of the smoke. Observation distances shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet and no more than one-quarter (¼) mile from the smoke observed. 
( Code 1959 , §15-40.1; Ord. No. 1989-390-TC-340, §11, 6-20-89) 
State law reference: Authority to regulate air pollutants, G.S. 160A-185.  
Sec. 13-3004. - SMOKING IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES AND REGULATION OF VENDING MACHINES. 
(a)  Generally. 
No person shall make or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or use any spark, flame or fire-producing device not specially authorized for use in such place by the Fire Marshal, in any of the following places: 
(1)  Elevators: 
Elevators, regardless of capacity, in any public place. 
(2)  Convention Center complex. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke inside of buildings in the Convention Center complex during concerts, stage shows, and athletic contests. 
(3)  Buses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person , while occupying any bus operating upon the streets of the City , to engage in smoking tobacco or any other substance in any form, or to have in his possession while on any such bus any lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette. 
(4)  Theatres or public halls. 
It shall be unlawful to smoke within any theatre or public hall except as provided in §28.3 of the Fire Prevention Code as incorporated by reference into this Code. 
(5)  Municipal complex. 
It shall be unlawful to smoke within the confines of the City Council Chamber (room 201) and in room 203, room 237 and room 305 of the new municipal building. 
(b)  Placarding required. 
Every person , or his agent, having control of premises upon which smoking or the carrying of lighted objects is prohibited by or under the authority of this section, shall conspicuously display upon the premises signs reading "SMOKING PROHIBITED BY LAW" or "NO SMOKING." Such signs must be of a standard size and lettering approved by the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal shall also have the authority to designate the location of the signs. 
(c)  Smoking signage. 
All restaurants within the City of Raleigh shall post the signs required by this subsection. Each sign required by this subsection shall be a minimum of eleven (11) inches by nine (9) inches in size with all capital letters at least one inch in height. The letters shall be white on a dark background or dark on a white background. The signs shall be prominently displayed within view of the main entrance for patrons into the restaurant. 
(1)  A restaurant that lacks a nonsmoking section comprising twenty-five (25) per cent or more of a restaurant's capacity for patron seating shall display a sign stating "WE DO NOT PROVIDE A NONSMOKING SECTION." 
(2)  A restaurant that provides a nonsmoking section comprising at least twenty-five (25) per cent but less than one hundred (100) per cent of the total public seating capacity shall display a sign stating "NONSMOKING SECTION AVAILABLE." The nonsmoking section may be divided into separate areas, but each area shall contain at least twenty-five (25) per cent of the total required number of nonsmoking seats. If this requirement is not satisfied, the restaurant does not contain a nonsmoking area pursuant to this subsection. A restaurant meeting these requirements shall prominently display at least one sign in each nonsmoking area stating "NONSMOKING AREA" OR "NO SMOKING IN THIS AREA" and including the international no smoking symbol. 
(3)  A restaurant that permits no smoking in the patron seating area shall display a sign stating "NO SMOKING." 
(4)  If a restaurant which meets the requirement for having a nonsmoking area employs a greeter to seat patrons, that greeter shall ask each party before seating it as to its preference for the smoking or nonsmoking section. 
(d)  Vending machines. 
Tobacco products may be sold at retail through vending machines only under the conditions and at the locations named below: 
(1)  In factories, businesses, offices, or other places not open to the public or where persons under the age of eighteen (18) are not permitted access. 
(2)  A single vending machine may not be used to sell other commodities in combination with tobacco products. 
Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not longer than thirty (30) days. 
( Code 1959 , §15-41; Ord. No. 1988-167, §3, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 1990-514, §1, 3-20-90; Ord. No. 1990-534, §1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1990-613, §1, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 1991-848, §§1, 2, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 1995-577, §§1, 2, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 2008-451, §1, 9-2-08) 
Editor's note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 1991-848, adopted Sept. 17, 1991, added §13-3004(d), pertaining to vending machines for tobacco products. §5 of Ord. No. 1991-848 provided that said provisions would become effective on April 1, 1992. 
Cross references: Fire prevention code adopted by reference, §5-2031; public transit generally, Part II, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 13-3005. - FOOD, DRINK AND AUDIO EQUIPMENT ON BUSES. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any bus operating upon the streets of the City to eat, drink, or possess open containers of food or drink, or to operate radios or other audio equipment. Provided, however, that such audio equipment may be used with earphones so that they are inaudible to persons not having such earphones. 
(b)  The word "bus," as used in this section and in §13-3004, shall not include any bus operating in interstate commerce or operating between any two (2) or more municipalities in the State . 
( Code 1959 , §15-42; Ord. No. 1986-870, §1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1988-167, §2, 5-3-88) 
Cross reference: Public transit generally, Part 11, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 13-3006. - MASSAGE OF PRIVATE PARTS OF ANOTHER FOR HIRE. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or offer to massage the private parts of another for hire. "Massage" means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or otherwise, by hand or mechanical device used manually. "Private parts" means the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva or vaginal area. The provisions of this section shall not apply to licensed medical practitioners, registered nurses, practical nurses, osteopaths or chiropractors, or persons operating at their directions, in connection with the practice of medicine, chiropractic, or osteopathy. 
( Code 1959 , §15-50) 
Cross reference: Massage regulations and prohibitions, §12-2131 et seq.  
Sec. 13-3007. - OBSCENE WRITINGS AND DEVICES. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, draw, carve or cut any obscene word, letters or device in any public place. 
( Code 1959 , §15-33)  
Sec. 13-3008. - PROSTITUTION. 
As authorized by the provisions of G.S. 14-208, as amended, the City Council hereby finds that prostitution is a serious problem with the City and accordingly any person found guilty of prostitution shall be sentenced as permitted under G.S. 14-208. 
(Ord. No. 2003-412, 3-18-03) 
Editor's note: Prior to the reenactment of §13-3008 by Ord. No. 2003-412, §13-3008, relating to tanyards and slaughter houses, derived from Code 1959 , §12-4, was repealed by §2 of Ord. No. 1991-879E-TC-388, adopted Nov. 19, 1991.  
Sec. 13-3009. - TRANSPORTING MEAT PRODUCTS. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any street or to park on any street or at any filling stations, parking lot, or other place within the City any vehicle containing wet meat or meat products, seafood or seafood products unless the vehicle is so constructed or equipped as to prevent leakage or seepage of the water or waste therefrom or unless the same is free from noxious odors. 
( Code 1959 , §12-5)  
Sec. 13-3010. - TRANSPORTING SWILL, ETC. 
No swill, slops, garbage, bones, offal, kitchen waste or refuse shall be carried through the streets of the City except in watertight metal containers with tight-fitting covers. 
( Code 1959 , §11-8)  
Sec. 13-3011. - BARBED WIRE. 
(a)  The use of barbed wire in the City of Raleigh is prohibited below a point five (5) feet above ground level. Barbed wire is any wire or strand of wire armed with barbs or sharp points. No barbed wire shall be installed, except pursuant to these regulations. All nonconforming existing barbed wire shall be removed within one (1) year after initial application of this ordinance. [2] 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, barbed wire may be used in any application at a penal institution so long as any wire located below the seven-foot level is at least fifteen (15) feet from the closest public right-of-way. Barbed wire may also be used in agricultural applications for the enclosure of livestock and livestock holding and grazing areas so long as the wire is located at least fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the closest street pavement or, if the street is curbed and guttered, fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb. 
(c)  The use of barbed wire on any lot containing one (1) or more dwellings, congregate care, or congregate living structures is prohibited in the City of Raleigh and shall not be installed after application of this ordinance.* All nonconforming existing barbed wire shall be removed within one (1) year after initial application of this ordinance. [3] 
(Ord. No. 1985-664, §1, 11-5-85; Ord. No. 1986-760, §1, 4-1-86; Ord. No. 1987-951, §1, 4-7-87; Ord. No. 1998-305, §§1, 2, 4-7-98) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note: This provision first became applicable on November 5, 1985, Ord. No. 1985-664. 

--- (3) --- 
Editor's note: This provision first became applicable on April 7, 1998, Ord. No. 1998-305. 
 
Sec. 13-3012. - SMOKING IN ELEVATORS. 
It shall be unlawful to smoke in elevators, regardless of capacity, in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1988-152, §1, 4-19-88)  
Sec. 13-3013. - URINATING OR DEFECATING ON CITY PROPERTY OR IN PUBLIC VIEW. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any City right-of -way, street, sidewalk, park, or other City building or facility or to urinate or defecate outdoors in view of the public on any property unless such urination or defecation is into an approved toilet facility provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1988-270, §2, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 2011-837, §1, 2-1-11)  
Sec. 13-3014. - NUISANCE ON PROPERTY. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to maintain on their property or property controlled by them a nuisance as defined in §12-6002(15) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1991-747, §4, 3-19-91)  
Sec. 13-3015. - STREET ADDRESS. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner , or his designated agent, of each and every residence , business, or building to fail to properly display unit numbers that are visible from the street in compliance with the street numbering system established by the City . 
(Ord. No. 1991-742, §1, 3-5-91)  
Sec. 13-3016. - REGULATION OF SMOKING. 
(a)  Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be construed as defined in this subsection: 
(1)  Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit- or non-profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
(2)  Child care facility means any licensed nursery, day care center, preschool, or other facility engaged in the practice of providing care for children. 
(3)  Common work area means an area within a place of employment where two (2) or more people perform job-related tasks that is not separated by solid walls from floor to ceiling on all sides. 
(4)  Designated smoking area means an enclosed area where smoking is permitted, or an area outside of facilities, that is identified by proper signage. 
(5)  Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
(6)  Eating establishment means an establishment engaged in the business of regularly and customarily selling food, primarily to be eaten on the premises. Eating establishments shall include businesses that are referred to as restaurants, cafeterias, or cafes. Eating establishments shall also include lunch stands, grills, snack bars, fast-food businesses, and other establishments, such as drugstores, which have a lunch counter or other section where food is sold to be eaten on the premises. 
(7)  Educational facility means any facility that is used for the principal purpose of providing instruction or training in a trade, craft, business skill; or athletic or sports activity; or of providing child care; or primary, secondary, or higher education. 
(8)  Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services. 
(9)  Employer means any person , business, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of one or more individual persons . 
(10)  Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, or similar structures. 
(11)  Health care facility means any facility associated with the rendition of health care, including, but not limited to, laboratories, hospitals, public and private health care facilities. 
(12)  Nonsmoking area means an area of an eating establishment where smoking is prohibited. 
(13)  Overnight or emergency shelter means any facility providing temporary shelter for homeless or transient individuals. 
(14)  Place of employment means any enclosed area which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference rooms and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. 
a.  A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a licensed child care facility, licensed health care facility, or domiciliary home. 
b.  The dining area of an eating establishment is not a "place of employment." 
(15)  Public place means any enclosed area in which the public is permitted. 
(16)  Grounds means an unenclosed area owned, leased, or occupied by local government. 
(17)  Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
(18)  Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, or other tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
(19)  Sports facility means an enclosed sports facility, including, but not limited to, sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice skating rinks, where members of the general public assemble either to engage in or witness physical exercise or events. 
(20)  Art/entertainment facility includes but is not limited to "theaters," meaning any enclosed facility engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures, plays or performances to an audience; concert halls, art galleries, auditoriums, indoor recreational areas, libraries, and museums. 
(21)  Domiciliary home means a long-term care facility licensed under that name and classification by the Division of Facility Services of the North Carolina Department of Human Resources. 
(b)  Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places and Grounds. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided, smoking shall be prohibited within the following public places and grounds : 
a.  Art/entertainment facilities ; 
b.  Enclosed shopping malls; 
c.  Educational facilities ; 
d.  Elevators; 
e.  Health care facilities; 
f.  Pharmacies; 
g.  Public transportation vehicles; 
h.  Restrooms; and 
i.  Sports facilities . 
j.  All City parks and greenways and structures associated with parks and greenways except that smoking shall be permitted in all parks and greenway areas specifically delineated as automobile parking areas. 
k.  Within twenty-five (25) feet of any boarding platform or area at a transit facility. A transit facility includes but is not limited to Moore Square Station and other bus stops on public or private property where two (2) or more buses meet to allow the convenient transfer of passengers. 
(2)  Clear and conspicuous signs shall be posted in every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this section. 
(c)  Regulation of Smoking in Places of Employment. 
Employers shall make reasonable provisions for smokefree air for nonsmoking employees . Each employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment as a nonsmoking place of employment . Each employer having a place of employment located within the City of Raleigh shall adopt a written policy related to smoking and shall clearly designate smoking areas by appropriate signage in accordance with subsection (k) of this section. Each employer shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy to any present or prospective employee upon request. 
(d)  Regulation of Smoking in Public Places of Businesses and Retail Establishments. 
(1)  Public places in each business , retail service establishment and retail store shall be designated, by the owner or operator, as nonsmoking or smoking areas. Smoking is not permitted in designated nonsmoking areas . 
(2)  Clear and conspicuous signage shall be posted at the entrance to each business , retail service establishment and retail store to alert the public as to the designation made. 
(e)  Regulation of Smoking in Eating Establishments. 
(1)  All eating establishments with a seating capacity of thirty (30) or more patrons shall designate nonsmoking areas . The seating capacity of any bar or lounge located within the dining area of an eating establishment shall be included in the calculation of the total capacity of the eating establishment . 
a.  Eating establishments with a seating capacity of thirty (30) or more patrons shall have posted a conspicuous sign or signs clearly stating that a nonsmoking area is available in accordance with subsection (k) of this section. 
b.  The nonsmoking area shall be separate and contiguous, containing at all times one-third or more of the seating capacity of the dining area . 
(2)  Eating establishments with a seating capacity of fewer than thirty (30) patrons shall designate the entire facility as either smoking or nonsmoking and post signage to that effect at the patron entrance. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner , operator, manager or other person who controls any eating establishment described in this section may declare the entire eating establishment as a nonsmoking eating establishment . 
(f)  Regulation of Smoking in Domiciliary Homes. 
Domiciliary homes may permit smoking in common lounge areas or in private residential quarters so long as similar nonsmoking common facilities are available and so long as nonsmoking private residential quarters are provided if desired by any residents. 
(g)  Regulation of Smoking in Retail Tobacco Stores. 
Smoking is permitted in retail tobacco stores when related to the testing and sale of tobacco products. 
(h)  Regulation of Smoking in Overnight and Emergency Shelters. 
Smoking is prohibited in overnight and emergency shelters except in designated smoking areas. Designated smoking areas may be established provided that they are separate from sleeping quarters. 
(i)  Regulation of Smoking in Bowling Facilities. 
No smoking shall be allowed within any area which is less than twenty (20) feet from the foul line of any bowling lane. No smoking shall be allowed in any restroom facility located in a bowling facility. Smoking may be permitted in any other part of a bowling facility so long as one-third of the seats in any dining facility and one-third of the spectator seating is designated as a nonsmoking area . The nonsmoking areas shall be separate and contiguous. 
(j)  Exclusions. 
The following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section: 
(1)  Private residences . 
(2)  Eating establishments (or portion thereof), hotel rooms, conference or meeting rooms, and public transportation vehicles while these places are being rented for private functions. 
(3)  State and Federal facilities. 
(k)  Signage. 
(1)  "No smoking," or other signs relating to an establishment's smoking policy, whichever are appropriate, shall have letters of not less than one inch in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). 
(2)  Signs shall be conspicuously posted by the owner , operator, or manager of a regulated place or building in a position clearly visible on entry into every building, and within facilities, where smoking is regulated. 
(3)  No person shall remove or deface any placard required to be erected by or under the authority of this section. 
(l)  Enforcement. 
The proprietor, employer , or other person in charge of a public place or place of employment where smoking is regulated shall make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in nonsmoking areas . 
(m)  Administration. 
Anyone in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and punished by a penalty not greater than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(n)  Other Applicable Laws. 
This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1992-934, §1, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 1992-998, §§1, 2, 6-16-92; Ord. No. 1992-7, §1, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 1992-44, §§1, 2, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 1992-44, §§1, 2, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 1993-196, §1, 6-1-93; Ord. No. 2007-184, §1, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 2011-834, §§1, 3, 2-1-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. 2012-120, §1, 11-6-12, eff. 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2019-911, §§1, 2, 1-8-19 )  
Sec. 13-3017. - NUISANCE PARTY. 
(a)  Definition. 
A nuisance party is a party or other social gathering conducted in the City and which, by reason of the conduct of those persons in attendance, results in any one (1) or more of the following conditions or occurrences: unlawful public possession or consumption of alcohol, unlawful drunken and disruptive conduct; public urination or defecation; the unlawful sale, furnishing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages; the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or private property; the unlawful destruction of public or private property; the generation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic caused by those invited to or allowed to attend which obstructs the free flow of residential traffic or interferes with the ability to provide emergency services; excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the repose of the neighborhood; public disturbances, brawls, fights or quarrels; or any other activity resulting in conditions that annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of the neighboring residents, or results in any obscene conduct, or results in any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure by persons at the gathering. 
(b)  Any person being the owner, occupant, tenant, or otherwise having any possessory control of any degree of any premises who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites, suffers, permits, or continues to allow a gathering to continue which is or becomes a nuisance as described in subsection (a) above is in violation of this section and may be punished by any of the criminal or civil enforcement penalties available to municipalities. Any person who remains in attendance at a nuisance party after being directed by an officer to leave is also in violation of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to gathering held at locations holding valid entertainment center permits or any other gathering authorized by this Code. 
(d)  Civil penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The Police Department is authorized to issue civil penalty citations to enforce this Section. Each calendar day on which a continuing violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation under this subsection. For each subsequent violation occurring within twelve (12) months of any other violation, the violator shall be subject to a civil penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within thirty (30) days after it is assessed, the City may recover the penalty, together with all costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. 
(e)  Appeal of civil penalties: Any person issued a civil penalty under the provisions of this section may appeal by filing an appeal in writing with the Police Department within ten (10) calendar days after the civil penalty is issued. The written appeal shall state all reasons that the civil penalty was wrongly applied and shall include all supporting documentation that the appellant contends supports the appeal. If a person files a written appeal within the time provided in this section, the penalty being appealed shall be stayed pending the decision of the Chief or arbitrator. Unless the Chief of Police, or the delegate of the Chief of Police, decides to allow the requested relief based on the appeal request, the Chief of Police shall send each appeal request to arbitration. The Chief of Police shall select an arbitrator other than an employee of the City of Raleigh. The arbitration shall be conducted, to the extent practicable, in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules for Court-Ordered Arbitration in North Carolina. The arbitrator shall be paid a fee equal to the maximum fee specified in such Rules. The arbitrator shall issue a written determination, within a reasonable time, stating whether the disputed civil penalty will be approved without change or modified or reversed. 
All decisions of the Chief of Police and arbitrator shall be served on the petitioner. 
(f)  Injunctive and other equitable relief: This section may be enforced by injunction or any appropriate equitable remedy. The institution of an action for injunctive or equitable relief shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this section. 
(g)  Criminal penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation under this subsection. 
(h)  This section may be enforced by any one, all, or a combination of the remedies set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 2000-848, §1, 7-18-00; Ord. No. 2008-415A, §1, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 2009-583, §1, 5-19-09, eff. 7-1-09)  
Sec. 13-3018. - SALE OF DRUG STEM INTENDED FOR ILLEGAL DRUG USE. 
(a)  It is a violation of this section for any person or retail establishment to sell, or possess with intent to sell, a drug stem knowing that it will be used to ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce a controlled substance defined in G.S. 90-86 et seq. into the human body. 
(b)  A drug stem is any object that facilitates the ingestion or inhalation of crack cocaine, crank methamphetamine or any other controlled substance defined by the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act. A drug stem is further defined as a two (2) to six (6) inch long tube, one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch to three-quarter (¾) inch in diameter made of glass, metal, ceramic or any other material. Drug stems include, but are not limited to, glass vials or tubes which may contain novelty items of insignificant value or may contain items that are not packaged that way in the normal course of business. 
(c)  In determining whether an item is a drug stem the following factors may considered along with any other evidence: 
(1)  The proximity of the drug stem to a controlled substance. 
(2)  The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the drug stem. 
(3)  The proximity of the drug stem to other drug paraphernalia as defined by the North Carolina Drug Paraphernalia Act. 
(4)  Instructions provided with the drug stem concerning its use. 
(5)  Advertising concerning its use. 
(6)  The manner in which it is displayed for sale. 
(7)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the drug stem in the community. 
(Ord. No. 2007-327, §1, 11-20-07)  
Sec. 13-3019. - USE OF PINE STRAW MULCH. 
No pine straw mulch shall be placed, kept, or stored within ten (10) feet of buildings with combustible exterior construction. This provision shall not apply to one and two family dwellings as defined in Section R101.2 of the North Carolina Residential Building Code, as the same may be amended, nor shall it apply to pine straw falling from trees located on the same parcel as the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2010-732, §1, 5-4-10, eff. 12-1-10)  
CHAPTER 4. - REGULATION OF SECURITY AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note: Former Ch. 4 to Pt. 13, §§13-4001—13-4003, which pertained to regulation of security alarm systems , was repealed by §1 of Ord. No. 2004-677, adopted July 20, 2004. §2 of the ordinance enacted a new Ch. 4, §§13-4001—13-4011, to read as herein set out. The repealed provisions derived from Ord. No. 2004-650, §1, adopted June 1, 2004. 
Cross references: Police protection, §5-1001 et seq. ; Fire Department, §5-2001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-4001. - PURPOSE. 
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness and proper utilization of alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms which may unduly divert police and fire resources. 
This chapter governs systems intended to summon law enforcement or other public safety response, establishes fees, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4002. - DEFINITIONS. 
[As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:] 
Alarm means any electronic or mechanical device which emits any signal, whether electronic, audible, silent or recorded, and which is designed, used, or intended for the detection of an unauthorized intrusion or attempted intrusion into a building, structure or premises to signal an actual or attempted robbery; or for the detection of fire or products of combustion to signal a fire or initiate a response for medical assistance. 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the City of Raleigh to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts for the City . 
Alarm agent means any person who is employed by an alarm company either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, testing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing in any building, structure, or facility any alarm system, excluding any person who installs an alarm system in a home wherein that person personally resides. 
Alarm company means the business, by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an alarm site. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term "alarm company" shall not mean a landlord leasing alarm sites to tenants. All alarm companies operating within the jurisdiction of the City of Raleigh shall hold a current alarm systems business license issued by the North Carolina Alarm Systems Licensing Board. 
Alarm dispatch request means a notification to a law enforcement agency or public safety agency that an alarm, either manual or automatic has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
Alarm site means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to discourage crime and summon the Raleigh Police Department or other public safety agency. Alarm system does not include: (1) an alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site, and (2) an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does not have a sounding device which can be heard from the exterior of the alarm site. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who (which) uses or is in control of any alarm system at its alarm site. In the case of a tenancy, the tenant shall be considered the sole alarm user at the alarm site. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted by the municipality or law enforcement agency for the purpose of educating alarm users about the problems created by false alarms and responsible use and operation of alarm systems. 
Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a law enforcement agency. 
Cancellation is the process by which an alarm company providing monitoring verifies with the alarm user or responsible party that a false dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement or public safety agency response. 
Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm company begins monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm company. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening situation or a crime in progress requiring law enforcement response. 
False alarm means an alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency/public safety agency, or an alarm signal eliciting a police response, when a situation requiring an immediate response does not in fact exist and the responding officer/agent finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense or fire after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. An alarm will not be considered false if it is determined that the alarm was caused by: 
(1)  A natural or man-made catastrophe, or other "Act of God" such as tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, or other similarly violent conditions. 
(2)  Vandalism causing physical damage to the property. 
(3)  Attempted entry of a location causing visible, physical, or other evidence of damage to the location which has caused the alarm to sound. 
(4)  Severe weather or failure of electrical power not caused by subscriber. 
(5)  The test of a local alarm system by an authorized alarm agent or alarm company employee who is present at the premise inspecting, servicing, repairing, or installing the alarm. 
An alarm dispatch request which is cancelled by the alarm company prior to the time the responding officer/agent reaches the alarm site shall not be considered a false alarm dispatch. 
Fire department includes members of the Raleigh Fire Department. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Keypad means a device that allows control of an alarm system by the manual entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters. 
Law enforcement authority means the chief of police, sheriff, or other authorized representative certified as a law enforcement officer and maintaining jurisdiction within the City of Raleigh. 
Local alarm system means any alarm system that annunciates an alarm only by an internal or external audio device. 
Monitoring means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the purpose of summoning law enforcement response to the alarm site. 
One plus duress alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (Normal code = 1234 One Plus Duress Code = 1235). 
Panic means a silent or audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
Public safety agency includes the police and fire department. 
Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
Verify means an attempt, by the alarm company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
Zones are subdivisions into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4003. - ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES. 
Alarm contracted by individual tenant: 
(1)  For purposes of enforcing this article against an individual residential unit, the tenant is responsible for false alarms emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. 
(2)  Each apartment unit shall be considered an alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4004. - DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER. 
(a)  An alarm user shall : 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms, and 
(2)  Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when notified by the municipality to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises, and 
(3)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated (or fifteen (15) minutes for systems operating under Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. Standards 365 or 609). 
(c)  An alarm user shall have their alarm company inspect the alarm system after two (2) false alarms within a one (1) year period. The alarm administrator may waive an inspection requirement if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. After four (4) false alarms within a one (1) year period the alarm user must have a licensed alarm company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate. 
(d)  An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(e)  An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
(f)  Alarm users shall not use one plus duress alarms. Alarm companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress prior to enactment of this chapter. However, upon enactment of this chapter when a takeover or conversion occurs the alarm user must remove the one plus alarm capability from such alarm system. 
(g)  Upon enactment of this chapter the alarm user shall not permit the installation of a device activating a hold-up alarm which is a single action non-recessed button. An alarm user must remove all single action non-recessed buttons when a takeover or conversion occurs. 
(h)  The alarm user shall review the customer false alarm prevention checklist provided by the alarm administrator or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator. 
(i)  An alarm user who is having an alarm system monitored shall : 
(1)  Receive training from the alarm company on the proper use of the alarm system prior to the alarm user authorizing the alarm company to request the dispatch of law enforcement and insure that training is provided to all of the alarm user's employees; 
(2)  Confirm with the alarm company and/or monitoring company that the telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator are being used by the alarm company and/or monitoring company; 
(3)  Direct the alarm company and/or monitoring company to verify every alarm signal, except a duress and holdup alarm activation, before requesting a law enforcement or public safety response to an alarm system signal; 
(4)  Communicate with the alarm company and/or monitoring company to assure that the alarm dispatch requests to the municipality are being provided in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(5)  Communicate with the alarm company and/or monitoring company to assure that cancellations to the municipality are in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(6)  Shall be adequately trained as to the proper use of the duress or holdup alarm if so equipped. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4005. - DUTIES OF THE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. 
(a)  The alarm administrator shall : 
(1)  Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; 
(2)  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests; 
(3)  Maintain proper billing and collection records; and 
(4)  Maintain reports on the number of false alarms and review same to determine program effectiveness. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record such information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information. This information may be relayed by the responding officer at the time of clearance to law enforcement and fire dispatchers, who will then record said information on the call record. 
(1)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(2)  Date and time alarm dispatch request was received; 
(3)  Date and time of fire or law enforcement officer arrival at the alarm site; 
(4)  Zone description if available; 
(5)  Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any; 
(6)  Identification of the responsible alarm company; 
(7)  Whether unable to locate the address, and/or ; 
(8)  Cause of alarm, if known; 
(9)  Identification of the responding officer/agent; 
(10)  Identification of the alarm user/account holder; 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. Options include, but are not limited to, the responding officer/agent leaving a notice at the alarm site. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of law enforcement/fire response to the false alarm; 
(2)  The identification number of the responding law enforcement officer or public safety agent, and; 
(3)  A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and resulting fines. 
(d)  If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user to review the circumstances of each false alarm. 
(e)  The alarm administrator shall oversee the creation and implementation of an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of alarm companies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to operate their alarm systems without generating false alarms. 
(f)  The alarm administrator shall request from the North Carolina Alarm Systems Licensing Board a complete database of all alarm companies licensed in North Carolina and will request updates as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4006. - FINES. 
(a)  An alarm user shall be subject to fines, warnings and suspension depending on the number of false alarms emitted from an alarm system within a twelve (12) month period beginning on July 1 of each year based upon the following schedule: 
No. of False Alarms 	Fines 
1 ..... 	Written warning 
2 ..... 	$50.00 
3—5 ..... 	$100.00 
6—7 ..... 	$200.00 
8—9 ..... 	$300.00 
10 or more ..... 	$500.00 each 
 
(b)  If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of fines and no fines will be assessed. 
(c)  Payments must be received within thirty (30) days or a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late fee will be added to the account. 
(d)  Failure to pay civil penalties within sixty (60) days may result in the suspension of police or public safety response to the alarm user because of an alarm activation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4007. - NOTIFICATION. 
(a)  The alarm administrator shall have the alarm user notified in writing after the first and each subsequent false alarm. The notification shall include: 
(1)  The amount of the fines for each false alarm, 
(2)  The fact that response may be suspended after the eighth false alarm, and 
(3)  A description of the appeal procedure available to the alarm user. 
(b)  The alarm administrator will have the alarm user notified that response may be suspended if fines are not paid within sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4008. - APPEALS. 
(a)  An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a fine or suspension of response to the alarm administrator. The filing of an appeal with the alarm administrator stays the assessment of the fine or suspension until the alarm administrator makes a final decision. 
(1)  The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the alarm administrator by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of notification of a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4009. - REINSTATEMENT. 
(a)  A person whose alarm has been suspended may have alarm response reinstated by the alarm administrator if the person has abided by the following: 
(1)  Pays or otherwise resolves all fines; and 
(2)  Submits a certification stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired, if necessary, by the alarm company; and 
(3)  Certifies that the user is educated about how to use the system correctly. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4010. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the civil penalties set forth. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a non-criminal violation and shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to G.S. 14-4 or section 14-1005(a) of this Code. 
(b)  If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within one hundred eighty (180) days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the general court of justice of Wake County for recovery of the penalty. Any sums recovered shall be used to carry out the purposes and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
Sec. 13-4011. - [SEVERABILITY.] 
(a)  All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict, except if there is conflict with any provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by the City of Raleigh then the Fire Prevention Code will prevail. 
(b)  City ordinance 5-2031 shall be modified to read "It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or aid or abet in turning in any false alarm in the City . A false alarm reported by an alarm system as defined at 13-4002, is subject to the provision of Chapter 4 of Part 13 of the Code of Ordinances and is not a violation of this section." 
(c)  If this ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate effect and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
(d)  This ordinance shall become effective September 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 2004-677, §2, 7-20-04)  
CHAPTER 5. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State law references: G.S. Chapter 113A Article 4 (Pollution Control Act); G.S. Chapter 143 Article 21 (Water and Air Resources); Emission of pollutants and contaminants, G.S. 160A-185; Raleigh City Charter §2.14(50); 1989 Session Law, Chapter 1043 (Authorizes City of Raleigh to regulate stormwater). 
 
Sec. 13-5001. - TITLE. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Raleigh's "Illicit Discharge Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95)  
Sec. 13-5002. - PURPOSES. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted for the purposes of: 
(1)  Protecting the public health, safety and welfare by controlling the discharge of pollutants into the stormwater conveyance system; 
(2)  Promoting activities directed toward the maintenance and improvement of surface and ground water quality; 
(3)  Satisfying the requirements imposed upon the City of Raleigh under its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS 4 ) discharge permit issued by the State ; and 
(4)  Establishing administration and enforcement procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled. 
(b)  The provisions of this regulation are supplemental to regulations administered by Federal and State governments. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95)  
Sec. 13-5003. - ACRONYMS. 
MS 4 : Municipal separate storm sewer system. 
NCDENR : North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources. 
NPDES : National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 2011-844, §1, 2-15-11, eff. 2-20-11)  
Sec. 13-5004. - DEFINITIONS. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply: 
Illicit connection . Any unlawful connection which allows the discharge of non- stormwater to the stormwater conveyance system or waters of the State in violation of this chapter. 
Illicit discharge . Any unlawful disposal, placement, emptying, dumping, spillage, leakage, pumping, pouring, emission, or other discharge of any substance other than stormwater into a stormwater conveyance , the waters of the State , or upon the land in such proximity to the same, such that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the waters of the State. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS 4 ) . A stormwater conveyance or unified stormwater conveyance system (including without limitation: roads with drainage systems, municipal streets , catch basins, stormwater detention facilities, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural or man-made channels, or storm drains), that: 
(1)  Is located within the corporate limits of Raleigh, North Carolina; and 
(2)  Is owned or operated by the State , County , the City, or other public body; and 
(3)  Discharges to waters of the State, excluding publicly owned treatment works, and lawful connections thereto, which in turn discharge into the waters of the State. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System . A permitting system established pursuant to §402 of the Clean Water Act et seq. 
Federal law reference: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permits, 33 USC §1342. 
Pollution . Man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal, and/or radiological integrity of water. 
Stormwater . Any flow resulting from, and occurring during or following , any form of natural precipitation. 
Stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system . Any feature, natural or man-made, that collects and transports stormwater , including but not limited to roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made and natural channels, pipes, culverts, and storm drains, and any other natural or man-made feature or structure designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
Waters of the State . Surface waters within or flowing through the boundaries of the State including the following : any intermittent or perennial stream, river, creek, brook, swamp, lake, sound, tidal estuary, bay, reservoir, wetland, or any other surface water or any portion thereof that is mapped as solid or dashed blue lines on United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic maps. Treatment systems, consisting of man-made bodies of water, which were not originally created in waters of the State and which are not the result of impoundment of waters of the State, are not waters of the State. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95)  
Sec. 13-5005. - SCOPE AND EXCLUSIONS. 
This chapter shall apply within the territorial jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 2011-844, §2, 2-15-11, eff. 2-20-11) 
Editor's Note: G.S. 160A-459 granted enforcement authority over federal, state, and local governments.  
Sec. 13-5006. - OBJECTIVES. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Regulate the discharge of substances which may contaminate or cause pollution of stormwater , stormwater conveyances, or waters of the State ; 
(2)  Regulate connections to the stormwater conveyance system ; 
(3)  Provide for the proper handling of spills; and 
(4)  Provide for the enforcement of same. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95)  
Sec. 13-5007. - NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE CONTROLS. 
(a)  Illicit discharges . 
No person shall cause or allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping directly or indirectly to any stormwater conveyance, the waters of the State, or upon the land in such proximity to the same (such that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the waters of the State ), any fluid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than stormwater ; provided that non- stormwater discharges associated with the following activities are allowed provided that they do not significantly impact water quality: 
(1)  Declorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(2)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(3)  Condensate from residential or commercial air conditioning; 
(4)  Residential and non-profit vehicle washing; 
(5)  Water line flushing; 
(6)  Discharges associated with emergency removal and treatment activities, for hazardous materials, authorized by the federal, State, or local government on-scene coordinator; 
(7)  Uncontaminated ground water [including the collection or pumping of springs, wells, or rising ground water and ground water generated by well construction or other construction activities]; 
(8)  Collected infiltrated stormwater from foundation or footing drains; 
(9)  Collected ground water and infiltrated stormwater from basement or crawl space pumps; 
(10)  Irrigation water (does not include reclaimed water as described in 15A NCAC 2H .0200); 
(11)  Street wash water; 
(12)  Flows from emergency fire fighting; 
(13)  Discharges from the pumping or draining of natural watercourses or waterbodies; 
(14)  Flushing and cleaning of stormwater conveyances with unmodified potable water; 
(15)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(16)  Diverted stream flows; 
(17)  Placing leaves at the curbside for the City's residential seasonal leaf collection program; 
(18)  Wash water from the cleaning of the exterior of buildings, including gutters, provided that the discharge does not pose an environmental or health threat; and 
(19)  Other non- stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge permit has been approved and issued by NCDENR, provided that any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system shall be authorized by the City. 
Prohibited substances include but are not limited to: oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, animal waste, paints, garbage, construction debris, yard waste, and litter. 
State law references: Emission of pollutants and contaminants, G.S. 160A-185, Raleigh City Charter §2.14(50), and 1989 Session Laws, Chapter 1043. 
Cross reference: Discharge onto City streets , sidewalks, or gutters, §12-1032 and depositing waste on land in the City , §7-3005(c)(2), (3). 
(b)  Illicit connections . 
(1)  Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system which allow the discharge of non- stormwater , other than the exclusions described in section (a) above, are unlawful. Prohibited connections include, but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and waste water from septic systems. 
(2)  Where such connections exist in violation of §13-5007 and said connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using said connection shall remove the connection within one (1) year following application of this regulation; provided that, this grace period shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat. 
(3)  Where it is determined that said connection: 
a.  May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property , natural resources, wildlife, or habitat, or 
b.  Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance, 
the City Manager or his designee shall designate the time within which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the City shall take into consideration: 
a.  The quantity and complexity of the work, 
b.  The consequences of delay, 
c.  The potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and to public and private property, and 
d.  The cost of remedying the damage. 
Editor's note: This regulation first became applicable on March 12, 1995. 
Permits are issued by the Inspections Department for connection to or modification of storm sewers located in City owned rights-of-way. 
State law reference: Emission of pollutants and contaminants, G.S. 160A-185. 
(c)  Spills. 
Spills or leaks of polluting substances discharged to, or having the potential to be indirectly transported to the stormwater conveyance system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and removed promptly. All affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting condition. 
Persons associated with the spill or leak shall immediately notify the City of Raleigh Fire Chief or his designee of all spills or leaks of polluting substances. Notification shall not relieve any person of any expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability which may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by State or other law. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 2011-844, §§3—11, 2-15-11, eff. 2-20-11)  
Sec. 13-5008. - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Authority to enter. 
Any authorized City personnel shall be permitted to enter upon public property for the purposes of observation, inspection, sampling, monitoring, testing, surveying, and measuring compliance. Authorized City personnel may enter upon private property with the consent of the owner, occupant or other person authorized to give such consent. Should the owner or occupant of private property refuse to permit such reasonable access, the City Manager or his designee shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2 or its successor. 
No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while carrying out his official duties. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Illicit discharges . 
Any designer, engineer, contractor, agent, or any other person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs, or assists directly or indirectly in the creation of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
a.  For first time offenders, if the quantity of the discharge is equal to or less than five (5) gallons and consists of domestic or household products in quantities considered ordinary for household purposes, said person shall be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation, and if the quantity of the discharge is greater than five (5) gallons or contains non-domestic substances, including but not limited to process waste water, or if said person cannot provide clear and convincing evidence of the volume and nature of the substance discharged, said person shall be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. 
b.  For repeat offenders, the amount of the penalty shall be double the amount assessed for the previous penalty, not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. 
c.  In determining the amount of the penalty, the City Manager or his designee shall consider: 
1.  The degree and extent of harm to the environment, the public health, and public and private property ; 
2.  The cost of remedying the damage; 
3.  The duration of the violation; 
4.  Whether the violation was willful; 
5.  The prior record of the person responsible for the violation in complying or failing to comply with this chapter; 
6.  The costs of enforcement to the public; and 
7.  The amount of money saved by the violator through his, her, or its noncompliance. 
(2)  Illicit connections. 
Any person found with an illicit connection in violation of this chapter and any designer, engineer, contractor, agent, or any other person who allows, acts in concert, participates, directs, or assists directly or indirectly in the establishment of an illicit connection in violation of this chapter, shall be subject to civil penalties as follows: 
a.  First time offenders shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day of continuing violation. 
b.  Repeat violators shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day of continuing violation. 
c.  In determining the amount of the penalty, the City Manager or his designee shall consider: 
1.  The degree and extent of harm to the environment, the public health, and public and private property ; 
2.  The cost of remedying the damage; 
3.  The duration of the violation; 
4.  Whether the violation was willful; 
5.  The prior record of the person responsible for the violation in complying or failing to comply with this chapter; 
6.  The costs of enforcement to the public; and 
7.  The amount of money saved by the violator through his, her, or its noncompliance. 
d.  Procedures for assessing penalties pursuant to illicit connections. 
Said penalties shall be assessed by the City Manager or his designee. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served written notice of the violation either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the first class mail is not returned by the Post Office within ten (10) days after the mailing. 
The notice shall warn that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the assessment of a civil penalty and/or other enforcement action. If after the allotted time period has expired, and the violation has not been corrected, the penalty shall be assessed from the date of the violation and each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation under this section. 
(3)  Other violations. 
Any person found in violation of other provisions of this chapter, not specifically enumerated elsewhere, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or per day for any continuing violation. 
(4)  Payment/collection procedures. 
Penalties shall be assessed by the City Manager or his designee. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served written notice of the violation by registered or certified mail or personal service. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by the Post Office within ten (10) days after the mailing. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty. The City Manager or his designee shall make written demand for payment upon the person in violation. If the payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within thirty (30) days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City , in the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice in Wake County for recovering the penalty. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. 
(1)  Whenever the City Council has a reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this chapter, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter or making a connection to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system other than in accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of approval, the City may , either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by the Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain and abate the violation or threatened violation. 
(2)  The institution of an action for injunctive relief under subsection (c) shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any further civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Code. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. 
Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this chapter, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not longer than thirty (30) days. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(e)  Administrative fee. 
Any person who shall commit a violation of this chapter, receives official notice from the City of said violation, and fails to remedy said violation such that a Notice of Violation is issued shall be subject to an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to any other charge. 
(Ord. No. 1995-573, §2, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 2011-844, §§12—19, 2-15-11, eff. 2-20-11) 
Cross references: Declaration of public nuisance, §12-6002(p); administrative fees, §14-1012.  
PART 14 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1. - USE OF CODE; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 14-1001. - HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED. 
The laws embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as "The Code of The City of Raleigh," "The City Code," or "The Code." 
( Code 1959 , §1-1; Ord. No. 1991-879D-TC-387, §1, 11-19-91)  
Sec. 14-1002. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council: 
Affiliate. A person that directly, or indirectly through one (1) or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by, or is under common control of another person. 
City, agencies, officers. The word City , as well as the title or designation of all departments, commissions, agencies, officers and employees of Raleigh, shall be construed as if the words "of Raleigh, North Carolina" followed it. 
City of Raleigh Fee Schedule. The City of Raleigh Fee Schedule shall be a comprehensive list of individual fees established and charged by the City under the City Code or other sources of legal authority. The City of Raleigh Fee Schedule shall be maintained by the City's Budget and Management Services Department and may be subject to change on an annual basis as part of the adoption of the annual budget by the City Council or, as may be allowed by law, from time to time by the City Council. Certain individual fees or classes of fees may not be listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule and may be maintained by other departments as set forth in the City Code or at the direction of the City Council or City Manager. 
Code 1959. The designation Code 1959 appearing as a historical reference following Code sections shall refer to the 1959 revision and recodification of the City Code. 
Council. Whenever the words Council , this Council or the Council are used, they shall be construed to mean the Council of the City of Raleigh, North Carolina. 
County. The words the County or this County shall mean the County of Wake, State of North Carolina. 
G.S. The designation G.S. appearing in the State law citations shall refer to the General Statutes of North Carolina of 1943, as amended. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall include and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations, and corporations as well as to males. 
Month. The word month , shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number only may include and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in like cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Owner. The word owner , applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Parent. An affiliate that directly, or indirectly through one (1) or more intermediaries, controls another person. 
Person. The word person shall include and be applied to associations, corporations, limited liability companies, company, firm, partnerships, joint ventures, public or private institutions, corporations, trusts, estates, utilities, cooperatives, commissions, boards, condominiums, interstate bodies and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals or other legal entities. 
Personal property. The words personal property include every species of property except real property as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words preceding and following means next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word property shall include real and personal property. 
Real property. The term real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term residence shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever his absent, he has the intention of returning. 
Shall, may. The term shall is mandatory, and the term may is permissive. 
Signature or subscription. The words signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words the State or this State shall be construed to mean the State of North Carolina. 
Street. The term street , when used herein, shall be construed to embrace all streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, squares, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, causeways, and sidewalks, lying within the street right-of-way, and all other public highways in the City. 
Subsidiary. An affiliate that is directly, or indirectly through one (1) or more intermediaries, controlled by another person. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Used for. The phrase used for includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
Written or in writing. The words written or in writing , shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word year shall mean a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1987-950-TC-287, §50, 4-7-87; Ord. No. 1991-879D-TC-387, §2, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§27, 28, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 1996-808-TC-126, §22, TC-31-95, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 2019-949, §15, 6-4-19, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Cross references: Definitions applicable to specific chapters, articles and sections of this Code, see privilege license taxes, §2-2011; fair housing, §4-2002; solid waste collection, §7-2001; sewer use ordinance, §8-2111; zoning, §10-2002; subdivision and site plans, §10-3003; floodprone area regulations, §10-4002; erosion and sedimentation control, §10-5003; housing code, §10-6121 et seq. ; motor vehicles and traffic, §11-2002; bicycles, §11-3003; taxicabs, §12-2022; animals, §12-3004; noise regulations, §12-5001. 
State law references: Rules of construction, G.S. 12-3; computation of time, G.S. 1-593.  
Sec. 14-1003. - CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titled of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
( Code 1959 , §1-3)  
Sec. 14-1004. - SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
( Code 1959 , §1-4; Ord. No. 1981-602, §1, 3-17-81)  
Sec. 14-1005. - CRIMINAL PENALTY, NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS. 
(a)  In accordance with G.S. 160A-175, and unless this Code of Ordinances provides otherwise, violation of any provision hereof shall be a misdemeanor or infraction as provided in G.S. 14-4, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day that any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. An ordinance may provide by express statement that the maximum fine or term of imprisonment to be imposed for its violation shall be some figure or number of days less than the maximum penalties prescribed by G.S. 14-4. 
(b)  An ordinance contained herein may be enforced by other remedies, as authorized in G.S. 160A-175, including the imposition of civil fines, the ordering of appropriate equitable relief, including injunctions, or a combination of remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-718-TC-258, §6, TC-17-04, 10-5-04) 
State law references: Misdemeanor or violations of City ordinances, G.S. 14-4; violations generally, G.S. 160A-175.  
Sec. 14-1006. - RULE OF CONSTRUCTION FOR CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. 
Conflicts and duplications among portions of this Code shall be resolved in favor of the more stringent regulation.  
Sec. 14-1007. - DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. 
The degree of regulatory protection and public service provision afforded under the terms of this Code are considered reasonable and based on sound public policy. Wrongful acts and adverse consequences will occur on occasion. This Code shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any personal injury or property damage that may result from reliance upon this Code or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.  
Sec. 14-1008. - EXTRATERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF CODE. 
(a)  The provisions of this Code, as they may be adopted pursuant to authority conferred under G.S. 160A-360 et seq. and G.S. 113A-50 et seq. of the General Statutes, or other statutory authority which may be exercised in areas of extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be in effect and apply within the corporate limits of the City and within the area outside the corporate limits comprising the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall be according to the official map entitled, "Extraterritorial; Jurisdiction Map" maintained in the office of the Planning Department, and recorded in the Wake County Register of Deeds' office, as the same may be amended from time to time pursuant to law. 
(Code 1979, §14-1008; Ord. No. 1979-41 TC-101, §17, 4-16-79; Ord. No. 1995-760-TC-122, §§29—31, TC-20C-95, 11-21-95) 
Cross references: Building inspections, minimum housing standards enforcement, planning and development, Part 10. 
State law references: Extraterritorial planning jurisdiction, G.S. 160A-360; zoning, G.S. 160A-381; subdivisions, G.S. 160A-371; flood-prone area regulations, G.S. 143-215.57 and G.S. 160A-458.1; sedimentation and erosion control, G.S. 113A-50 and G.S. 160A-458; public health nuisance abatement one (1) mile beyond corporate limits, G.S. 160A-193.  
Sec. 14-1009. - EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION OF ORDINANCES. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repeals another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.  
Sec. 14-1010. - PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 14-1011. - FALSE INFORMATION. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code for any person to give false information or misrepresentations in any application or permit required by this code. 
(Ord. No. 1979-247-TC-108, §8, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 14-1012. - ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, all administrative fees of this Code shall be deemed to be non-criminal and shall not be enforced as a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to any State statute or City ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-718-TC-258, §7, TC-17-04, 10-5-04)  
CHAPTER 2. - TORT CLAIMS BY CITY 
 
Sec. 14-2001. - PROCEDURE AS PRESCRIBED HEREIN. 
Whenever any person shall destroy, injure or damage any property belonging to or in the custody of the City in such a manner as to create a claim for monetary damages in favor of the City , the claim shall be handled according to the procedure prescribed by this chapter. 
( Code 1959 , §2-39)  
Sec. 14-2002. - RESPONSIBILITY OF DEPARTMENT HEAD AND SUPERINTENDENT OF SHOPS; PRELIMINARY. 
If the property destroyed, injured or damaged is a motor vehicle or other vehicular equipment, or equipment accessory thereto, it shall be the responsibility of the head of the department or division having control or supervision of such property to cause an immediate report of the damages to be made to the superintendent of shops, who shall immediately make or cause to be made an inspection of the property and an estimate of the damages and the cost of repairs. As soon as practicable thereafter, the superintendent of shops shall make and forward to the City Attorney a written report of such property damages, setting forth the amount thereof and the circumstances under which they resulted. 
( Code 1959 , §2-40)  
Sec. 14-2003. - REPORT TO CITY ATTORNEY. 
If the property destroyed, injured or damaged is of a type other than that referred to in §14-2002, then the department head or the division head shall make immediate report thereof direct to the City Attorney, together with a statement of the circumstances under which the damages resulted. Repairs or replacement shall be the responsibility of the head of the department or division having supervision or control of the property . The amount of damages and cost of repairs shall be reported to the City Attorney. 
( Code 1959 , §2-41)  
Sec. 14-2004. - DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY. 
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to determine the facts concerning the destruction, injury or damage to such property , and the heads of departments and divisions shall cooperate with and assist the City Attorney in his investigations. If, in the opinion of the City Attorney, the City has a just and lawful claim against any person , firm or corporation responsible for causing the destruction, injury or damage to City property, he shall make written demand upon such person , firm or corporation for payment of the damages determined to be due the City , unless the damages shall be so nominal that the City Attorney, in his discretion, shall deem it impracticable and inappropriate to make such demand. 
When it appears to the City Attorney that there is no legal basis for making claim, no such demand shall be made. In the event that the person , firm or corporation causing the destruction, injury or damage shall fail or refuse to make payment to the City of the damages sustained, the City Attorney is authorized and directed to file in the name of the City a civil action against such person , firm or corporation for the recovery of damages, if in the opinion of the City Attorney the amount involved is sufficient to justify the prosecution of a suit and if in the opinion of the City Attorney there is a reasonable probability of obtaining and collecting a judgment against such person , firm or corporation. When the City Attorney has determined that a civil action is necessary and advisable, he is authorized to issue an order to the City Accountant and the City Clerk for the amount required to be deposited as advance court costs, and a check shall be issued by the proper officials for such amount payable to the proper court or official thereof. 
( Code 1959 , §2-42) 
Cross reference: City Attorney, duties, §1-2011.  
Sec. 14-2005. - AUTHORITY TO SETTLE CLAIMS. 
Whenever the City shall have any just and lawful claim for damages against any person arising out of tort causing destruction, injury or damage to any property of the City , the collector of revenue of the City is authorized to accept payment of the amount of compensation determined to be due to the City by the City Clerk, the City Attorney, and the head of the department of the City to which the property damaged was subject to control or supervision. The amount of compensation shall in no event be less than the actual cost of repairs to the property damaged, if the property is repairable, nor less than the difference between the reasonable market value of the property immediately before the damages and the reasonable market value or salvage value of the property immediately thereafter, if destroyed or damaged beyond repair. No amount less than that hereinbefore prescribed shall be accepted on behalf of the City in settlement of liability unless authorized in writing by the finance committee of the Council . 
( Code 1959 , §2-43)  
Sec. 14-2006. - EXECUTION OF RELEASE. 
When payment has been received and accepted in accordance with the provisions of this article, the Mayor and the City Clerk, or the City Clerk acting alone, shall have full power and authority to execute in the name of and on behalf of the City a written release of liability in favor of the person claimed by the City to have been responsible for the damages, the form of release to be approved by the City Attorney. 
( Code 1959 , §2-44)  
Sec. 14-2007. - REPAIR OF DAMAGED PROPERTY. 
Repairs to property damaged shall be made by the proper employee of the City whenever practicable. Repairs shall not be made by persons other than the City , except upon express authority from the Council when the estimated cost of repairs is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or except upon the written authority of the City Manager when the estimated cost thereof is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); in either case, competitive bids shall be requested and the repair work awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
( Code 1959 , §2-45) 

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.1. Legal Provisions
Sec. 1.1.1. Title

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.1. Legal Provisions
Sec. 1.1.10. ..Penalties and Remedies

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.3. ..Zoning Districts
Sec. 1.3.1. General Use Zoning Districts

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.4. Building Types
Sec. 1.4.1. Building Type Descriptions

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.4. Building Types
Sec. 1.4.2. Building Types Allowed by District

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability
Sec. 1.5.3. Coverage

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability
Sec. 1.5.4. Building Setbacks

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability
 Sec. 1.5.12. Private Residential Garage Parking Options

.CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 .

Article 1.1. Legal Provisions   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.1.8. Severability

Article 1.2. Zoning Map   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.2.1. Establishment of Official Zoning Map

Article 1.3. ..Zoning Districts   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.3.4. Legacy Districts

Article 1.4. Building Types   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.4.1. Building Type Descriptions

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.1. Site

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.4. Building Setbacks

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.12. Private Residential Garage Parking Optionz

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.12. Private Residential Garage Parking Options

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.6. Build-to

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.10. Blank Wall Area

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.7. Height

Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability   |   CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS  
 Sec. 1.5.9. Transparency

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability
 Sec. 1.5.7. Height

CHAPTER 1. ..INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS   |   Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability
 Sec. 1.5.7. Height

Chapter 1. 
Introductory Provisions

Article 1.1. 
Legal Provisions

Sec. 1.1.1. 
Title


The official title of this document is Part 10: Unified Development Ordinance for the City of Raleigh, North Carolina and is referred to throughout this document as "this UDO.”
Sec. 1.1.2. 
Applicability

A.	
This UDO applies to all land, buildings, structures and uses located within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Raleigh, North Carolina.

B.	
To the extent allowed by law, the provisions of this UDO apply to all land, buildings, structures and uses owned, leased or otherwise controlled by any district, County, State or Federal government agencies. 

Sec. 1.1.3. 
Effective Date


This UDO was adopted on February 18, 2013 and became effective on September 1, 2013 by Ordinance No. 2013 151 TC 357 (TC-3-12).
Sec. 1.1.4. 
Purpose and Intent


This UDO is adopted to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of residents and businesses in the City. More specifically, this UDO is adopted to achieve the following objectives:
A.	
Implement the policies and goals contained within officially adopted plans, including the Comprehensive Plan;

B.	
Improve the built environment and human habitat;

C.	
Conserve and protect the City’s natural beauty and setting, including trees, scenic vistas and cultural and historic resources;

D.	
Ensure that new development conserves energy, land and natural resources;

E.	
Protect water quality within watershed critical areas, the general watershed areas of designated water supply watersheds and other watershed districts;

F.	
Encourage environmentally responsible development practices;

G.	
Promote development patterns that support safe, effective and multi-modal transportation options, including auto, pedestrian, bicycle and transit and therefore minimize vehicle traffic by providing for a mixture of land uses, walkability and compact community form;

H.	
Provide neighborhoods with a variety of housing types to serve the needs of a diverse population;

I.	
Promote the greater health benefits of a pedestrian-oriented environment;

J.	
Reinforce the character and quality of neighborhoods;

K.	
Remove barriers and provide incentives for walkable projects;

L.	
Protect and promote appropriately located commercial and industrial activities in order to preserve and strengthen the City’s economic base;

M.	
Encourage compact development; 

N.	
Ensure that adequate facilities are constructed to serve new development;

O.	
Provide for orderly growth and development of suitable neighborhoods with adequate transportation networks, drainage and utilities and appropriate building sites;

P.	
Save unnecessary expenditures of funds by requiring the proper initial construction of transportation networks, sidewalks, drainage facilities and utilities; and

Q.	
Provide land records for the convenience of the public and for better identification and permanent location of real estate boundaries.

Sec. 1.1.5. 
Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan


The Comprehensive Plan serves as the basic policy guide for development under this UDO. The policies and action items of the Comprehensive Plan may be amended from time to time to meet the changing requirements of the City in accordance with the standards and procedures in Sec. 10.2.2.Sec. 1.1.6. Minimum RequirementsThe requirements of this UDO are considered to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.Sec. 1.1.7. Conflicting ProvisionsA.	If any provisions of this UDO are inconsistent with similar provisions of State or Federal law, the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.B.	Conflicts and duplications among portions of this UDO shall be resolved in favor of the more stringent regulation.Sec. 1.1.8. SeverabilityA.	It is expressly declared that this UDO and each section, subsection, sentence and phrase would have been adopted regardless of whether one or more other portions of the UDO are declared invalid or unconstitutional (See Section 14-1004).B.	If for any reason any specific condition or regulation of a conditional use zoning district ordinance is found to be invalid, it is the intention of this section that such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the conditional use zoning district ordinance. However, when any property owner or their tenant or agents challenge any specific condition or regulation of a conditional use zoning district ordinance, then the entire zoning district ordinance shall return to its prior zoning classification upon a finding of invalidity of any specific condition or regulation.Sec. 1.1.9. Ownership & Management of Common ElementsA.	Applicability 1.	This UDO requires common elements which are used for the benefit of multiple lots in a variety of its regulations, including, but not limited to:a.	Tree conservation areas for subdivisions 2 acres and greater in size (Sec. 9.1.4.);b.	Common open space (Article 2.5.,  Article 4.6. and Article 4.7.);c.	Outdoor amenity area (Sec. 1.5.3.);d.	Townhouse party walls;e.	Objects or improvements for a subdivision located on, under, in, or over public property or public street right-of-way which is subject to an encroachment agreement with a governmental entity; andf.	City greenways and permanently protected undisturbed open space areas (Article 9.2

.). 



2.	
A City Code Covenant is required for developments that contain a common element. When a development contains a common element that is owned, maintained or installed to the benefit of a lot owned by a unit of government, alternate compliance to the City Code Covenant may be allowed. This alternate compliance must be in the form of a written agreement and must, to the satisfaction of the City’s Development Services Director, address maintenance responsibilities, cost sharing, and rights of access.  The alternate compliance described herein shall not relieve any lot owner of any other applicable provisions of this UDO.

3.	
For the purposes of this section, it does not matter whether the common elements are owned by a homeowners’ association or are governed by easements; in both instances, a City Code Covenant is required. An executed copy of the City Code Covenant shall be submitted to Development Services prior to the recording of the final subdivision plat or prior to the issuance of building permits whichever event first occurs. 



B.	
City Code Covenant


The City Code Covenant is a form instrument that can be found on the City’s web portal. The contents of the City Code Covenant are: 
1.	
Establishment of a homeowners' association;

2.	
Mandatory membership in the association for owners;

3.	
Association responsibility for expenditures, including liability insurance, taxes on common areas, maintenance of common elements, payment of assessments, utility charges and management, enforcement and administrative expenses;

4.	
Association empowerment to levy assessments against lot owners;

5.	
Easements for access, parking and walkways granted to owners;

6.	
Limitations on conveying common space or elements;

7.	
Provisions for common party walls;

8.	
Perpetual access easements for immediately abutting buildings;

9.	
Maintenance of private streets (if any);

10.	
Perpetual rights of access for all common elements and private streets for governmental agencies;

11.	
Obligations for tree protection;

12.	
Limits on immunity and indemnification;

13.	
Restrictions on parking on private streets;

14.	
Limits within clear sight triangles;

15.	
Provisions for common ownership of water and sewer lines; and

16.	
Provisions regarding maintenance and planting in landscape easements.


C.	
Recording City Code Covenant
1.	
The City Code Covenant shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds office where the property is located. By the end of the next business day following the recordation of the final subdivision plat, the developer shall provide Development Services evidence of the recorded City Code Covenant. 

2.	
In all other instances, evidence of the recorded City Code Covenant shall be presented to Development Services no later than 1 day following the recording of the City Code Covenant. 

3.	
No building permit will be issued for any portion of the development unless and until evidence of recordation of the City Code Covenant is first presented to Development Services.



Sec. 1.1.10. 
Penalties and Remedies 


Enforcement may be by any one or more of the following methods and the institution of any action under any of these methods shall not relieve any party from any other civil or criminal proceeding prescribed for violations and prohibitions.
A.	
Equitable Remedy


The City may apply for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this UDO.
B.	
Injunction


Enforcement may also be achieved by injunction. When a violation occurs, the City may either before or after the institution of any other authorized action or proceeding, apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction commanding the defendant, or in the case of counterclaims the plaintiff, to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the property.
C.	
Order of Abatement


The City may apply for and the court may enter an order of abatement. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this chapter. Whenever the party is cited for contempt by the court and the City executed the order of abatement, the City shall have a lien, in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's, on the property for the cost of executing the order of abatement.
D.	
Criminal


Violations of this UDO shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction as provided by N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-4 and the maximum fine, term or imprisonment or infraction penalty allowed by law is hereby authorized.
Sec. 1.1.11. 
Existing Buildings and Structures


No existing building or structure constructed prior to September 1, 2013 shall be considered a nonconforming structure based on any of the following provisions: 
A.	
Build-to regulations in Sec. 1.5.6.;

B.	
Pedestrian access regulations in Sec. 1.5.8.;C.	Transparency regulations in Sec. 1.5.9.

; 

D.	
Blank wall regulations in Sec. 1.5.10.; andE.	Residential garage parking options in Sec. 1.5.12.Sec. 1.1.12. Adopted ManualsThe following external manuals contain technical requirements and are maintained by the City and referenced in this UDO: A.	Addressing Manual;B.	Guidelines for Land Disturbing Activity;C.	Design Guidelines for Raleigh Historic Districts and Landmarks dated May 2, 2017;D.	Private Use of Public Spaces;E.	Public Utilities Handbook;F.	Solid Waste Services Design Manual;G.	Stormwater Management Design Manual;H.	Street Design Manual dated January 1, 2018; andI.	Tree Manual.Article 1.2. Zoning MapSec. 1.2.1. Establishment of Official Zoning MapA.	The location and boundaries of zoning districts established by this UDO are shown and maintained as part of the City’s Geographic Information System (GIS) under the direction of the Planning Director. The Zoning GIS layer constitutes the City of Raleigh's Official Zoning Map and is part of this UDO. All notations, references and other information shown shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth or described in this UDO.B.	At the direction of City Council, the Planning Director is authorized to revise the Official Zoning Map. No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Official Zoning Map.C.	City Planning must maintain digital or printed copies of the Official Zoning Map and maintain records of superseded official maps. D.	All changes to the Official Zoning Map of the City shall be identified by updating the original computer digital data of each change, together with the date of the change. E.	When the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction is expanded, changes in the Official Zoning Map shall be identified by updating the original computer digital data with the date of the change. F.	A hard copy of the data and changes to the data will be kept by City Planning; all revisions to hard copies will be numbered, dated and signed by the Planning Director.Sec. 1.2.2. Interpretation of Map BoundariesA.	In the event that any uncertainty exists with respect to the intended boundaries as shown on Official Zoning Map, the Planning Director is authorized to interpret the boundaries.B.	Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Official Zoning Map, the precise location is to be determined as follows: 1.	Where a boundary line is shown as coinciding, binding along or super-imposed upon a lot line, such lot line shall be deemed to be a boundary line. 2.	Where the location of a boundary line is indicated by a designated number of feet, that distance controls. 3.	Where a boundary line is shown as within or binding along a street, alley, waterway or right-of-way, the boundary line is deemed to be in the center of the street, alley, waterway or right-of-way except in the cases where the edge of the street, alley, waterway or right-of-way is designated as the boundary line. 4.	Where a boundary line is shown as binding along a railroad track or as being located a designated number of feet from a railroad track or where the location of a boundary line may be scaled from a railroad track, the nearest rail of the track designated controls. 5.	Where a boundary line is superimposed on a topographic elevation line, the precise location of the boundary line must be determined by field survey of the topographic elevation line, unless the topographic elevation has been relocated through grading subsequent to establishment of the boundary line. 6.	Where a boundary line is shown and its location is not fixed by any of the rules above, its precise location shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the map.Sec. 1.2.3. Rules of InterpretationWhere an approved zoning condition conflicts with a standard of the corresponding general use district, the following shall apply.A.	The new general use district is controlling.  B.	The UDO height, setback, parking, landscaping and screening regulations when more stringent than in the conditional use zoning district ordinance are controlling. The calculation of height, setback and parking shall be in accordance with the UDO.C.	All approval processes shall follow the regulations of this UDO.D.	If the conditional use zoning ordinance limits uses to a former legacy zoning district, those use limitations shall continue except if the former allowed use is not allowed in the new UDO general use zoning district. Limited uses and special uses will be determined by the UDO general use district.Article 1.3. Zoning DistrictsSec. 1.3.1. General Use Zoning DistrictsThe following general use zoning districts are established and applied to property as set forth on the Official Zoning Map.







Residential Districts
 
R-1
 Residential-1 
 
R-2
 Residential-2 
 
R-4
 Residential-4
 
R-6
 Residential-6
 
R-10
 Residential-10
 
Mixed Use Districts
 
RX-
 Residential Mixed Use
 
OP-
 Office Park 
 
OX-
 Office Mixed Use 
 
NX-
 Neighborhood Mixed Use 
 
CX-
 Commercial Mixed Use
 
DX-
 Downtown Mixed Use 
 
IX-
 Industrial Mixed Use
 
Special Districts 
 
CM
 Conservation Management 
 
AP
 Agricultural Productive
 
IH
 Heavy Industrial 
 
MH
 Manufactured Housing  
 
CMP
 Campus 
 
PD
 Planned Development 
 


Sec. 1.3.2. 
Conditional Use Zoning Districts


The following conditional use zoning districts are established and applied to property as set forth on the Official Zoning Map. Each conditional use district (bearing the designated CU on the Official Zoning Map) corresponds to a general use district. All zoning requirements that apply to the general use district are also applicable to the corresponding conditional use district unless adopted conditions are more restrictive. 
Residential Districts
 
R-1-CU
 Residential-1 
 
R-2-CU
 Residential-2 
 
R-4-CU
 Residential-4
 
R-6-CU
 Residential-6
 
R-10-CU
 Residential-10
 
Mixed Use Districts
 
RX-CU
 Residential Mixed Use
 
OP-CU
 Office Park 
 
OX-CU
 Office Mixed Use 
 
NX-CU
 Neighborhood Mixed Use 
 
CX-CU
 Commercial Mixed Use
 
DX-CU
 Downtown Mixed Use 
 
IX-CU
 Industrial Mixed Use
 
Special Districts
 
CM-CU
 Conservation Management 
 
AP-CU
 Agricultural Productive
 
IH-CU
 Heavy Industrial 
 
MH-CU
 Manufactured Housing  
 
CMP-CU
 Campus 
 


Sec. 1.3.3. 
Overlay Districts


The following overlay districts are established and applied to property as set forth on the Official Zoning Map.
-ADUOD
 Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District
 
-AOD
 Airport Overlay District
 
-MPOD
 Metro-Park Overlay District
 
-UWPOD
 Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District
 
-FWPOD
 Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District
 
-SWPOD
 Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District
 
-SHOD-1
 Special Highway Overlay District -1
 
-SHOD-2
 Special Highway Overlay District -2
 
-HOD-G
 General Historic Overlay District 
 
-HOD-S
 Streetside Historic Overlay District
 
-NCOD
 Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District 
 
-TOD
 Transit Overlay District 
 
-SRPOD
 Special Residential Parking Overlay District
 


Sec. 1.3.4. 
Legacy Districts


The following districts are referred to as legacy districts. These districts exist in the former Part 10 Zoning Code, and will eventually be replaced with a UDO zoning district. No new legacy district may be added to the Official Zoning Map, nor may any boundary of an existing legacy district be modified. These legacy districts may exist as a general use district or as a conditional use district.
R-15
 Residential-15 
 
R-20
 Residential-20
 
R-30
 Residential-30
 
SpR-30
 Special Residential-30
 
RB
 Residential Business
 
O&I-1
 Office and Instituion-1
 
O&I-2
 Office and Instituion-2
 
O&I-3
 Office and Instituion-3
 
BC
 Buffer Commercial
 
SC
 Shopping Center
 
NB
 Neighborhood Business
 
BUS
 Business
 
TD
 Thoroughfare District
 
I-1
 Industrial-1
 
I-2
 Industrial-2
 
DOD
 Downtown Overlay District
 
PBOD
 Pedestrian Business Overlay District
 
PDD
 Planned Development District
 
SHOD-3
 Special Highway Overlay District-3
 
SHOD-4
 Special Highway Overlay District-4
 


Article 1.4. 
Building Types

Sec. 1.4.1. 
Building Type Descriptions 


The following building types have been established to allow for detailed regulation of the form within each zoning district. All graphic depictions of building types are for illustrative purposes only.
A.	
Detached House 


A building constructed to accommodate 1 dwelling unit on a single lot. A series of detached houses as part of a cottage court may be located on a single lot. In a Mixed Use District, a detached house may be used for nonresidential purposes. 
B.	
Attached House 


A building constructed to accommodate 2 principal dwelling units on a single lot. A series of attached houses as part of a cottage court may be located on a single lot. In a Mixed Use District, an attached house may be used for nonresidential purposes.
C.	
Townhouse 


A building constructed to accommodate 2 or more dwelling units that are horizontally integrated where each dwelling unit is separated vertically by a party wall. Units may be placed on individual lots or the entire building may be placed on a single lot. In a Mixed Use District, a townhouse may be used for nonresidential purposes. 
D.	
Apartment


A building constructed to accommodate 3 or more dwelling units that are vertically or horizontally integrated. A common kitchen is allowed. A limited set of nonresidential uses may be allowed in ground floor corner units in a Mixed Use District.
E.	
General Building


A building constructed to accommodate nonresidential uses on all floors.
F.	
Mixed Use Building 


A multi-story building constructed to accommodate retail on the ground floor and uses in addition to retail on the upper floors. 
G.	
Civic Building 


A building that in residential zoning districts exclusively accommodates civic uses, as well as rest homes, day care centers, life care, congregate care, special care facilities and accessory uses. Land uses otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning district are allowed in civic buildings in nonresidential zoning districts.
H.	
Open Lot


Open lots are used to accommodate uses with large outdoor or open areas. An open lot can also accommodate open space, parks or natural areas. 
Sec. 1.4.2. 
 Building Types Allowed by District 


Building types are allowed by district as set forth below.


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Detached
House 
 Attached
House 
 Townhouse
 Apartment
 General
Building 
 Mixed Use
Building
 Civic
Building
 Open
Lot
 

Residential Districts 
 
Residential-1 (R-1)
 .
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 .
 .
 
Residential-2 (R-2)
 .
 .
 --
 --
 --
 --
 .
 .
 
Residential-4 (R-4)
 .
 .
 .
 --
 --
 --
 .
 .
 
Residential-6 (R-6)
 .
 .
 . 
 (1)
 .
 --
 --
 .
 .
 
Residential-10 (R-10)
 .
 .
 .
 .
 --
 --
 .
 .
 

Mixed Use Districts
 
Residential Mixed Use (RX-)
 .
 .
 .
 .
 --
 --
 .
 .
 
Office Park (OP-)
 --
 --
 --
 --
 .
 .
 .
 .
 
Office Mixed Use (OX-)
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 
Neighborhood Mixed Use (NX-)
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 
Commercial Mixed Use (CX-)
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 
Downtown Mixed Use (DX-)
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 
Industrial Mixed Use (IX-)
 --
 --
 --
 --
 .
 .
 .
 .
 

 Special Districts 
 
Conservation Management (CM)
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 .
 
Agricultural Productive (AP)
 .
 --
 --
 --
 .
 --
 --
 .
 
Heavy Industrial (IH)
 --
 --
 --
 --
 .
 --
 --
 .
 
Manufactured Housing (MH)
 See Article 4.5. Manufactured Housing (MH)
 
Campus (CMP)
 Allowed building types determined on master plan (see Article 4.6. Campus (CMP))
 
Planned Development (PD)
 Allowed building types determined on master plan (see Article 4.7. Planned Development (PD))
 
KEY:        .  =  Building Type Allowed              . =  Building Type Allowed as Part of an Approved Conservation Development             --  =  Building Type Not allowed
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) In R-6, townhouses approved prior to September 1, 2013 are not considered nonconforming structures or uses. 
 


Article 1.5. 
Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability

Sec. 1.5.1. 
Site

A.	
Defined


A site is any lot or group of contiguous lots owned or functionally controlled by the same person or entity, assembled for the purpose of development.
B.	
Site Area
1.	
Gross




Gross site area is the total area of a site, including proposed streets or other land required for public use that is attributable to the site, as dedicated by the owner or predecessor in title.
2.	
Net


Net site area is the area included within the rear, side and front lot lines of the site. Does not include existing or proposed public streets or right-of-way.
C.	
Site Width


Site width is the distance between the side lot lines of the site (generally running perpendicular to a street) measured at the primary street property line along a straight line or along the chord of the property line.
D.	
Site Depth


Site depth is the distance between the front and rear property lines of the site measured along a line midway between the side property lines.
Sec. 1.5.2. 
Lot

A.	
Defined


A parcel of land either vacant or occupied intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or for the future, of transfer of ownership or possession or for development. 
B.	
Lot Area 


Lot area is the area included within the rear, side and front lot lines. It does not include existing or proposed right-of-way, whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use. District density applies, and may require larger lots than those required for an individual building type. Within the Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD), one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot, regardless of underlying density designation.
C.	
Lot Width


Lot width is the distance between the side lot lines (generally running perpendicular to a street) measured at the primary street property line along a straight line or along the chord of the property line. A lot must meet the minimum lot width for the entire minimum required depth of the parcel except for cul-de-sac lots.
D.	
Lot Depth


Lot depth is the distance between the front and rear property lines measured along a line midway between the side property lines.


E.	
Lot Width and Depth for Cul-de-Sac Lots


Any lot abutting a cul-de-sac in a Residential District where the minimum lot width is not met at the front property line must comply with the following:
1.	
The minimum lot frontage on a street shall be 20 feet (this dimension may be reduced upon approval of the Development Services Director if a common driveway or other form of shared access is provided); and

2.	
The minimum lot depth specified shall not be measured from the front property line, but instead measured beginning from the nearest point to front property line where the lot width equals the minimum lot width for the district. The minimum lot depth measured this way shall be 70 feet in R-1, R-2 and R-4, 60 feet in R-6 and 50 feet in R-10.


F.	
Density
1.	
Residential density is expressed in units per acre and is calculated by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the gross site area. 

2.	
Although minimum lot sizes may allow additional units, density serves as the maximum number of principal units per acre. Within the Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD), one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot, regardless of underlying density designation.

3.	
Transfers are restricted to properties under the same ownership which are located outside any Watershed Protection Area and in the same development as the dedication for right-of-way less than 60 feet in width.

4.	
A map showing the property and right-of-way dedication shall be recorded in the Wake County Registry with an indication that the roadway dedication density allowance has been utilized for the particular property prior to recording any subsequent maps in the development.

5.	
No density transfer shall be allowed if the developer has executed a reimbursement contract. 

6.	
The density transfer is applicable to all those portions of greenway dedicated after September 1, 2013 provided that the dedicators waive their statutory right to withdraw the dedication.

7.	
The dedicated greenway easement carries the residential density as shown on the Official Zoning Map for that location.

8.	
When a site is partly within a CM District, density may be transferred from the CM District, which carries the residential density of the contiguous zoning district. If more than 1 zoning district adjoins the CM District, the CM District shall be divided by carrying the boundary lines separating the districts into the CM-zoned area.



Sec. 1.5.3. 
Coverage

A.	
Defined


Building coverage is the maximum area of a lot that is permitted to be covered by roofed buildings or structures. Building coverage does not include paved areas such as parking lots, driveways or pedestrian walkways.
B.	
Intent
1.	
Outdoor amenity areas are intended to provide usable on-site open space in both residential and non-residential developments for the healthy enjoyment of occupants, invitees and guests of the development. 

2.	
In more intensely developed urban contexts, outdoor amenity areas are also intended to provide visual breaks.



C.	
General Requirements
1.	
Where outdoor amenity area is required, it must be provided on-site and must be available for use by or as an amenity for the occupants, invitees and guests of the development. 

2.	
All required outdoor amenity areas must be ADA accessible.

3.	
Required outdoor amenity area may be met in 1 contiguous open area or in multiple open areas on the lot; however, to receive credit, each area must be at least 10 feet in width and length.

4.	
Required outdoor amenity area may be located at or above grade.

5.	
Required outdoor amenity area cannot be parked or driven upon, except for emergency access and permitted temporary events.

6.	
In all other districts except DX-, required outdoor amenity area may be covered but cannot be enclosed.

7.	
Stormwater detention wet ponds and dry ponds shall not be considered an outdoor amenity area. GSI practices may be used to meet up to 10% of the requirement for the amenity area.

8.	
Tree Conservation areas shall not be considered an outdoor amenity area.



D.	
Additional Requirements for Urban Plazas


Amenity areas located within the DX- District or the NX-, CX- or OX- Districts with an urban frontage, and associated buildings in excess of 4 stories in height must meet all of the following:
1.	
 Amenity areas associated with a general building, or mixed use building that is 50% or more non-residential in floor area must be located contiguous to the public sidewalk and be visually permeable from the public right-of-way. When a mixed use building is more than 50% residential by floor area, only half of the required amenity area must meet this standard. 

2.	
Amenity areas shall contain at least one of the following: benches, seats, tables, eating areas, plazas, courtyards, fountains, active recreation areas, or public art. In addition, vegetated GSI practices may be located within the amenity area and may be used to meet up to 10% of the requirement for the amenity area. Stormwater detention wet ponds and dry ponds shall not be considered an outdoor amenity area.

3.	
Amenity areas installed in conjunction with an apartment or townhouse building type may contain any of the amenities listed above in subsection D.2, as well as courts, pools or fields used for active recreation. 

4.	
All required outdoor amenity areas must provide one linear foot of seating for each 50 square feet of required open space area and one two-inch caliper tree for every 1,000 square feet of required open space area. 

5.	
For all buildings greater than 7 stories in height, the minimum amount of required open space area specified in chapter 3 shall be increased. An additional 50 square feet of amenity area is required for each building story above the seventh story. In no case shall the required amenity area exceed 12% of the gross site area. 


Sec. 1.5.4. 
Building Setbacks

A.	
Setback Types


There are 4 types of setback – primary street setback, side street setback, side setback and rear setback. Through lots, except reverse-frontage lots, are considered to have 2 primary street setbacks. Reverse-frontage lots will designate the street from which access from adjacent lots is taken as primary. If that fails to produce a clear result, the applicant may designate either street as primary.
B.	
Measurement of Building Setbacks 
1.	
Primary and side street setbacks are measured perpendicular from the edge of the existing or proposed right-of-way, whichever is greater.

2.	
Side setbacks are measured perpendicular from the side property line.

3.	
Rear setbacks are measured perpendicular from the rear property line or the edge of the existing or proposed right-of-way, whichever is greater, where there is an alley.




C.	
 Multiple Street Frontage Lots 


For the purposes of determining setbacks, build-to lines, and other regulations, a multiple street frontage site or lot other than an Open Lot must designate at least 1 primary street prior to development, not to include additions. A lot may have more than one primary street. 
The following rules determine a primary street:
1.	
A lot developed with the Apartment, General, Mixed-Use or Civic building types shall designate its primary street using the criteria shown in (a) through (g) below.


If one street meets any of criteria (a) through (d), it will be designated primary. If two streets meet any of criteria (a) through (d), both will be designated primary.
If three or four streets meet any of criteria (a) through (d), the two streets that meet more of (a) through (d) will be designated as primary; if they meet the same number, then the applicant may choose the two streets.
Where the criteria refer to a street, the relevant portion of the street is the portion adjacent to or within the site or lot.
If no street meets criteria (a) through (d), then the street that that satisfies more of criteria (e) through (g) will be designated as primary. If the criteria do not apply or do not produce a clear result, then any street may be designated as primary by the applicant.
a.	
The street with transit service;

b.	
The street designated as a Main Street or Urban Thoroughfare on the Urban Form Map;

c.	
Any street designated as a Retail Street in the Downtown section of the Comprehensive Plan.

d.	
The street designated as a Mixed-use Street on the Raleigh Street Plan Map;

e.	
The street designated as a Major Street on the Raleigh Street Plan Map;

f.	
The street with on-street parking;

g.	
The street with the higher classification on the Raleigh Street Plan Map;


2.	
A block face predominately developed with the Townhouse building type shall designate as its primary street either a Local Street or Mixed-use Street, if available. If the site fronts on more than one street meeting these criteria or if they do not apply, then the selection of primary street shall be based on the criteria for Apartment, General, Mixed-Use, or Civic buildings. Any street designated as primary must form the face of a block or extend fully through the property.

3.	
For an Attached or Detached building, a corner lot shall designate its primary street as being opposite the rear yard of any adjoining lot. If the corner lot abuts only the side yard of adjoining lots or abuts another corner lot, then the primary street shall be located along the narrowest street frontage. If the two street frontages are within 10 percent of each other in length, either street may be designated as primary. In no case will a Major Street be designated as the primary street.

4.	
A limited-access highway shall never serve as the primary street.

5.	
A dead-end or cul-de-sac street can only be identified as primary for residential lots.

6.	
A private street cannot be primary unless the lot has no public street frontage.

7.	
In the event an adopted plan designates primary streets, the adopted plan shall control.

8.	
If none of the criteria produce a result, the applicant may designate the primary street.


D.	
Setback Encroachments


All buildings and structures must be located at or behind required setbacks, except as listed below. Underground structures covered by the ground may encroach into a required setback.
1.	
Building Features
a.	
Porches (raised structures attached to a building forming a covered entrance) may extend up to 9 feet, including the steps, into a required setback, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

b.	
Stoops (small raised platforms that serve as entrances to buildings) may extend up to 6 feet into a required setback, provided that the landing is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. Stoops may be covered but cannot be fully enclosed.

c.	
Balconies (platforms projecting from the wall of a building with a railing along its outer edge, often accessible from a door or window) may extend up to 6 feet into a required setback, provided that the landing is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. Balconies can be covered but cannot be fully enclosed.

d.	
Galleries (covered passages extending along the outside wall of a building supported by arches or columns that are open on 1 side), must have a clear depth from the support columns to the building's façade of at least 8 feet and a clear height above the sidewalk of at least 10 feet. A gallery may extend into a required street setback. A gallery may not extend into a required side setback.

e.	
Chimneys or flues may extend up to 4 feet, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

f.	
Building eaves, roof overhangs, awnings and light shelves may extend up to 5 feet, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

g.	
Bay windows, oriels, vestibules and similar features that are less than 10 feet wide may extend up to 4 feet, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

h.	
Unenclosed fire escapes or stairways may extend up to 4 feet into a required side or rear setback, provided that such extension is at least 5 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

i.	
Unenclosed patios, decks or terraces may extend up to 4 feet into a required side setback, or up to 8 feet into a required rear setback, provided that such extension is at least 5 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

j.	
Cornices, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features may project up to 1½ feet.

k.	
Handicap ramps may project to the extent necessary to perform their proper function.

l.	
If a variance is not required, a building feature may encroach into the right-of-way, provided a license for the use of the right-of-way is obtained from the City, which is terminable at will by the City.



2.	
Mechanical Equipment and Utility Lines
a.	
Mechanical equipment associated with residential uses, such as HVAC units and security lighting, may extend into a required rear or side setback, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. Permanently installed generators associated with residential uses must meet setbacks for the primary structure in the district. No plot plan is required for these generators: however, a zoning permit is required.

b.	
Solar panels or wind turbines may extend into a required rear or side setback, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

c.	
Rainwater collection or harvesting systems may extend into a required rear or side setback, provided that such extension is at least 3 feet from the vertical plane of any lot line.

d.	
Utility lines located underground and minor structures accessory to utility lines (such as hydrants, manholes and transformers and other cabinet structures) may extend into a required rear or side setback. 




E.	
Other Setback Encroachments
1.	
Fence and walls under Sec. 7.2.8.

2.	
Signs under Article 7.3. Signs.3.	Driveways under Sec. 8.3.5. Site Access

.

4.	
Transitional and street protective yards under Sec. 7.2.4.Sec. 1.5.5. Parking SetbacksA.	Parking Setback TypesThere are 4 types of parking setback – primary street setback, side street setback, side setback and rear setback. Through lots are considered to have 2 primary street setbacks.B.	Measurement of Parking Setbacks1.	Primary and side street setbacks are measured perpendicular from the edge of the existing or proposed right-of-way, whichever is greater.2.	Side setbacks are measured perpendicular from the side property line.3.	Rear setbacks are measured perpendicular from the rear property line or the edge of the existing or proposed right-of-way, whichever is greater, where there is an alley. C.	Parking Not AllowedOn-site surface and structured parking must be located behind the parking setback line, where applicable. This requirement does not apply to on-street parking or apply to upper stories of a parking deck. D.	Parking in the Front Setback 1.	For a detached house or attached house located within a Residential District and used for residential purposes, combined parking and driveway area shall not constitute more than 40% of the area between the front building facade and the front property line. Any parking in the front setback must have sufficient depth so that parked cars do not encroach on the adjacent sidewalk.2.	Additional parking regulations may be applied with the Special Residential Parking Overlay District (see Sec. 5.6.1.).Sec. 1.5.6. Build-toA.	Defined1.	The build-to is the area on the lot where a certain percentage of the front principal building facade must be located, measured as a minimum and maximum setback range from the edge of the proposed or existing right-of-way, whichever is greater.2.	The required percentage specifies the amount of the lot width that must be occupied by front building facade within the build-to range, measured based on the width of the building divided by the width of the site or lot.3.	There are 2 types of build-to -- primary street build-to and side street build-to. Through lots are considered to have at least 1 primary street build-to. The designation of the primary street build-to shall follow the rules of Sec. 1.5.4.C.









 No build-to is required on the non-primary street frontage of a through lot.






B.	
Intent
1.	
The build-to is intended to provide a range for building placement that strengthens the street edge along the right-of-way, establishing a sense of enclosure by providing spatial definition adjacent to the street.

2.	
The building edge can be supplemented by architectural elements and certain tree plantings aligned in a formal rhythm. The harmonious placement of buildings to establish the street edge is a principal means by which the character of an area or district is defined.

3.	
The build-to range is established to accommodate some flexibility in specific site design while maintaining the established street edge. 



C.	
General Requirements
1.	
On corner lots, a building facade must be placed within the build-to for the first 30 feet along the street extending from the block corner.

2.	
With the exception of parking areas, all structures and uses customarily allowed on the lot are permitted in the build-to area.

3.	
Any common area is not required to meet the build-to requirements.

4.	
Riparian Buffers, Floodways, areas of steep slope (defined as slopes in excess of 25%), pre-established and recorded Tree Conservation Areas and portions of property encumbered by overhead electric transmission lines rated to transmit 230 Kv, for any second driveway required by this code that must cross the build-to area, the additional width of the driveway up to a maximum of 25', and City of Raleigh utility easements shall not be considered when calculating the build-to percentage or build-to range.



D.	
Administrative Alternate Findings 


The Planning Director may in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. reduce the build-to requirement, subject to all of the following findings:
1.	
The approved alternate meets the intent of the build-to regulations;

2.	
The approved alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans;

3.	
The approved alternate does not substantially negatively alter the character-defining street wall or establish a build-to pattern that is not harmonious with the existing built context;

4.	
The change in percentage of building that occupies the build-to area or increased setback does not negatively impact pedestrian access, comfort or safety; and

5.	
Site area that would have otherwise been occupied by buildings is converted to an outdoor amenity area under Sec. 1.5.3.B.


Sec. 1.5.7. 
Height

A.	
Building Height  
1.	
Building height is measured from average grade in both number of stories and feet to the top of the highest point of a pitched or flat roof, not including a maximum parapet wall encroachment. The maximum height encroachment for a parapet wall is 4 feet for a 3-story building, with 1 additional foot of parapet wall allowed for each additional story thereafter. In no case shall a parapet encroachment be taller than 12 feet.  






2.	
Average grade is determined by calculating the average of the highest and lowest elevation along pre-development grade or improved grade (whichever is more restrictive) along each building elevation and averaging all elevations. Where land disturbance has been approved by the City through the mass-grading process, average grade shall be considered the improved grade following the completion of such mass grading. However, for any building subject to the standards of Sec. 2.2.7, average grade shall be the more restrictive of pre-development or improved grade.




3.	
For a detached or attached building type only, for any building type located within the Downtown Mixed Use District, or for any building that is zoned for a maximum of three stories, where a lot slopes downward from any primary street , one story that is additional to the specified maximum number of stories may be built on the lower portion of the lot. This provision shall not be applicable for any structure that includes a basement.




4.	
Where the property slope increases to the rear, building height is measured from the average point at grade of the front and rear wall plane.




5.	
For a detached or attached building type only, an attic does not count as a story where 50% or more of the attic floor area has a clear height of less than 7.5 feet; measured from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. To be classified as an attic, the space must also meet the specifications as provided in the defined term in Article 12.2, Defined Terms.




6.	
When 50% or more of the perimeter wall area of a detached or attached building is located below grade, the building contains a basement. The floor of this level must be located entirely below finished grade. This provision can be utilized in other building types; however, the entirety of the floor area may only be used for storage, mechanical equipment, parking, laundry or waste collection.


B.	
Ground Floor Elevation


Ground floor elevation is measured from the average curb level of the adjoining street, or if no curb exists, the average level of the center crown of the street to the top of the finished ground floor. The floor of the basement meeting the specifications of Article 12.2, Defined Terms, is not the ground floor.


C.	
Story Height
1.	
Story height is measured from the top of the finished floor to top of the finished floor above. 

2.	
Minimum ground story height applies to the first 30 feet of the building measured inward from the street facing facade. At least 50% of the ground story must meet the minimum ground story height provisions.

3.	
Where applicable, at least 80% of each upper story must meet the required minimum upper story height provisions.






D.	
Height Encroachments 


Any height encroachment not specifically listed is expressly prohibited except where the Planning Director determines that the encroachment is similar to a permitted encroachment listed below.
1.	
The maximum height limits of the district do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, bell towers, monuments, water tanks/towers or other similar structures not intended for human occupancy which, by design or function, must exceed the established height limits.

2.	
The following accessory structures may exceed the established height limits, except when located within an -AOD, provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than 12 feet: 
a.	
Chimney, flue or vent stack;

b.	
Unenclosed deck, patio or shade structure;

c.	
Rooftop garden, landscaping;

d.	
Flagpole; 

e.	
Parapet wall; 

f.	
Rainwater collection or harvesting system; and 

g.	
Solar panels, wind turbines.



3.	
The following accessory structures may exceed the established height limits, except when located within an -AOD, provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than 12 feet, do not occupy more than 25% of the roof area and are set back at least 10 feet from the edge of the roof:
a.	
Amateur communications tower;

b.	
Cooling tower; 

c.	
Elevator penthouse or bulkhead;

d.	
Greenhouse;

e.	
Mechanical equipment; 

f.	
Skylights;

g.	
Elevator or stairway access to roof; and

h.	
Tank designed to hold liquids, except as otherwise permitted.



4.	
An accessory structure located on the roof must not be used for any purpose other than a use incidental to the principal use of the building except for telecommunication facilities.


Sec. 1.5.8. 
Pedestrian Access

A.	
Intent
1.	
The street-facing entrance regulations are intended to concentrate pedestrian activity along the street edge and provide an easily identifiable and conveniently-located entrance for residents, visitors and patrons accessing a building as pedestrians from the street.

2.	
Access points should be located or identified in a manner visible to the pedestrian from the street and be accessible via a direct path.



B.	
General Requirements
1.	
An entrance installed after September 1, 2013 providing both ingress and egress, operable to residents or customers at all times, is required to meet the street facing entrance requirements. Additional entrances from another street, pedestrian area or internal parking area are permitted.

2.	
The entrance spacing requirements must be met for each building, but are not applicable to adjacent buildings.

3.	
An angled entrance may be provided at either corner of a building along the street to meet the street-facing entrance requirements.



C.	
Administrative Alternate Findings	 


The Planning Director may in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. allow a non-street-facing entrance, subject to all of the following findings:1.	The approved alternate meets the intent of the street-facing entrance regulations;2.	The approved alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans; 3.	The pedestrian access point is easily identifiable by pedestrians, customers and visitors; 4.	Recessed or projecting entries or building elements have been incorporated into the design of the building to enhance visibility of the street-facing entrance; and5.	The pedestrian route from the street and bus stops and other modes of public transportation to the entrance is safe, convenient and direct. Sec. 1.5.9. TransparencyA.	IntentThe transparency requirements are intended to lend visual interest to street-facing building facades for both pedestrians and building occupants and minimize blank wall areas. This is not applicable to residential uses.B.	General Requirements1.	The minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover a ground story facade is measured between 0 and 12 feet above the adjacent sidewalk. More than 50% of required the transparency must be located between 3 and 8 feet of the building facade.2.	The minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover an upper story facade is measured from top of the finished floor to the top of the finished floor above. When there is no floor above, upper story transparency is measured from the top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate.3.	In a mixed use building, or general building where an Urban Frontage is applied, a minimum of 60% of the street-facing, street-level window pane surface area must allow views into the ground story use for a depth of at least 8 feet. Windows shall not be made opaque by non-operable window treatments (except curtains, blinds or shades within the conditioned space).4.	Glass shall be considered transparent where it has a transparency higher than 80% and external reflectance of less than 15%. Glass on upper stories may have any level of transparency and external reflectance. C.	Administrative Alternate FindingsThe Planning Director may in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. reduce the required transparency, subject to all of the following findings:1.	The approved alternate meets the intent of the transparency requirements;2.	The approved alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans; and3.	The street-facing building facade utilizes other architectural treatments to create visual interest to offset the reduction in transparency.Sec. 1.5.10. Blank Wall AreaA.	Defined1.	Blank wall area means any portion of the exterior facade of the building that does not include a substantial material change; windows or doors; or columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth.2.	Substantial material change means a change between materials such as wood, metal, glass, brick, architectural block, stone or stucco. Substantial material change should occur at an inside corner, where feasible. Paint color is not a substantial material change.B.	Intent1.	The blank wall area regulations are intended to prevent large, monotonous expanses of undifferentiated building mass. 2.	The level of architectural detail should be most intense at the street level, where it is within view of the pedestrians on the sidewalk.C.	General Requirements1.	Blank wall area applies in both a vertical and horizontal direction.2.	Blank wall area applies to both ground and upper stories.D.	Administrative Alternate FindingsThe Planning Director may in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. approve additional blank wall, subject to all of the following findings:1.	The approved alternate meets the intent of the blank wall area regulations; 2.	The approved alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans;3.	The increase in blank wall area is offset by additional architectural treatments and increased vertical landscaping; and4.	The amount of blank wall area for buildings located on an Urban Frontage should not be more than 40%. Sec. 1.5.11. ReservedSec. 1.5.12. Private Residential Garage Parking OptionsA.	Intent1.	The intent of the residential garage options is to minimize the visual impact of street-facing garage doors. 2.	Where garage doors can be seen from the street, measures should be taken to reduce the visual impact of the doors. 3.	Measures include garage doors set back from the front wall plane, architectural treatments, translucent garage doors, single doors, projecting elements over the garage doors (such as bay windows) and limits on the total number of doors that face the street. 4.	Where garage doors are located perpendicular to the street, measures should be taken to reduce the visual impact of the side wall that faces the street. Measures include architectural treatments, changes in material, landscaping, vegetation or the installation of windows.B.	Applicability1.	Any private residential garage constructed after September 1, 2013 must meet the standards of this section. Alternative compliance may be considered by the Planning Director, consistent with the intent of this section.2.	In addition to the standards provided in this section, attached and detached garages must meet all applicable requirements for either principal buildings or accessory structures as set forth in this UDO.3.	Any garage constructed prior to September 1, 2013 that does not comply with these private residential garage parking options is not considered non-conforming. If a pre-existing garage is voluntarily demolished, any new garage must be constructed in compliance with these regulations. If a pre-existing garage that does not meet these regulations is destroyed following a casualty, the garage may be reconstructed to its previous state.C.	Administrative Alternate FindingsThe Planning Director may in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. approve an alternate garage option, subject to all of the following findings:1.	The approved alternate meets the intent of the garage option regulations;2.	The approved alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans;3.	The approved alternate does not negatively impact pedestrian circulation and safety;4.	Measures are taken to mitigate the visual impact of the garage design; and5.	The required garage setbacks are met. D.	Detached House and Attached House On lots of less than 1 acre, garage placement must match one of the following standards.1.	Front-facing, Attached to Housea.	Garage doors are oriented towards the front wall plane.b.	For garage doors positioned 6 feet or less behind the front wall plane of habitable space, garage doors may not comprise more than 50% of the overall width of the front-facing wall planes of the house.  c.	For garage doors positioned more than 6 feet behind the front wall plane of habitable space, garage doors may not comprise more than 66% of the overall width of the front-facing wall planes of the house.2.	Side-facing, Attached to Housea.	Garage doors are oriented perpendicular to the front wall plane.b.	The garage may not comprise more than 66% of the overall width of all front-facing wall planes of the house.3.	Detached Garage is placed no closer to the primary street or the side street than the principal structure's closest wall plane to the street.4.	Alley-Loaded a.	Garage is placed entirely to the rear of the house and is alley-accessed. b.	Garage doors must face the alley. c.	The garage must either be located 4 feet from the alley right-of-way or be a minimum of 20 feet from the alley right-of-way.d.	Where parking spaces are located between the garage and the alley, the garage must be located at least 20 feet from the alley right-of-way.E.	Townhouse1.	Rear-Loaded a.	Garage is placed entirely to the rear of the townhouse and is rear-accessed. Garage can be attached or detached.b.	The garage must either be located 4 feet from the alley right-of-way or easement or rear access drive or be a minimum of 20 feet from the alley right-of-way or easement or rear access drive.c.	Where parking spaces are located between the garage and the alley or rear access drive, the garage must be located at least 20 feet from the alley or rear access drive.2.	Front-Loadeda.	Garage doors may constitute no more than 50% of the width of the individual townhouse unit.b.	Combined parking and driveway area shall not constitute more than 50% of the area between the front building facade and the front property line. c.	Any parking in the front setback must have sufficient depth so that parked cars do not encroach on the adjacent sidewalk. To provide sufficient depth, the garage doors must be set back at least 20 feet from the sidewalk.d.	Garage doors must be recessed at least 1 foot behind the front wall plane or a second-story element over the garage doors must be provided that extends at least 1 foot beyond the front wall plane.Article 1.1. Legal Provisions	1 – 2











































Sec. 1.1.1. Title...........................................................................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.2. Applicability..............................................................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.3. Effective Date...........................................................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.4. Purpose and Intent....................................................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.5. Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan...................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.6. Minimum Requirements............................................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.7. Conflicting Provisions................................................................1 – 2
Sec. 1.1.8. Severability...............................................................................1 – 3
Sec. 1.1.9. Ownership & Management of Common Elements.....................1 – 3
Sec. 1.1.10. Penalties and Remedies ..........................................................1 – 4
Sec. 1.1.11. Existing Buildings and Structures.............................................1 – 4
Sec. 1.1.12. Adopted Manuals....................................................................1 – 4


Article 1.2. Zoning Map	1 – 5Sec. 1.2.1. Establishment of Official Zoning Map........................................1 – 5
Sec. 1.2.2. Interpretation of Map Boundaries.............................................1 – 5
Sec. 1.2.3. Rules of Interpretation..............................................................1 – 5


Article 1.3. Zoning Districts	1 – 6Sec. 1.3.1. General Use Zoning Districts.....................................................1 – 6
Sec. 1.3.2. Conditional Use Zoning Districts...............................................1 – 6
Sec. 1.3.3. Overlay Districts........................................................................1 – 6
Sec. 1.3.4. Legacy Districts.........................................................................1 – 7


Article 1.4. Building Types	1 – 8Sec. 1.4.1. Building Type Descriptions .......................................................1 – 8
Sec. 1.4.2.  Building Types Allowed by District .........................................1 – 10


Article 1.5. Measurement, Exceptions & General Rules of Applicability	1 – 11Sec. 1.5.1. Site..........................................................................................1 – 11
Sec. 1.5.2. Lot...........................................................................................1 – 11
Sec. 1.5.3. Coverage.................................................................................1 – 12
Sec. 1.5.4. Building Setbacks....................................................................1 – 13
Sec. 1.5.5. Parking Setbacks.....................................................................1 – 15
Sec. 1.5.6. Build-to....................................................................................1 – 15
Sec. 1.5.7. Height.....................................................................................1 – 16
Sec. 1.5.8. Pedestrian Access...................................................................1 – 19
Sec. 1.5.9. Transparency..........................................................................1 – 19
Sec. 1.5.10. Blank Wall Area.....................................................................1 – 20
Sec. 1.5.11. Reserved...............................................................................1 – 21
Sec. 1.5.12. Private Residential Garage Parking Options..........................1 – 21



















Page Intentionally Left Blank




CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.1. General Provisions
Sec. 2.1.1. District Intent Statements

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option
Sec. 2.2.1. Detached House

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option
Sec. 2.2.3. Townhouse

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option
Sec. 2.2.5. Civic Building

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option
Sec. 2.2.7. ..Residential Infill Compatibility

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.3. ..Compact Development
Sec. 2.3.1. ..General Requirements

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.3. ..Compact Development
Sec. 2.3.3. Attached House

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.3. ..Compact Development
Sec. 2.3.5. Apartment

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.3. ..Compact Development
Sec. 2.3.7. ..Open Lot

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option
Sec. 2.4.2. Detached House

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option
Sec. 2.4.4. Townhouse

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option
Sec. 2.4.6. Civic Building

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.5. ..Common Open Space Requirements
Sec. 2.5.1. Amount of Open Space

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.6. Additional Housing Patterns
Sec. 2.6.1. ..Cottage Court

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.6. Additional Housing Patterns
Sec. 2.6.2. ..Detached House Additions

.CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 .

Article 2.1. General Provisions   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.1.2. Housing Options

Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.2.2. Attached House

Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.2.4. Apartment

Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.2.6. Open Lot

Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.2.7. ..Residential Infill Compatibility

Article 2.3. ..Compact Development   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.3.2. Detached House

Article 2.3. ..Compact Development   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.3.4. Townhouse

Article 2.3. ..Compact Development   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.3.6. Civic Building

Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.4.1. ..General Requirements

Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.4.3. Attached House

Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.4.5. Apartment

Article 2.4. ..Conservation Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.4.7. ..Open Lot

Article 2.5. ..Common Open Space Requirements   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.5.5. Stormwater Control Measures

Article 2.6. Additional Housing Patterns   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.6.1. ..Cottage Court

CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option
Sec. 2.2.7. ..Residential Infill Compatibility

Article 2.2. ..Conventional Development Option   |   CHAPTER 2. ..RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 2.2.7. ..Residential Infill Compatibility

Chapter 2. 
Residential Districts

Article 2.1. 
General Provisions

Sec. 2.1.1. 
District Intent Statements

A.	
General Purpose
1.	
The intent of the Residential Districts is to protect established residential neighborhoods as well as promote planned and efficient future residential developments. 

2.	
 The building type design and dimensional standards and allowed uses work together to promote desirable residential neighborhoods. 

3.	
The district provisions discourage any use that would substantially interfere with the residential nature of the district. Compatible park, open space, utility and civic uses are permitted in Residential Districts.



B.	
Residential-1 (R-1)
1.	
Subject to the density restriction of 1 unit per acre, R-1 allows single-unit living in a detached house with a minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet. 

2.	
Smaller minimum lot sizes are permitted as part of a compact development.

3.	
Smaller lot sizes and increased density as part of a conservation development are allowed in exchange for preserving common open space.



C.	
Residential-2 (R-2)
1.	
Subject to the density restriction of 2 units per acre, R-2 allows single-unit living in a detached house with a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. 

2.	
Smaller minimum lot sizes are permitted as part of a compact development.

3.	
Additional building types, smaller lot sizes and increased density as part of a conservation development are allowed in exchange for preserving common open space.



D.	
Residential-4 (R-4)
1.	
Subject to the density restriction of 4 units per acre, R-4 allows single-unit living in a detached house with a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet. 

2.	
Decreased minimum lot sizes are permitted as part of a compact development.

3.	
Additional building types, smaller lot sizes and increased density as part of a conservation development are allowed in exchange for preserving common open space.



E.	
Residential-6 (R-6)
1.	
Subject to the density restriction of 6 units per acre, R-6 allows single-unit living in a detached house with a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet and 2-unit living in an attached house with a minimum lot size of 9,000 square feet.  

2.	
Smaller minimum lot sizes are permitted as part of a compact development.

3.	
Additional building types, smaller lot sizes and increased density as part of a conservation development are allowed in exchange for preserving common open space.



F.	
Residential-10 (R-10) 
1.	
Subject to the density restriction of 10 units per acre, R-10 allows single-unit living in a detached house with a minimum lot size of 4,000 square feet and 2-unit living in an attached house with a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet. Multi-unit living is also allowed in a townhouse or apartment.

2.	
Smaller minimum lot sizes are permitted as part of a compact development.

3.	
Smaller lot sizes and increased density as part of a conservation development are allowed in exchange for preserving common open space.




Sec. 2.1.2. 
Housing Options

A.	
Conventional Development Option (see Article 2.2. Conventional Development Option)1.	Conventional is a pattern of residential development that provides a majority of property owners with substantial yards on their own property.2.	Under the conventional option no preserved common open space is required and the minimum lot size is limited to the lot size for the respective district. B.	Compact Development Option (see Article 2.3. Compact Development)1.	A compact development permits a reduction in lot size for residential subdivisions in exchange for an increase in common open space. This allows for efficient residential subdivisions and ample amenity area for the residents. 2.	Size thresholds are district-based and are listed in Sec. 2.3.1.


 For projects under these minimum size thresholds, only the conventional option can be used. 

3.	
Density is regulated by the zoning district. Where the Conservation Development Option permits additional density, the Compact Development option does not.

4.	
Applicants that choose the Compact Development option must set aside 20% of the total project area as common open space. Requirements for the configuration, use and management of common open space are set forth in Article 2.5. Common Open Space Requirements.  



C.	
Conservation Development Option (see Article 2.4. Conservation Development Option) 
1.	
A conservation development trades smaller lot sizes (with reduced setbacks) and additional density in exchange for preserving common open space. This allows for more efficient layout of lots, streets and utilities, promotes a mix of housing and protects the natural character of an area through the preservation of open space, recreation areas, environmental features and scenic vistas.

2.	
A conservation development must be a minimum size to ensure sufficient common open space can be incorporated into the subdivision design.

3.	
Size thresholds are district-based and are listed in Sec. 2.4.1. For projects under these minimum size thresholds, only the conventional option can be used.

4.	
Applicants that choose to use the conservation development option must set aside 40% of the total project area as common open space. Requirements for the configuration, use and management of common open space are set forth in Article 2.5. Common Open Space Requirements.



Sec. 2.1.3. 
Additional Housing Patterns

A.	
Cottage Court (See Sec. 2.6.1.)


A cottage court is a group of small detached houses centered around a common open space or courtyard. The central court enhances the character of the area through the provision of consolidated open space. 
B.	
Detached House Conversions (See Sec. 2.6.2.)


A detached house addition is when an existing detached structure is expanded and converted into an attached building or apartment building. Additional regulations are required for these conversions.
Article 2.2. 
Conventional Development Option

Sec. 2.2.1. 
Detached House

R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 40,000 sf
 20,000 sf
 10,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width - interior lot (min)
 100'
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 
A2
 Width - corner lot (min)
 100'
 80'
 80'
 65'
 60'
 
A3
 Depth (min)
 100'
 100'
 100'
 80'
 60'
 
A4
 Density (max)
 1 u/a
 2 u/a
 4 u/a
 6 u/a
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 15'
 15'
 15'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 5'
 5'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 15'
 10'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 
B6
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 no
 no
 yes
 yes
 yes
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks: See Section 6.7.2.


 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 
D3
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 no
 no
 yes
 yes
 yes
 

E.	
Ground Floor Elevation 


 
E1
 20' or less from front property line (min)
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 
E1
 More than 20' from front property line (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 



Sec. 2.2.2. 
Attached House 


R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 9,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 
A2
 Width - interior lot (min)
 60'
 50'
 
A2
 Width - corner lot (min)
 80'
 65'
 
A3
 Depth (min)
 80'
 60'
 
A4
 Density (max)
 6 u/a
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 5'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 15'
 10'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 20'
 
B6
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 yes
 yes
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks See Section 6.7.2.


 
R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/3 stories
 40'/3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 
D3
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 yes
 yes
 

E.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
E1
 20' or less from front property line (min)
 2'
 2'
 
E1
 More than 20' from front property line (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.2.3. 
Townhouse


R-10
 

A.	
Site Dimensions


 
A1
 Net site area (min)
 3,300 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 44'
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 
A4
 Density (max)
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Lot Dimensions


 
B1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 
B2
 Width (min)
 16'
 

C.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 
C4
 From alley
 4' or 20' min
 
C5
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 yes
 

D.	
Parking Setbacks


 
D1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 
D2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
D3
 From side (min)
 0' or 3'
 
D4
 From rear lot line (min)
 3'
 
D4
 From alley, garage only (min)
 4'
 
R-10
 

E.	
Build-to (Blockface)


 
E1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 
E2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 
E3
 Preexisting Buildings: See Sec. 3.4.2.C.2.
 

F.	
Height


 
F1
 Principal building (max)
 45'/3 stories
 
F2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 
F3
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 yes
 

G.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
G1
 Within build-to (min)
 2'
 
G1
 Outside of build-to (min)
 n/a
 

H.	
Pedestrian Access


 
H1
 Street-facing entrance required for units fronting the street 
 yes
 

I.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.Sec. 2.2.4. Apartment
 



R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 15,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 
A4
 Density (max)
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 
B4
 From alley
 4' or 20' min
 
B5
 Residential infill rules may apply (see  Sec. 2.2.7.)
 yes
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min)
 3'
 
C4
 From alley, garage only (min)
 4'
 
R-10
 

D.	
Build-to (Site)


 
D1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 
D2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 
D3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 
D4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 35%
 
D5
 Preexisting Buildings: See Sec. 3.4.2.C.2.
 

E.	
Height


 
E1
 Principal building (max)
 45'/3 stories
 
E2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 
E3
 Residential infill rules may apply (see  Sec. 2.2.7.)
 yes
 

F.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
F1
 Within build-to (min)
 2'
 
F1
 Outside of build-to (min)
 n/a
 

G.	
Pedestrian Access


 
G1
 Street-facing entrance required (min 1 per building)
 yes
 

H.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.2.5. 
Civic Building

R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 40,000 sf
 20,000 sf
 10,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 15'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 
B5
 Residential infill rules may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 no
 no
 yes
 yes
 yes
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 6'
 6'
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 45'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 
D3
 Residential infill rules may apply  (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 no
 no
 yes
 yes
 yes
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 



Sec. 2.2.6. 
Open Lot 

R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 40,000 sf
 20,000 sf
 10,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 
A3
 Building coverage (max)
 10%
 15%
 17%
 20%
 22%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 7'
 5'
 



R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 All building/structures (max)
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony 
 
Gallery, awning 
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 



Sec. 2.2.7. 
Residential Infill Compatibility

A.	
Intent


The intent of the residential infill compatibility standards is to accommodate and encourage compatible development in existing residential neighborhoods, while reinforcing the established character of the neighborhood and mitigating adverse impacts on adjacent homes. 
B.	
Applicability 
1.	
The standards contained within this section apply to any building in an R-4, R-6 or R-10 district where all of the following are present:
a.	
The total site area is 5-acres or less; 

b.	
The subject lot's primary street frontage is on a street section that was platted for at least 20 years including subsequent right-of-way dedications;

c.	
If a comparative sample can be defined as outlined in Sec. 2.2.7.C. and at least three of the principal buildings contained in the comparative sample have primary street frontage on a street section that has been platted for at least 20 years including subsequent right-of-way dedications.



2.	
When a lot is subject to the residential infill compatibility standards and the lot is located within a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District that regulates any component herein, the Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District regulation shall apply for that specific component.



C.	
Street Setback


The primary street setback for principal buildings shall be determined by the comparative sample context of the block face as outlined in the following subsections: 
1.	
For subject lots of 50 feet in width or less, the primary street setback of the proposed building must be located within 10% of the median primary street setback of the comparative sample of nearby principal buildings.

2.	
For subject lots in excess of 50-feet in width, the primary street setback of the proposed building may be increased or decreased an additional 5% beyond the 10% allowed in Sec. 2.2.7.C.1. above, up to a maximum of a 25% increase or decrease from the median setback as noted in the table below.Subject Lot Width
 Modification to Median
 
50 feet or less
 Within 10% of median
 
More than 50 feet up to 65 feet
 Within 15% of median
 
More than 65 feet up to 80 feet
 Within 20% of median
 
More than 80 feet
 Within 25% of median
 



3.	
The subject lot's width shall be measured at the primary street property line in accordance with Sec. 1.5.2.C. However, the width of cul-de-sac lots shall be measured where the lot width equals the minimum lot width for the district as noted in Sec. 1.5.2.E.2.

4.	
Comparative sample principal buildings must be zoned Residential-4, Residential-6 or Residential-10.

5.	
Comparative sample setbacks are measured from the outer wall of pre-existing principal residential buildings within the comparative sample and do not include the building feature encroachments authorized by Sec. 1.5.4.D.

6.	
When differences in right-of-way widths exist between the subject property and comparative sample properties, the comparative primary street setbacks shall be measured and applied from the centerline of the primary street rather than the property line along the primary street.

7.	
The comparative sample of principal buildings shall be identified based on the context below, listed in order of applicability, and shall have a minimum of three principal buildings in the sample and a maximum of six principal buildings in the comparative sample:
a.	
All principal detached or attached houses within 300 feet of the subject lot in each direction along the same side of the same street, not to exceed a maximum of three principal buildings in each direction.


b.	
When the 300-foot range described in Sec. 2.2.7.C.7.a. above includes a Local Street (as defined in Sec. 8.4.4), the Local Street may be crossed to establish the comparative sample of principal detached or attached houses as described below. The right-of-way width of the Local Street shall be counted in the 300-foot range.
i.	
The comparative sample of principal detached or attached houses continues across the Local Street and continues along the block face, provided the first residential building on the other side of the Local Street has the same orientation as the subject property.








ii.	
 In instances where the first principal detached or attached house across the Local Street has a different orientation, that lot is skipped, and the comparative sample continues to the next improved lot's principal detached or attached house.




c.	
   When the 300-foot range described in Sec. 2.2.7.C.7.a. above includes a street that is not a Local Street, the comparative sample of principal buildings is all of the lots developed with detached or attached houses within 300 feet of the subject property on the same block face. This method would only capture the principal detached or attached houses that are on the same side of the non-local street.




d.	
When there are four or more consecutive vacant lots immediately adjacent to the subject lot in both directions, or at least three entries into the comparative sample are not obtained, the scenarios in Secs. 2.2.7.C.7.a. through 2.2.7.C.7.c. shall be applied utilizing properties on the opposite side of the street that are within 300 feet of the subject site as needed to achieve the requisite comparative sample size up to a maximum of six principal buildings. The maximum sample size includes only the six closest principal detached or attached houses. In the event that at least three collective entries cannot be identified for the comparative sample, the base zoning district rules shall apply.




8.	
These rules do not apply to lots abutting a cul-de-sac unless there are a minimum of three comparative sample lots abutting the cul-de-sac that are developed with either detached or attached houses.

9.	
Where an addition is proposed to a detached or attached house, the existing principal building on the lot shall be considered an addition to the comparative sample.

10.	
Where an official survey demonstrates that a detached or attached house is currently located on the lot or has been within the last 365 days, the proposed principal building may be located at the same primary street setback as the existing detached or attached dwelling or as prescribed by the rules above, whichever the applicant so chooses.

11.	
Riparian Buffers, Floodways, areas of steep slope (defined as slopes in excess of 25%), pre-established Tree Conservation Areas, City of Raleigh easements, drainage easements, slope easements, voluntary tree conservation in compliance with Sec. 9.1 for trees with a DBH of 10 inches or greater and protective yards (and associated setbacks) are considered impediments to compliance with the primary street setback range called for in Sec. 2.2.7.C.2. Where an applicant can demonstrate to the Development Services Director that an impediment located within the primary street setback prevents compliance with the primary street setback, the median comparative setback sample shall be considered the edge of the impediment.


D.	
Height
1.	
Side Setback Plane




The maximum allowed wall height adjacent to the side property line is 22 feet or the average height of the 2 abutting neighboring wall planes, whichever is greater. The wall height may be increased 1 foot for each foot of horizontal distance the wall is moved from the side setback line, not to exceed the maximum height allowed within the district.
2.	
Exceptions to Setback Planes
a.	
Side-Gabled Roof




A side-gabled roof structure may extend above the side setback plane on each side of the building, for a total length of not more than 30 feet (A) on each side, measured from the front wall plane.
b.	
Dormers


Dormers may also extend above the side setback plane on each side of the building for a total length of not more than 15 feet (B) on each side, measured along the intersection with the setback plane.


E.	
Side Wall Length 


Articulation is required for side walls on additions or new construction that are 22 feet or taller and located within 15 feet of the side lot line. No wall may extend for more than 50 feet without a projection or recession of at least 4 feet in depth and 10 feet in length.


F.	
Driveway and Parking Setbacks


Driveways and parking spaces must be located a minimum of 2.5 feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, a driveway may be located on the lot line closer than 2.5 feet if it is shared with an adjacent lot or when a no-build easement is secured and recorded on the adjacent lot that guarantees a minimum separation of 5 feet from the encroaching driveway and any impervious surfaces or structures on the adjacent lot. Fences and walls on either lot require a 2.5 feet separation from the encroaching driveway. All driveways and parking areas existing prior to January 1, 2019 shall not be deemed nonconforming solely because of this regulation or a parking setback specified in Chapter 2. 
Article 2.3. 
Compact Development

Sec. 2.3.1. 
General Requirements 


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Site


 
A1
 Density (max)
 1 u/a
 2 u/a
 4 u/a
 6 u/a
 10 u/a
 
A2
 Gross site area (min)
 10 acres
 10 acres
 8 acres
 Greater than 5 acres
 Greater than 5 acres
 

B.	
Open Space 


 
B1
 Open space required (min)
 20%
 20%
 20%
 20%
 20%
 
B2
 Width of open space (min)
 50'
 50'
 50'
 50'
 50'
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

C.	
Transitional Protective Yard


 
C1
 Site boundary (min)
 Type B1 or B2 Transitional Protective Yard 
(see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) or perimeter lots must meet dimensional standards of Article 2.2. Conventional Development Option of the district where the property is located.
 

D.	
 Residential Unit Types (max)


 
Detached house
 100%
 100%
 100%
 100%
 100%
 
Attached house
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 100%
 100%
 
Townhouse 
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 100%
 
Apartment
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 100%
 



Sec. 2.3.2. 
Detached House


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 30,000 sf
 15,000 sf
 7,500 sf
 5,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width - interior lot (min)
 100'
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 
A2
 Width - corner lot (min)
 100'
 80'
 80'
 65'
 60'
 
A3
 Depth (min)
 100'
 100'
 100'
 80'
 60'
 
A4
 Density (max)
 1 u/a
 2 u/a
 4 u/a
 6 u/a
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 15'
 15'
 15'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 5'
 5'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 15'
 15'
 15'
 15'
 10'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks: See Section 6.7.2.


 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Ground Floor Elevation 


 
E1
 20' or less from front property line (min)
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 
E1
 More than 20' from front property line (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 
Residential infill regulations for additional building setback and reduced height may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 


Sec. 2.3.3. 
Attached House


R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 7,500 sf
 6,000 sf
 
A2
 Width - interior lot (min)
 60'
 50'
 
A2
 Width - corner lot (min)
 80'
 65'
 
A3
 Depth (min)
 80'
 60'
 
A4
 Density (max)
 6 u/a
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 5'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 15'
 10'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 20'
 
C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks: See Section 6.7.2.


 
R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/3 stories
 40'/3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
E1
 20' or less from front property line (min)
 2'
 2'
 
E1
 More than 20' from front property line (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks”for specific building element requirements.
 
Residential infill regulations for additional building setback and reduced height may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 


Sec. 2.3.4. 
Townhouse


R-10
 

A.	
Site Dimensions


 
A1
 Net site area (min)
 3,300 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 44'
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area
 5%
 
A4
 Density (max)
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Lot Dimensions


 
B1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 
B2
 Width (min)
 16'
 

C.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 
C4
 From alley, garage only (min)
 4' or 20' min
 

D.	
Parking Setbacks


 
D1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 
D2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
D3
 From side line (min)
 0' or 3'
 
D4
 From rear lot line (min)
 3'
 
D4
 From alley (min)
 4'
 
R-10
 

E.	
Build-to (Site)


 
E1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 
E2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 
E3
 Preexisting Buildings: See Sec. 3.4.2.C.2.
 

F.	
Height


 
F1
 Principal building (max)
 45'/3 stories
 
F2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 

G.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
G1
 Within build-to (min)
 2'
 
G1
 Outside of build-to (min)
 n/a
 

H.	
Pedestrian Access


 
H1
 Street-facing entrance required for units fronting the street 
 yes
 

I.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 
Residential infill regulations for additional building setback and reduced height may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 


Sec. 2.3.5. 
Apartment


R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 15,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area
 5%
 
A4
 Density (max)
 10 u/a
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 
B4
 From alley 
 4' or 20' min
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min)
 3'
 
C4
 From alley (min)
 4'
 
R-10
 

D.	
Build-to


 
D1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 
D2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 
D3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 
D4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 35%
 
D5
 Preexisting Buildings: See Sec. 3.4.2.C.2.
 

E.	
Height


 
E1
 Principal building (max)
 45'/3 stories
 
E2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 

F.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
F1
 Within build-to (min)
 2'
 
F2
 Outside of build-to (min)
 n/a
 

G.	
Pedestrian Access


 
G1
 Street-facing entrance required (min 1 per building)
 yes
 

H.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 
Residential infill regulations for additional building setback and reduced height may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 


Sec. 2.3.6. 
Civic Building


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 30,000 sf
 15,000 sf
 7,500 sf
 5,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 15'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 6'
 6'
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 
Residential infill regulations for additional building setback and reduced height may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)Sec. 2.3.7. Open Lot
 



R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 30,000 sf
 15,000 sf
 7,500 sf
 5,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 
A3
 Building coverage (max)
 10%
 15%
 17%
 20%
 22%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 7'
 5'
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 All building/structures (max)
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 40’/ 
3 stories 
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony 
 
Gallery, awning 
 
See  Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 
Residential infill regulations for additional building setback and reduced height may apply (see Sec. 2.2.7.)
 


Article 2.4. 
Conservation Development Option

Sec. 2.4.1. 
General Requirements 


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Site


 
A1
 Density (max)
 2 units/acre
 4 units/acre
 6 units/acre
 10 units/acre
 15 units/acre
 
A2
 Gross site area (min)
 20 acres
 15 acres
 12 acres
 10 acres
 5 acres
 

B.	
Open Space 


 
B1
 Open space required (min)
 40%
 40%
 40%
 40%
 40%
 
B2
 % of lots abutting open spaces (min)
 60%
 50%
 40%
 40%
 30%
 
B3
 Contiguous area (min)
 60%
 60%
 60%
 60%
 60%
 
B4
 Width of open space (min)
 50'
 50'
 50'
 50'
 50'
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

C.	
Transitional Protective Yard


 
C1
 Site boundary (min)
 Type B1 or B2 Transitional Protective Yard 
(see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) or perimeter lots must meet dimensional standards of Article 2.2. Conventional Development Option of the district where the property is located.
 

D.	
 Residential Unit Types (max)


 
Detached house
 100%
 100%
 100%
 100%
 100%
 
Attached house
 n/a
 35%
 40%
 45%
 50%
 
Townhouse 
 n/a
 n/a
 30%
 35%
 40%
 
Apartment
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 30%
 35%
 



Sec. 2.4.2. 
Detached House


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 20,000 sf
 10,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 3,000 sf
 
A2
 Width - interior lot (min)
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 30'
 
A2
 Width - corner lot (min)
 80'
 80'
 65'
 60'
 45'
 
A3
 Depth (min)
 100'
 100'
 80'
 60'
 60'
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 5'
 5'
 5'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 20'
 20'
 15'
 10'
 10'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 15'
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks: See Section 6.7.2.


 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Ground Floor Elevation 


 
E1
 20' or less from front property line (min)
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 
E1
 More than 20' from front property line (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.4.3. 
Attached House


R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 15,000 sf
 9,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,500 sf
 
A2
 Width - interior lot (min)
 65'
 60'
 50'
 40'
 
A2
 Width - corner lot (min)
 80'
 80'
 65'
 55'
 
A3
 Depth (min)
 80'
 80'
 60'
 60'
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 5'
 5'
 5'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 20'
 15'
 10'
 10'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 20'
 20'
 15'
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks: See Section 6.7.2.


 
R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
E1
 20' or less from front property line (min)
 2'
 2'
 2'
 2'
 
E1
 More than 20' from front property line (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.4.4. 
Townhouse


R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Site Dimensions


 
A1
 Net site area (min)
 3,900 sf
 3,300 sf
 3,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 52'
 44'
 40'
 

B.	
Lot Dimensions


 
B1
 Area (min)
 1,500 sf
 1,200 sf
 1,050 sf
 
B2
 Width (min)
 20'
 16'
 14'
 

C.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 20'
 20'
 
C4
 From alley, garage only (min)
 4' or 
20' min
 4' or 
20' min
 4' or 
20' min
 

D.	
Parking Setbacks


 
D1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 
D2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
D3
 From side line (min)
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
D4
 From rear lot line (min)
 3'
 3'
 3'
 
D4
 From alley (min)
 4'
 4'
 4'
 
R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

E.	
Build-to (Site)


 
E1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 
E2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 70%
 70%
 

F.	
Height


 
F1
 Principal building (max)
 45'/
3 stories
 45'/
3 stories
 45'/
3 stories
 
F2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

G.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
G1
 Within build-to (min)
 2'
 2'
 2'
 
G1
 Outside of build-to (min)
 0'
 0'
 0'
 

H.	
Pedestrian Access


 
H1
 Street-facing entrance required for units fronting the street 
 yes
 yes
 yes
 

I.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.4.5. 
Apartment


R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 15,000 sf
 15,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 100'
 100'
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 20'
 
B4
 From alley 
 4' or 20' min
 4' or 20' min
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min)
 3'
 3'
 
C4
 From alley (min)
 4'
 4'
 
R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Build-to


 
D1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 
D2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 70%
 
D3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 
D4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 35%
 35%
 

E.	
Height


 
E1
 Principal building (max)
 45'/3 stories
 45'/3 stories
 
E2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

F.	
Ground Floor Elevation


 
F1
 Within build-to (min)
 2'
 2'
 
F2
 Outside of build-to (min)
 0'
 0'
 

G.	
Pedestrian Access


 
G1
 Street-facing entrance required (min 1 per building)
 yes
 yes
 

H.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.4.6. 
Civic Building


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 20,000 sf
 10,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 45'
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 20'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 6'
 6'
 6'
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 40'/
3 stories
 45'/
3 stories
 45'/
3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 2.4.7. 
Open Lot


R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 20,000 sf
 10,000 sf
 6,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 80'
 65'
 50'
 45'
 45'
 
A3
 Building coverage (max)
 15%
 17%
 20%
 22%
 22%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 30'
 30'
 20'
 20'
 20'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side/rear lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 10'
 

R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 All building/structures (max)
 40’/ 
3 stories
 40’/ 
3 stories
 40’/ 
3 stories
 40’/ 
3 stories
 40’/ 
3 stories
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony 
 
Gallery, awning 
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks" for specific building element requirements.
 


Article 2.5. 
Common Open Space Requirements 

Sec. 2.5.1. 
Amount of Open Space


Applicants that choose to use the conservation standards must set aside at least 40% of the total project area as common open space. Applicants that choose to use the compact standards must set aside at least 20% of the total project area as common open space. The amount of required common open space is calculated as a percentage of the net site area.
Sec. 2.5.2. 
Open Space Allocation


In allocating land for required common open space, the following hierarchy of pri­mary and secondary open space applies.
A.	
Primary Open Space


The following are considered primary open space areas and must be the first areas reserved as required open space:
1.	
Floodway areas;

2.	
Natural resource buffers required along primary and secondary watercourses (see open space bonus allowance in Sec. 9.2.3 A.1.d);

3.	
Slopes above 25% of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area;

4.	
Jurisdictional wetlands under federal law (Clean Water Act, Section 404) that meet the definition applied by the Army Corps of Engineers; and

5.	
Transitional protective yards.


B.	
Secondary Open Space


The following are considered secondary open space areas and must be included as required open space once the primary open space areas are exhausted:
1.	
Flood fringe areas.


C.	
Tertiary Open Space


The following are considered tertiary open space areas and must be included as required open space once the primary and secondary open space areas are exhausted:
1.	
Historic, archeological and cultural sites, cemeteries and burial grounds;

2.	
Significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, field borders, meadows, fields, river views, natural woodlands that can be seen from roadways and serve to block the view of the project in whole or in part; 

3.	
Habitat for federally-listed endangered or threatened species;

4.	
Individual existing healthy trees greater than 10 inches DBH and their critical root zones;

5.	
Areas that connect to neighboring open space, trails or greenways;

6.	
Soils with severe limitations due to drainage problems; and

7.	
Tree conservation areas.


Sec. 2.5.3. 
Configuration of Open Space

A.	
The minimum width for any required open space is 50 feet. Exceptions may be granted for items such as trail easements and linear parks and 32-foot wide tree conservation areas.

B.	
At least 60% of the required open space must be contiguous. For the purposes of this section, contiguous includes any open space bisected by a Local Street or Mixed Use Street, provided that:
1.	
A pedestrian crosswalk provides access to the open space on both sides of the street; and

2.	
The right-of-way area is not included in the calculation of minimum open space required.



C.	
Where feasible, the open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas and non-protected natural areas.

D.	
The required open space must be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of dwelling units within the development. Non-adjoining lots must be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space.

E.	
No lot can be farther than a ¼-mile radius from the open space. This radius is measured in a straight line from the lot line, without regard for street, sidewalk or trail connections, to the nearest point of the open space.

F.	
Access to the open space must be provided either by an abutting street or easement not less than 20 feet in width.

Sec. 2.5.4. 
Allowed Uses of Open Space


To the extent not otherwise prohibited, required open space may be used for the following:
A.	
Conservation areas for natural, archeological or historical resources;

B.	
Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves or similar conservation-oriented areas;

C.	
Pedestrian or multipurpose trails;

D.	
Passive recreation areas;

E.	
Active recreation areas, provided that impervious area is limited to no more than 25% of the total open space (active recreation areas in excess of this impervious area limit must be located outside of the required open space);

F.	
Golf courses (excluding clubhouse areas and maintenance facilities), provided the area does not exceed 50% of the required open space and further provided that impervious area is limited to no more than 10% of the total open space;

G.	
Water bodies, such as lakes and ponds and floodways provided the total surface area does not exceed 50% of the required open space;

H.	
Restricted agriculture, community garden;

I.	
Floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, row and field crops, viticulture, tree or sod farm, silviculture; 

J.	
Stormwater control measures; and

K.	
Easements for drainage, access and underground utility lines.

Sec. 2.5.5. 
Stormwater Control Measures


No more than 25% of the required common space shall be devoted singularly or col­lectively to detention ponds, sand filters and retention ponds, provided, this limita­tion shall have no application to any retention pond that meets all of the following:
A.	
The retention pond or closely connected series of ponds is one-half acre water surface area at normal pool in size or greater; 

B.	
The retention pond is surrounded by open space; 

C.	
The retention pond is accessible to all homeowners; and

D.	
The retention pond is an amenity complying with Sec. 7.2.6.Sec. 2.5.6. Prohibited Uses of Open SpaceRequired open space cannot be used for the following:A.	Individual wastewater disposal systems; B.	Overhead electric transmission lines or high voltage electric transmission lines; andC.	Streets (except for street crossings as expressly provided) and impervious parking areas.Sec. 2.5.7. Ownership and Management of Open SpaceA.	OwnershipRequired open space must be owned and maintained by one of the following entities:1.	Land Conservancy or Land TrustA bona fide land conservancy or land trust with the legal authority may own the open space. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities may be borne by a land conservancy or land trust.2.	Homeowners' AssociationA homeowners' association representing residents of the development may own the open space. The homeowners' association must have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities is borne by the homeowners' association.B.	ConveyanceThe conveyance of common open space shall be in accordance with the following:1.	Open space shall be conveyed to the land conservancy or homeowners' association in fee simple without any encumbrances except drainage, greenway and utility easements. Title to the real property shall be conveyed no later than the time of the conveyance of the first lot within the applicable phase of the development. 2.	Open space shall be preserved for the perpetual benefit of the residents within the development and it shall be restricted against private or public ownership for any other purpose except acquisition by condemnation or in lieu of condemnation and the granting of utility, drainage and greenway easements. C.	DissolutionIf the homeowner’s association is dissolved, the open space may be offered to another entity who shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the open space. If no other offer is accepted, the open space shall be offered to the City and if accepted, deeded to the City. Article 2.6. Additional Housing PatternsSec. 2.6.1. Cottage CourtA.	DescriptionA cottage court is a group of small houses centered around a common open space or courtyard. The central court enhances the character of the area through the provision of consolidated open space. B.	Districts Allowed InR-6, R-10, RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX-C.	Building Types AllowedDetached house, attached house









R-6
 R-10
 RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX-
 

D.	
Site Dimensions


 
D1
 Net site area (min) 
 40,000 sf
 22,000 sf
 18,000 sf
 
D2
 Width (min)
 150'
 150'
 150'
 
D3
 Depth (min)
 120'
 120'
 120'
 
D4
 Dwelling units per min site area (max)
 5
 5
 5
 
D5
 Additional site area per dwelling unit (min) 
 8,000 sf
 4,400 sf
 3,600 sf
 
D6
 Dwelling units per site (max)
 6 u/a
 10 u/a
 n/a
 
D7
 Building footprint (max)
 1,400
 1,200 sf
 1,000 sf
 
D8
 Detached accessory structure footprint (max)
 450 sf
 450 sf
 450 sf
 

E.	
Internal Courtyard 


 
E1
 Area (min)
 5,000 sf
 4,000 sf
 3,000 sf
 
E2
 Width (min)
 60'
 50'
 40'
 
E3
 Additional courtyard area per unit (min)
 1,000 sf
 800 sf
 600 sf
 
R-6
 R-10
 RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX-
 

F.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
F1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
F2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
F3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
F4
 From rear lot line (min)
 20'
 20'
 20'
 
F4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 5'
 
F5
 Building separation (min)
 6'
 6'
 6'
 

G.	
Parking Setbacks


 
G1
 From primary street (min)
 90'
 90'
 90'
 
G2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
G3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 5'
 5'
 
G4
 From rear lot line (min)
 5'
 5'
 5'
 
G4
 From alley (min)
 0'
 0'
 0'
 
R-6
 R-10
 RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX-
 

H.	
Height


 
H1
 Building height (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 
H2
 Building wall plate height (max)
 17'
 17'
 17'
 
H3
 Accessory building height (max)
 17'
 17'
 17'
 
H4
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 2'
 2'
 2'
 

I.	
Pedestrian Access


 
I1
 Street-facing entrance or front porch required for end units
 yes
 yes
 yes
 

J.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 



Sec. 2.6.2. 
Detached House Additions 


When an existing detached house is converted to an attached or apartment building type and an addition is added to the existing building, the following regulations ap­ply:
A.	
The addition must contain the same building materials as the existing structure;

B.	
The roof pitch and form of the addition shall be the same as the existing structure;

C.	
The height of the addition shall not exceed the height of the existing structure;

D.	
The building addition shall not cumulatively exceed 50% of the floor area of the existing structure; and

E.	
Additions made after September 1, 2013, which do not comply with paragraphs A through D. above shall not be used for conversions that add one or more dwelling units. 



Article 2.1. General Provisions	2 – 2Sec. 2.1.1. District Intent Statements.........................................................2 – 2
Sec. 2.1.2. Housing Options.......................................................................2 – 3
Sec. 2.1.3. Additional Housing Patterns.....................................................2 – 3


Article 2.2. Conventional Development Option	2 – 4Sec. 2.2.1. Detached House.......................................................................2 – 4
Sec. 2.2.2. Attached House .......................................................................2 – 5
Sec. 2.2.3. Townhouse...............................................................................2 – 6
Sec. 2.2.4. Apartment................................................................................2 – 7
Sec. 2.2.5. Civic Building............................................................................2 – 8
Sec. 2.2.6. Open Lot .................................................................................2 – 9
Sec. 2.2.7. Residential Infill Compatibility.................................................2 – 10


Article 2.3. Compact Development	2 – 14Sec. 2.3.1. General Requirements ............................................................2 – 14
Sec. 2.3.2. Detached House.....................................................................2 – 15
Sec. 2.3.3. Attached House......................................................................2 – 16
Sec. 2.3.4. Townhouse..............................................................................2 – 17
Sec. 2.3.5. Apartment..............................................................................2 – 18
Sec. 2.3.6. Civic Building..........................................................................2 – 19
Sec. 2.3.7. Open Lot.................................................................................2 – 20


Article 2.4. Conservation Development Option	2 – 21Sec. 2.4.1. General Requirements ............................................................2 – 21
Sec. 2.4.2. Detached House.....................................................................2 – 22
Sec. 2.4.3. Attached House......................................................................2 – 23
Sec. 2.4.4. Townhouse.............................................................................2 – 24
Sec. 2.4.5. Apartment..............................................................................2 – 25
Sec. 2.4.6. Civic Building..........................................................................2 – 26
Sec. 2.4.7. Open Lot.................................................................................2 – 27


Article 2.5. Common Open Space Requirements 	2 – 28Sec. 2.5.1. Amount of Open Space...........................................................2 – 28
Sec. 2.5.2. Open Space Allocation............................................................2 – 28
Sec. 2.5.3. Configuration of Open Space..................................................2 – 28
Sec. 2.5.4. Allowed Uses of Open Space...................................................2 – 28
Sec. 2.5.5. Stormwater Control Measures................................................2 – 29
Sec. 2.5.6. Prohibited Uses of Open Space...............................................2 – 29
Sec. 2.5.7. Ownership and Management of Open Space...........................2 – 29


Article 2.6. Additional Housing Patterns	2 – 30Sec. 2.6.1. Cottage Court.........................................................................2 – 30
Sec. 2.6.2. Detached House Additions .....................................................2 – 32

















































CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.1. General Provisions
Sec. 3.1.1. District Intent Statements

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards
Sec. 3.2.1. ..Detached House

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards
Sec. 3.2.3. ..Townhouse

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards
Sec. 3.2.5. ..General Building

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards
Sec. 3.2.7. ..Civic Building

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.3. ..Height Requirements
Sec. 3.3.1. Applicability

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements
Sec. 3.4.1. Purpose and Intent

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements
Sec. 3.4.5. Parking Limited (-PL)

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements
Sec. 3.4.7. Urban Limited (-UL)

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements
Sec. 3.4.9. Shopfront (-SH)

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.5. ..Neighborhood Transitions
Sec. 3.5.3. Zone A: Protective Yard

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.5. ..Neighborhood Transitions
Sec. 3.5.5. Zone C: Height and Form

Article 3.1. General Provisions   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.1.2. District Components

Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.2.2. ..Attached House

Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.2.4. ..Apartment

Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.2.6. ..Mixed Use Building

Article 3.2. ..Base Dimensional Standards   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.2.8. ..Open Lot

Article 3.3. ..Height Requirements   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.3.3. Building Massing Standards

Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.4.2. General Requirements

Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.4.6. Green (-GR)

Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.4.8. Urban General (-UG)

Article 3.5. ..Neighborhood Transitions   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.5.1. Applicability

Article 3.5. ..Neighborhood Transitions   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.5.4. Zone B: Use Restrictions

Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.4.2. General Requirements

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 

Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.4.3. Parkway (-PK)

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. Frontage Requirements


CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements
Sec. 3.4.2. General Requirements

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.4. ..Frontage Requirements
Sec. 3.4.4. Detached (-DE)

CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS   |   Article 3.5. ..Neighborhood Transitions
Sec. 3.5.6. Historic Alley Transition

Article 3.5. ..Neighborhood Transitions   |   CHAPTER 3. ..MIXED USE DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 3.5.6. Historic Alley Transition 

Chapter 3. 
Mixed Use Districts

Article 3.1. 
General Provisions

Sec. 3.1.1. 
District Intent Statements

A.	
Residential Mixed Use (RX-)
1.	
RX- is a mixed residential district intended to provide for a variety of residential building types and housing options at density in excess of 10 dwelling units per acre.

2.	
RX- can serve as a land use transition between other mixed use districts and residential neighborhoods. 

3.	
RX- allows limited retail and services subject to use standards that limit the size and scale to the ground floor corner unit of an apartment building.



B.	
Office Park (OP-)
1.	
OP- is intended to preserve and provide land for office and employment uses. 

2.	
OP- can also serve as a land use transition between other mixed use districts and residential neighborhoods. 



C.	
Office Mixed Use (OX-)
1.	
OX- is intended to provide for a variety of office and employment uses while allowing for housing and limited retail and service-related options. Limited retail and service-related options are allowed subject to use standards that restrict the size and scale of each use.

2.	
OX- is not intended to provide for areas exclusively dominated by office or employment uses but provide for developments that balance employment and housing options with access to convenience retail services and goods.

3.	
OX- can serve as a land use transition between other mixed use districts and residential neighborhoods. 



D.	
Neighborhood Mixed Use (NX-)
1.	
NX- is intended to provide for a variety of residential, retail, service and commercial uses all within walking distance of residential neighborhoods. 

2.	
To limit the overall scale, NX- has a maximum lot size of 10 acres. Maximum height limits should be compatible with adjacent residential development.



E.	
Commercial Mixed Use (CX-)
1.	
CX- is intended to provide for a variety of residential, retail, service and commercial uses.

2.	
While CX- accommodates commercial uses, the inclusion of residential and employment uses are strongly encouraged in order to promote live-work and mixed use opportunities. 



F.	
Downtown Mixed Use (DX-)


DX- is intended to provide for intense mixed use development of the City’s downtown area. 
G.	
Industrial Mixed Use (IX-)
1.	
IX- is intended to provide for a variety of light industrial and manufacturing uses while allowing for retail, service and commercial activity and limited housing opportunities. To help ensure that land is reserved for manufacturing and employment, residential uses are limited to the upper stories of mixed use buildings.

2.	
IX- is not intended to provide for areas exclusively dominated by light industrial or manufacturing but provide for developments that incorporate commercial uses with housing, retail and service-related activity. 

3.	
IX- can serve as a land use transition between heavy industrial areas and mixed use districts. 




Sec. 3.1.2. 
District Components

A.	
Each Mixed Use District is comprised of one or more of the following components: 
1.	
Use and Base Dimensions (RX-, OP-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX-, IX-);

2.	
Height (-3, -4, -5, -7, -12, -20, -40); and 

3.	
Frontage (-PK, -DE, -PL, -GR, -UL, -UG, -SH).



B.	
A variety of Mixed Use Districts can be constructed by applying different height and frontage configurations as shown in the table below. 

C.	
Each Mixed Use District must include a height designation. A frontage is optional unless it has already been applied to the property and designated on the Official Zoning Map. 

D.	
Neighborhood transitions apply when adjacent to a residential district (see Article 3.5. Neighborhood Transitions).


Use and Base Dimensions
 Height
 Frontage
 Examples
 
Specifies the range of uses 
allowed (Chapter 6. Use Regulations) and base dimensional standards for allowed building types (Article 3.2. Base Dimensional Standards).
 Sets the maximum 
allowed height for the district (Article 3.3. Height Requirements)
 Frontages place additional limitations beyond the base dimensional standards
(Article 3.4. Frontage Requirements)
 
RX- = Residential Mixed Use
OP- = Office Park 
OX- = Office Mixed Use
NX- = Neighborhood Mixed Use
CX- = Commercial Mixed Use
DX- = Downtown Mixed Use
IX- = Industrial Mixed Use
 3 = 3 stories max
4 = 4 stories max
5 = 5 stories max
7 = 7 stories max
12 = 12 stories max
20 = 20 stories max
40 = 40 stories max
 -PK = Parkway
-DE = Detached
-PL = Parking Limited
-GR = Green
-UL = Urban Limited
-UG = Urban General
-SH = Shopfront
 RX-3:
Residential Mixed Use, up to 3 stories, no frontage required
OX-5-SH:
Office mixed use, up to 5 stories, shopfront frontage required
CX-7-PK:
Commercial mixed use, up to 7 stories, parkway frontage required
 


Article 3.2. 
Base Dimensional Standards

Sec. 3.2.1. 
Detached House


RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 4,000 sf
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 45'
 n/a
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 3'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 10'
 6'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 10'
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 50'
 30'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 5'
 3'
 
C4
 From alley 
 4' or 20' min
 4' or 20' min
 
RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/3 stories
 40'/3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Floor Heights 


 
E1
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 2'
 2'
 
E2
 Ground story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
E3
 Upper story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Transparency


 
F1
 Ground story (min)
 20%
 20%
 
F2
 Upper story (min)
 15%
 15%
 
F3
 Blank wall area (max)
 35'
 35'
 

G.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 3.2.2. 
Attached House


RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 6,000 sf
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 50'
 n/a
 

B.	
Principal Building Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 3'
 
B4
 Sum of side setbacks (min)
 10'
 6'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 10'
 

C.	
Accessory Structure Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 50'
 30'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 5'
 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 5'
 3'
 
C4
 From alley 
 4' or 20' min
 4' or 20' min
 
RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 40'/3 stories
 40'/3 stories
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Floor Heights 


 
E1
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 2'
 2'
 
E2
 Ground story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
E3
 Upper story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 

F.	
Transparency


 
F1
 Ground story (min)
 20%
 20%
 
F2
 Upper story (min)
 15%
 15%
 
F3
 Blank wall area (max)
 35'
 35'
 

G.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 3.2.3. 
Townhouse 


RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Site Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 3,300 sf
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 44'
 n/a
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 10%
 

B.	
Lot Dimensions


 
B1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
B2
 Width (min)
 16'
 n/a
 

C.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 20'
 0' or 6'
 
C4
 From alley 
 4' or 20' min
 4' or 20' min
 

D.	
Parking Setbacks


 
D1
 From primary street (min)
 20'
 20'
 
D2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
D3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 3' 
 0' or 3'
 
D4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 3' 
 3' 
 
D4
 From alley (min)
 4'
 4'
 
RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

E.	
Build-to (Blockface)


 
E1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 
E2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 70%
 
E3
 Preexisting Buildings: See Sec. 3.4.2.C.2.
 

F.	
Height


 
F1
 Principal building (max)
 Set by district
 Set by district
 
F2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

G.	
Floor Heights 


 
G1
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 
Residential 
 2'
 2'
 
Nonresidential 
 n/a
 n/a
 
G2
 Ground story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
G3
 Upper story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 

H.	
Transparency


 
H1
 Ground story (min)
 20%
 20%
 
H2
 Upper story (min)
 15%
 15%
 
H3
 Blank wall area (max)
 35'
 35'
 

I.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 3.2.4. 
Apartment


RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 10,000 sf
 n/a
 
A1
 Area (max)
 10 acres (NX- only)
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 10%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 5'
 5'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 5'
 5'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From alley
 4' or 20' min
 4' or 20' min
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From alley (min)
 4'
 4'
 
RX-, OX-, NX-, CX-
 DX-
 

D.	
Build-to


 
D1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 
D2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 70%
 
D3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 10'/55'
 10'/55'
 
D4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 35%
 35%
 
D5
 Preexisting Buildings: See Sec. 3.4.2.C.2.
 

E.	
Height


 
E1
 Principal building (max)
 Set by district
 Set by district
 
E2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

F.	
Floor Heights 


 
F1
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 
Residential 
 2'
 2'
 
Nonresidential 
 n/a
 n/a
 
F2
 Ground story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
F3
 Upper story height, floor to floor (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 

G.	
Transparency


 
G1
 Ground story (min)
 20%
 20%
 
G2
 Upper story (min)
 15%
 15%
 
G3
 Blank wall area (max)
 35'
 35'
 

H.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 3.2.5. 
General Building

OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 
A1
 Area (max)
 10 acres 
(NX- only)
 n/a
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 10%
 10%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 5'
 3'
 3'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 5'
 3'
 3'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 5'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 5'
 
OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 Set by district
 Set by district
 Set by district
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Floor Heights 


 
E1
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 0'
 0'
 0'
 
E2
 Ground story height, floor to floor (min)
 11'
 13'
 11
 
E3
 Upper story height, floor to floor (min)
 9'
 9'
 9'
 

F.	
Transparency


 
F1
 Ground story (min)
 33%
 50%
 20%
 
F2
 Upper story (min)
 20%
 20%
 20%
 
F3
 Blank wall area (max)
 30'
 30'
 50'
 

G.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 



Sec. 3.2.6. 
Mixed Use Building


OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-, IX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
A1
 Area (max)
 10 acres (NX- only)
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 10%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 5'
 3'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 5'
 3'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-, IX-
 DX-
 
C4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 Set by district
 Set by district
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Floor Heights 


 
E1
 Ground floor elevation (min)
 0'
 0'
 
E2
 Ground story height, floor to floor (min)
 13'
 15'
 
E3
 Upper story height, floor to floor (min)
 9'
 9'
 

F.	
Transparency


 
F1
 Ground story (min)
 50%
 66%
 
F2
 Upper story (min)
 20%
 20%
 
F3
 Blank wall area (max)
 20'
 20'
 

G.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 3.2.7. 
Civic Building


RX-, OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-, IX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
A1
 Area (max)
 10 acres (NX- only)
 n/a 
 
A2
 Width (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 
A3
 Outdoor amenity area (min)
 10%
 10%
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 5'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 6'
 0' or 6'
 
B4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 0' or 3'
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0' or 3''
 0' or 3'
 
C4
 From alley (min)
 5'
 5'
 
RX-, OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-, IX-
 DX-
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 Principal building (max)
 Set by district
 Set by district
 
D2
 Accessory structure (max)
 25'
 25'
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 


Sec. 3.2.8. 
Open Lot 


RX-, OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-, IX-
 DX-
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 5,000 sf
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 50'
 n/a
 
A3
 Building coverage (max) 
 15%
 15%
 

B.	
Building/Parking Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 10'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 10'
 10'
 
RX-, OP-, OX-
NX-, CX-, IX-
 DX-
 
B4
 From alley (min)
 10'
 10'
 

C.	
Height


 
C1
 All building/structures (max)
 40'/3 stories
 40'/3 stories
 

D.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.4.D “Building Setbacks” for specific building element requirements.
 



Article 3.3. 
Height Requirements 

Sec. 3.3.1. 
Applicability

A.	
Each Mixed Use District must include one of the following height designations. The designation establishes the maximum height in stories and feet for each mixed use district. For example, CX-7 has a maximum height limit of 7 stories or 90 feet.  


-3
 3 stories / 50 feet max
 
-4
 4 stories / 62 feet max
 
-5
 5 stories / 75 feet max
 
-7
 7 stories / 90 feet max
 
-12
 12 stories / 150 feet max
 
-20
 20 stories / 250 feet max
 
-40 
 40 stories / 500 feet max
 


B.	
The height requirements apply to apartments, general buildings, mixed use buildings and civic buildings. Maximum heights for detached house, attached house, townhouse and open lot are set forth in Article 3.2. Base Dimensional Standards.  

C.	
The minimum height requirements apply only to the Urban Frontages. The Urban Frontages include the following: Green, Urban Limited, Urban General and Shopfront. Civic buildings are exempt from the minimum height requirements.


Sec. 3.3.2. 
Building Height Standards 

District
  -3 
 -4
 -5
 -7
 -12
 -20
 -40
 

A.	
Max Height 


 
A1
 Building height (max stories)
 3
 4
 5
 7
 12
 20
 40
 
A1
 Building height (max feet)
 50'
 62'
 75'
 90'
 150'
 250'
 500'
 

B.	
Min Height (Urban Frontages Only)


 
B2
 Building height (min stories) 
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 2
 2
 3
 3
 
B3
 Street facing facade at min height (min % of lot width)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 75%
 75%
 75%
 75%
 
B4
 Depth of min height from front building facade into lot (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 30'
 45'
 60'
 60'
 




Sec. 3.3.3. 
Building Massing Standards

A.	
Intent


The intent of the building massing regulations is to manage the impact of tall buildings located near the public right-of-way. Stepbacks are intended to provide access to light and air at street level, mitigate wind impacts, produce a consistent street wall and visually reduce the perceived scale of a building to avoid a canyon effect. 	
B.	
Stepbacks


Buildings of 8 or more stories are required to place a stepback above the 3rd floor but below the 8th floor.
1.	
The stepback is only required on building faces adjoining the public street.

2.	
The depth of a required stepback may be reduced by 5 feet if the cornice line  of the stepback matches the cornice line of an adjacent building.


C.	
Administrative Alternate Findings


The Planning Director may in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. approve an alternate building massing standard, subject to all of the following findings:
1.	
The approved alternate meets the intent of the building massing regulations.

2.	
The approved alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans.

3.	
If the approved alternate uses a change in building materials to mimic a change in wall plane, the most substantial and durable building materials are located at the bottom floors of the building. 

4.	
If the approved alternate proposes a building setback behind the sidewalk in lieu of a required stepback, the resulting open space includes public amenities such as seating areas, trees and landscaping or outdoor dining.

5.	
The building contains architectural treatments for delineating the base, middle and top of the building. 


 Height of Building 
  Up to 3 Stories 
 4 to 5
Stories
 6 to 7
Stories
 8 to 12
Stories
 13 to 20
Stories
 21 to 40 Stories 
 

D.	
Massing 


 
C1
 3rd - 7th story 
stepback (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 12'
 15'
 15'
 

E.	
Towers


 
D1
 Floor plate size above 12 stories (max)
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 25,000 sf
 25,000 sf
 
D2
 Spacing between towers - floors above 12 stories (min)*
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 n/a
 100'
 



Article 3.4. 
Frontage Requirements 

Sec. 3.4.1. 
Purpose and Intent


Frontages link a desired development pattern with specific form requirements that mandate the type of development desired along the street edge. Frontages place different requirements from the base dimensional standards. Where there is a conflict between the base dimensional standards and the frontage requirements, the frontage requirements control. 
A.	
Parkway (-PK)


The -PK Frontage is intended to provide a heavily landscaped buffer between the roadway and adjacent development to ensure a continuous green corridor along the street right-of-way.  
B.	
Detached (-DE)


The -DE Frontage is intended for areas adjacent to roadways transitioning from residential to commercial. Accommo­dates neighborhood-scaled, low intensity commercial uses while maintaining the residential character of the street right-of-way.
C.	
Parking Limited (-PL)


The -PL Frontage is intended for areas where access to buildings by automobile is desired but where some level of walk­ability is maintained. Permits a maximum of 2 bays of on-site parking with a single drive aisle between the building and the street right-of-way.
D.	
Green (-GR)


The -GR Frontage is intended for areas where it is desirable to locate buildings close to the street, but where parking between the building and street is not permitted. Requires a landscaped area between the building and the street right-of-way.
E.	
Urban Limited (-UL)


The -UL Frontage is intended for areas where parking between the building and street is not allowed. Buildings abut the street and sidewalk but to balance the needs of both the pedestrian and automobile lower street wall continuity is required.
F.	
Urban General (-UG)


The -UG Frontage is also intended for areas where parking between the building and street is not allowed. Buildings abut the street and sidewalk but higher street wall continuity is required than the -UL Frontage.   
G.	
Shopfront (-SH)


The -SH Frontage is for intended for areas where the highest level of walkability is desired. The -SH Frontage is intended to create a “main street” type of environ­ment; therefore, mixed use buildings are the primary building type allowed.
Sec. 3.4.2. 
General Requirements

A.	
Urban Frontages


The Urban Frontages include the following: Green, Urban Limited, Urban General and Shopfront.
B.	
Design of Parking Structures on Urban Frontages
1.	
The ground story of structured parking must have active uses (such as, but not limited to, residential, commercial, office or civic space) located between the parking structure and any public sidewalk.

2.	
Where upper stories of structured parking are located at the perimeter of a building, they must be screened so that cars are not visible from adjacent streets. Sloped ramps cannot be discernible along the perimeter of the parking structure. Architectural and vegetative screens must be used to articulate the facade, hide parked vehicles and shield lighting. In addition, the ground floor facade treatment (building materials, windows and architectural detailing) shall be continued on upper stories.

3.	
Upper stories of parking structure facades shall be designed with both vertical (facade rhythm of 20 feet to 30 feet) and horizontal articulation (aligning with horizontal elements along the block).



C.	
Preexisting Conditions
1.	
All buildings, structures, pedestrian accesses, streetscapes and vehicular surface areas existing at the time that the frontage is first applied to the property shall not be deemed a zoning nonconformity solely because of frontage requirements. Replacement and repair of buildings, structures, pedestrian accesses, streetscapes and vehicular surface areas existing at the time that the frontage is first applied to the property may be made provided all of the following are met:
a.	
Replacement is like for like.

b.	
The replacement conforms to all provisions of this UDO except, frontage requirements.

c.	
The damage or destruction is caused by means other than voluntary actions.

d.	
Reconstruction and repair, not including interior work, shall not exceed 50% of the replacement cost immediately prior to the damage or destruction. Replacement cost shall be determined in accordance with Sec. 10.3.3.G.4 and 5.

e.	
Reconstruction or repair is commenced with a valid building permit or zoning permit within 12 months of the date of such damage or destruction.



2.	
Lots subject to build-to requirements that contain pre-existing buildings and maintain pre-existing buildings and which add additions to existing buildings that singularly or collectively comprise no more than 25% of the gross floor area existing at the time the build-to requirements became applicable to the property, or 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater, are allowed to expand the building anywhere within their minimum setbacks, without deference to the build-to requirements. All other frontage requirements, if any, shall apply.

3.	
Lots subject to build-to requirements that contain pre-existing buildings and maintain pre-existing buildings and which either add additions to existing buildings in excess of those allowed by item number 2. above or construct any new additional buildings on the lot shall conform to the following build-to requirements. All other frontage requirements, if any, shall apply.
a.	
Additions






Expansion of an existing building that is unable to meet the required build-to percentage must comply with the following provisions:
i.	
Street-Fronting: Addition


Additions to the front of an existing building would be allowed. The addition does not have to extend into the build-to area nor does it have to meet the required build-to percentage for the lot. 
ii.	
Rear: Addition


Rear additions are not allowed until the required build-to percentage for the lot has been met except when the addition is used exclusively for one or more of the following: loading areas, storage, kitchens, repair facilities (including bays for motor vehicles) and mechanical equipment.
iii.	
Non-street Side: Addition


Non-street Side Additions are allowed where the side addition is at least as close to the build-to as the existing building because the extension increases the width of the building and does not set back any further than the existing building.
b.	
New Buildings


Where a new building is being constructed on a lot with an existing building that does not meet the build-to percentage requirement, the following provisions comply:
i.	
Street-Fronting: New Building


All new buildings must be placed in the build-to range until the required build-to percentage requirement has been met for the lot.
ii.	
Rear: New Building


New buildings located in the rear of existing buildings are not allowed until the required build-to percentage requirements have been met for the lot.
iii.	
Non-street Side: New Building


New buildings located outside of the build-to range are not allowed until the required build-to percentage requirements have been met for the lot.
4.	
The Planning Director may, in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17., reduce the build-to requirement, subject to the findings set forth in Sec. 1.5.6.D.

5.	
The streetscape requirements shall not apply whenever a plot plan is applicable in accordance with Sec.10.2.7.A.; in all other instances, the streetscape requirements shall apply. The additional parking limitations of this article shall be applied in accordance with Sec. 7.1.1.B.4. Related parking requirements of this UDO shall be in accordance with Sec. 7.1.1.B.

6.	
Lots subject to build-to requirements that contain buildings existing at the time the frontage regulations were first applied to the property may, without deference to the build-to requirements, make voluntary renovations or alterations changing the exterior appearance of such buildings, including vertical expansions, that do not enlarge the footprint of the existing buildings, when done in accordance with the transparency and streetscape requirements of this UDO, and the pedestrian access requirements of this UDO when the costs of the improvements exceed cumulatively $10,000 in any one calendar year. Voluntary demolitions or tear-downs shall be replaced with building improvements that comply with the regulations of the applicable build-to requirements and all other frontage requirements.

7.	
In the event that buildings, structures, pedestrian accesses, streetscapes and vehicular surface areas existing at the time that the frontage is first applied to the property is damaged or partially destroyed, by exercise of eminent domain, riot, fire, accident, explosion, flood, lightning, wind or other calamity or natural cause to the extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost immediately prior to such damage, such buildings, structures, pedestrian accesses, streetscapes and vehicular surface areas shall not be restored unless either the replacement will conform to all regulations of this UDO or a special use permit is issued by the Board of Adjustment for the restoration. Replacement cost shall be determined in accordance with Sec. 10.3.3 G.4. and 5.


Before a request for the special use permit is granted, the Board of Adjustment must show that all of the following are met:
a.	
The applicable standards of this section have been met;

b.	
All of the showings of Sec. 10.2.9.E. have been met; and

c.	
The requested repair, reconstruction, or restoration will not be injurious to property or improvements in the affected area.


Sec. 3.4.3. 
Parkway (-PK)




A.	
Description


 
Provides for a heavily landscaped buffer between the roadway and adjacent development to ensure a continuous green corridor along the street right-of-way.
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Detached house (see Sec. 3.2.1.)
 General building (see Sec. 3.2.5.)
 
Attached house (see Sec. 3.2.2.)
 Mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.)
 
Townhouse (see Sec. 3.2.3.)
 Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
Apartment (see Sec. 3.2.4.)
 Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Additional Setbacks


 
C1
 Building setback from primary street (min)
 50'
 
C2
 Parking setback from primary street (min)
 50'
 


D.	
Pedestrian Access


 
D1
 Pedestrian access required (minimum of 1 per lot)
 yes
 
D2
 Pedestrian access way spacing (max)
 300'
 
D3
 Width of pedestrian access way (min/max)
 10'/20'
 
D4
 A road or driveway with a sidewalk at least 6 feet in width may substitute for a required pedestrian access way
 
D5
 Direct pedestrian access is required from the public sidewalk to the primary entrance of the building
 

E.	
Protective Yard Landscaping


 
E1
 The 50-foot protective yard must be landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F. (SHOD-1 requirements) or Sec. 5.3.1.H. for expansions and additions.
 

F.	
Protective Yard Encroachments


 
F1
 Driveways
 see Sec. 8.3.5.
 
F2
 Ground signs
 see Article 7.3.
 
F3
 Pedestrian access way
 

G.	
Streetcape Requirement


 
Sidewalk & tree lawn 
 see Sec. 8.5.2.G. 
 



Sec. 3.4.4. 
Detached (-DE)




A.	
Description


 
Intended for areas adjacent to roadways transitioning from residential to commercial. Accommodates neighborhood-scaled, low intensity commercial uses while maintaining the residential character of the street right-of-way. 
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Detached house (see Sec. 3.2.1.)
 Apartment (see Sec. 3.2.4.)
 
Attached house (see Sec. 3.2.2.)
 Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
Townhouse (see Sec. 3.2.3.)
 Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Additional Buildings Setbacks


 
C1
 Average front setback applies (see Sec. 2.2.7.C. )
  
 

D.	
Additional Parking Limitations


 
D1
 No on-site parking or vehicular surface area permitted between the building and the street
 



E.	
Pedestrian Access


 
E1
 Primary street-facing entrance required (min of 1 per building)
 
E2
 Direct pedestrian access is required from the public sidewalk to the primary street-facing entrance of the building
 

F.	
Facade Articulation


 
F1
 Front wall length without offset (max)
 40'
 
F2
 Front wall offset length and depth (min)
 10'
 

G.	
Height Limitations 


 
G1
  Height limit for frontage (max)
 3 stories/50'
 

H.	
Streetcape Requirement


 
Residential 
 see Sec. 8.5.2.D. 
 


Sec. 3.4.5. 
Parking Limited (-PL)




A.	
Description


 
Intended for areas where access to buildings by automobile is desired but where some level of walkability is maintained. Permits a maximum of 2 bays of on-site parking with a single drive aisle between the building and the street right-of-way.
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Townhouse (see Sec. 3.2.3.)
 Mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.)
 
Apartment (see Sec. 3.2.4.)
 Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
General building (see Sec. 3.2.5.)
 Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Build-to


 
C1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 Minimum setback based on base 
dimensional stan­dards for the specific building type/100'
 
C2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 50%
 
C3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 0'/100'
 
C4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 25%
 

D.	
Height Limitations 


 
D1
  Height limit for frontage (max)
 7 stories/90'
 



E.	
Additional Parking Limitations


 
E1
 A maximum of 2 bays of on-site parking with a single drive aisle is permitted between the building and the street.
 

F.	
Pedestrian Access


 
F1
 Primary street-facing entrance required (min of 1 per building)
 
F2
 Direct pedestrian access is required from the public sidewalk to the primary street-facing entrance of the building
 

G.	
Streetcape Requirement


 
Main Street; or
 see Sec. 8.5.2.A. 
 
Mixed Use; or
 see Sec. 8.5.2.B. 
 
Commercial; or 
 see Sec. 8.5.2.C. 
 
Multi-way; or
 see Sec. 8.5.2.E. 
 
Parking.
 see Sec. 8.5.2.F. 
 
The determination of the appropriate streetscape treatment will be made by the Planning Director, based on the existing built context and character.
 


Sec. 3.4.6. 
Green (-GR)




A.	
Description


 
Intended for areas where it is desirable to locate buildings close to the street, but where parking between the building and street is not permitted. Requires a landscaped area between the building and the street right-of-way.
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Townhouse (see Sec. 3.2.3.)
 Mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.)
 
Apartment (see Sec. 3.2.4.)
 Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
General building (see Sec. 3.2.5.)
 Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Build-to


 
C1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 20'/50'
 
C2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 50%
 
C3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 20'/50'
 
C4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 35%
 

D.	
Additional Parking Limitations


 
D1
 Parking setback from primary street (min)
 20'
 
D2
 No on-site parking or vehicular surface area permitted between the building and the street
 



E.	
Pedestrian Access


 
E1
 Primary street-facing entrance required 
 yes
 
E2
 Street-facing entrance spacing (max)
 100'
 

F.	
Landscape Yard Encroachments 


 
F1
 Driveways
    see Sec. 8.3.5.
 
F2
 Ground signs
 see Article 7.3. Signs
 
F3
 Pedestrian access way
 

G.	
Streetcape Requirement


 
Commercial
 see Sec. 8.5.2.C. 
 


Sec. 3.4.7. 
Urban Limited (-UL)




A.	
Description


 
Intended for areas where parking between the building and street is not allowed. Buildings abut the street and sidewalk but to balance the needs of both the pedestrian and automobile lower street wall continuity is required.
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Townhouse (see Sec. 3.2.3.)
 Mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.)
 
Apartment (see Sec. 3.2.4.)
 Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
General building (see Sec. 3.2.5.)
 Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Build-to


 
C1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 0'/20'
 
C2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 50%
 
C3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 0'/20'
 
C4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 25%
 

D.	
Additional Parking Limitations


 
D1
 No on-site parking or vehicular surface area permitted between the building and the street
 



E.	
Pedestrian Access


 
E1
 Primary street-facing entrance required
 yes
 
E2
 Street-facing entrance spacing (max)
 75'
 

F.	
Streetcape Requirement


 
Main Street; or
 see Sec. 8.5.2.A. 
 
Mixed Use.
 see Sec. 8.5.2.B. 
 


Sec. 3.4.8. 
Urban General (-UG)




A.	
Description


 
Intended for areas where parking between the building and street is not allowed. Buildings abut the street and sidewalk but higher street wall continuity is required than the -UL Frontage.   
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Townhouse (see Sec. 3.2.3.)
 Mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.)
 
Apartment (see Sec. 3.2.4.)
 Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
General building (see Sec. 3.2.5.)
 Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Build-to


 
C1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 0'/20'
 
C2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 70%
 
C3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 0'/20'
 
C4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 35%
 

D.	
Additional Parking Limitations


 
D1
 Parking setback from primary street (min)
 30'
 
D2
 No on-site parking or vehicular surface area permitted between the building and the street
 



E.	
Pedestrian Access


 
E1
 Primary street-facing entrance required
 yes
 
E2
 Street-facing entrance spacing (max)
 75'
 

F.	
Streetcape Requirement


 
Main Street; or
 see Sec. 8.5.2.A. 
 
Mixed Use.
 see Sec. 8.5.2.B. 
 


Sec. 3.4.9. 
Shopfront (-SH)




A.	
Description


 
Intended for areas where the highest level of walkability is desired. The -SH Frontage is intended to create a "main street" type of environment; therefore, mixed use buildings are the primary building type allowed.
 

B.	
Building Types Allowed


 
Mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.)
 
Civic building (see Sec. 3.2.7.)
 
Open lot (see Sec. 3.2.8.)
 

C.	
Build-to


 
C1
 Primary street build-to (min/max)
 0'/15'
 
C2
 Building width in primary build-to (min)
 80%
 
C3
 Side street build-to (min/max)
 0'/15'
 
C4
 Building width in side build-to (min)
 40%
 



D.	
Additional Parking Limitations


 
D1
 Parking setback from primary street (min)
 30'
 
D2
 No on-site parking or vehicular surface area permitted between the building and the street
 

E.	
Pedestrian Access


 
E1
 Primary street-facing entrance required
 yes
 
E2
 Street-facing entrance spacing (max)
 50'
 

F.	
Streetscape Requirement 


 
Main Street
 see Sec. 8.5.2.A. 
 


Article 3.5. 
Neighborhood Transitions 

Sec. 3.5.1. 
Applicability 

A.	
The following neighborhood transition standards apply in the Mixed Use and Campus Districts when the following occurs:
1.	
The site immediately abuts a district boundary of an R-1, R-2, R-4 or R-6 district, except where the abutting property contains a civic use; or 

2.	
The site immediately abuts a district boundary of an R-10 district where the abutting property is vacant or contains an existing detached house or attached house used for residential purposes. 



B.	
Zone B does not apply to sites 50 feet or less in depth. In such cases, Zone C starts immediately adjacent to the Zone A protective yard. 

C.	
Zones B and C do not apply to detached house, attached house, townhouse or apartment building types in RX- where 3 stories is the maximum height.

D.	
Where an intervening alley is located between the residential property and the Mixed Use District or Campus District, the transition regulations apply. One-half of the width of the alley shall be included in the required transition yard measurement and shall be first applied to the required width of Zones A and B and then to Zone B. In all cases, landscaping, fences and walls shall not be required where there is an intervening alley.

E.	
In addition to the alley transition described in paragraph D, the Historic Alley Transition described in Section 3.5.6 is available where an alley lies between a residential district and a mixed use district and the following conditions are met:
1.	
The alley abuts or lies within a National Register Historic District; and

2.	
The mixed-use parcel has not within the last two years contained a structure that is, or was, individually designated as a local, State, or national historic landmark.



Sec. 3.5.2. 
Transition Zones

A.	
Zone A: Protective Yard
1.	
Intent




Intended to buffer and screen. Consists of vegetative landscaping and wall or fence. No buildings or structures allowed.
2.	
Location


Immediately abutting district boundary line.
3.	
Width


Varies (depends on protective yard type applied).
B.	
Zone B: Use Restricted  
1.	
Intent




Intended to be occupied by open areas and low intensity uses, such as surface parking, alleys, landscaping, playgrounds, outdoor dining, community serving buildings and service-related structures.
2.	
Location


Located between Zone A and Zone C. Zone B starts at the inside edge of the Zone A protective yard (edge furthest from the district boundary line) and ends 50 feet from the district boundary line.
3.	
Width


50 feet from the district boundary line.
C.	
Zone C. Height and Form
1.	
Intent




Intended to restrict the height and form of development so as to decrease the impact of new multi-story structures.   
2.	
Location


Located beyond and adjacent to Zone B. Zone C extends from 50 to 100 feet from district boundary line. When Zone B does not exist, Zone C starts at the inside edge of the Zone A protective yard (edge furthest from the district boundary line). 
3.	
Width


50 to 100 feet from the district boundary line. When Zone B does not exist, Zone C extends a maximum of 50 feet from inside edge of the Zone A protective yard (edge furthest from the district boundary line). 
Sec. 3.5.3. 
Zone A: Protective Yard

A.	
Type 1: Narrow (10 feet)
1.	
Width




A Type 1 protective yard must be an average width of at least 10 feet.
2.	
Installation Requirements


A Type 1 protective yard must include the following:
a.	
A wall between 6.5 and 9 feet in height; 

b.	
Four shade trees per 100 lineal feet; 

c.	
Three understory trees per 100 lineal feet; and

d.	
40 shrubs per 100 lineal feet.


B.	
Type 2: Medium (20 feet)
1.	
Width




A Type 2 protective yard must be an average width of at least 20 feet.
2.	
Installation Requirements


A Type 2 protective yard must include the following:
a.	
A wall or fence between 6.5 and 9 feet in height;

b.	
Five shade trees per 100 lineal feet;

c.	
Four understory trees per 100 lineal feet; and

d.	
30 shrubs per 100 lineal feet.


C.	
Type 3: Wide (50 feet)
1.	
Width




A Type 3 protective yard must be an average width of at least 50 feet.
2.	
Installation Requirements


A Type 3 protective yard must include the following:
a.	
Six shade trees per 100 lineal feet; 

b.	
Five understory canopy trees per 100 lineal feet; and

c.	
60 shrubs per 100 lineal feet.


3.	
Optional Provisions
a.	
A fence or wall between 6.5 and 8 feet in height may be installed.

b.	
In lieu of planting required shrubs, a berm with a minimum height of 3 feet may be installed.



4.	
Permitted uses
a.	
Landscaping, fences, walls and berms.

b.	
Swales, underground detention facilities and bioretention facilities. Detention facilities must be located at least 20 feet from the district boundary line. Landscaping quantities specified in Sec. 3.5.3.C.2. above may not be reduced.




D.	
Design and Installation
1.	
A required protective yard may be replaced with a tree conservation area that meets the requirements of Article 9.1.Tree Conservation.

2.	
Required landscaping in a protective yard must meet the design and installation requirements of Sec. 7.2.4.

3.	
In no case shall required landscaping exceed 30% of the total lot area, see Sec. 7.2.2.D. 

4.	
Protective yards must meet the location requirements of Sec. 7.2.4.C.  

5.	
Fences, walls and berms located in a protective yard must meet the requirements of Sec. 7.2.4.D. Fences, walls and berms cannot be located in a protective yard when the protective yard is also a tree conservation area.



Sec. 3.5.4. 
Zone B: Use Restrictions 

A.	
Permitted Activity
1.	
Protective yard, landscaping, fence, wall.

2.	
Garden.

3.	
Outdoor dining (not between the hours of 10 PM and 6 AM). 

4.	
Service area.

5.	
Accessory garage, storage area.

6.	
Park, playground.

7.	
Stormwater detention.

8.	
Surface parking lot.

9.	
Path, walkway, sidewalk.

10.	
Alley.



B.	
Civic Building and Accessory Structures  
1.	
An accessory structure can be no more than 14 feet in height and must be located at least 15 feet from the district boundary line.

2.	
Building walls parallel to the district boundary line can be no longer than 75 feet.

3.	
Buildings and structures must be spaced apart to maintain views. There must be a minimum of 40 feet between buildings and structures.



C.	
Service Areas


Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas must be located at least 25 feet from the district boundary line.
Sec. 3.5.5. 
Zone C: Height and Form

A.	
Permitted Activity


All structures and uses allowed in the zoning district are permitted in Zone C.
B.	
Height
1.	
No building or structure can be more than 40 feet in height at the Zone C line. 

2.	
Height can increase subject to a 45 degree height plane measured from a height of 40 feet at the Zone C line, extending upward one foot for every additional foot of setback into the site.

3.	
The height plane applies up to 100 feet from the district boundary line.



C.	
Wall Articulation


The rear facade of the building that faces the residential property as described in Sec. 3.5.1.A. is subject to a maximum blank wall area of 30 feet as calculated in Sec. 1.5.10. The blank wall area provisions are not subject to an Administrative Alternate.
Sec. 3.5.6. 
Historic Alley Transition

A.	
Intent 


The Historic Alley Transition is intended to ensure a graduated height transition between the National Register District and nearby mixed-use development; to avoid abrupt contrasts of scale between the residential properties in a National Register District and mixed use structures; to avoid incompatible development facing the residential properties in a National Register District; and to improve historic alleys with active frontages and uses more beneficial to the National Register District.
B.	
Extent 


The Historic Alley Transition extends from the residential parcel property line across the intervening alley and into the mixed-use parcel for a distance of 50 feet from the residential parcel property line.
C.	
Restrictions 


In addition to the other restrictions imposed by this Unified Development Ordinance, the following additional restrictions apply to construction within the Historic Alley Transition:
1.	
 Content 


This Historic Alley Transition Area may contain vegetative landscaping, walls, fences, gardens, paths, walkways, sidewalks, surface parking, parks, playgrounds, stormwater detention, outdoor dining areas associated with residential uses, accessory structures compliant with the limits set forth in Paragraph 3.5.4.B, service areas compliant with the limits set forth in Paragraph 3.5.4.C, detached houses, attached houses, townhouses, apartments, general buildings, mixed use buildings, and open lots.
2.	
Height 


No portion of a detached house, attached house, townhouse, apartment, general building, mixed use building, or other structure that lies within the Historic Alley Transition shall exceed the maximum building height applicable to the residential parcel across the alley from the mixed use parcel, as specified in the residential zoning district or applicable overlay district or otherwise. For this purpose only, height shall be measured from the elevation of the alley.
3.	
Uses 


Any use extending into the Historic Alley Transition must be one of the residential uses permitted in R-10 Districts.
4.	
Setback 


Notwithstanding any base dimensional standards or frontage requirements that might otherwise apply, any building constructed in the Historic Alley Transition shall be set back at least 10 feet from the alley-facing property line of the mixed use parcel. This setback must contain a sidewalk of at least 5-foot width immediately adjacent to the alley right-of-way, over which a permanent public access easement must be granted. This immediately adjacent sidewalk will be separated from the street by sharply contrasting materials. The sidewalk shall not exceed the elevation of alley by more than two inches, unless a mountable curb is installed. No building element or other item or obstruction may extend into or be placed in this sidewalk portion of the setback. The remainder of the setback shall meet the requirements of Section 3.5.2.A and 3.5.3.A, except
a.	
If the remainder of the setback is less than 10 feet in width, the protective yard need not contain shade trees; and

b.	
No wall is required when a building immediately abuts the protective yard.


5.	
Design Requirements
a.	
Structured parking is permitted in the Historic Alley Transition, but residential uses must screen the structured parking and conceal the structured parking (other than an entrance with no visible point source lighting) consistent with the regulations contained in Section 3.4.2.B, except that all upper levels of the parking structure that face the alley shall also be screened by residential uses.

b.	
An alley-facing entrance is required at least every 100 feet, regardless of building type. There must be direct pedestrian access to that entrance from the adjoining sidewalk.

c.	
The alley-facing facade is subject to a maximum blank wall area of 30 feet as calculated in Sec. 1.5.10. The blank wall area provisions are not subject to an Administrative Alternate.

d.	
Private residential garage parking that satisfies the requirements of Section 1.5.12 is permitted along the alley as part of a detached house, attached house, or townhouse within the Historic Alley Transition. Such parking must be concealed behind a garage door of not more than 12-foot width. Any standard contained in Section 1.5.12 that is applied must be consistent with G.S. 160A-381(h).

e.	
Entrances to structured parking and private residential garage parking shall not occupy more than 50% of the parcel’s linear alley frontage.

f.	
The requirements of Section 3.5.4.C apply, though residential trash and recycling bins may be collected from the alley if placed according to the applicable rules. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment other than individual residential HVAC units must be placed according to Section 3.5.4.C.





Article 3.1. General Provisions	3 – 2Sec. 3.1.1. District Intent Statements.........................................................3 – 2
Sec. 3.1.2. District Components.................................................................3 – 3


Article 3.2. Base Dimensional Standards	3 – 4Sec. 3.2.1. Detached House.......................................................................3 – 4
Sec. 3.2.2. Attached House........................................................................3 – 5
Sec. 3.2.3. Townhouse ...............................................................................3 – 6
Sec. 3.2.4. Apartment................................................................................3 – 7
Sec. 3.2.5. General Building.......................................................................3 – 8
Sec. 3.2.6. Mixed Use Building...................................................................3 – 9
Sec. 3.2.7. Civic Building...........................................................................3 – 10
Sec. 3.2.8. Open Lot .................................................................................3 – 11


Article 3.3. Height Requirements 	3 – 12Sec. 3.3.1. Applicability............................................................................3 – 12
Sec. 3.3.2. Building Height Standards ......................................................3 – 12
Sec. 3.3.3. Building Massing Standards.....................................................3 – 13


Article 3.4. Frontage Requirements 	3 – 14Sec. 3.4.1. Purpose and Intent..................................................................3 – 14
Sec. 3.4.2. General Requirements.............................................................3 – 15
Sec. 3.4.3. Parkway (-PK).........................................................................3 – 19
Sec. 3.4.4. Detached (-DE).......................................................................3 – 20
Sec. 3.4.5. Parking Limited (-PL)..............................................................3 – 21
Sec. 3.4.6. Green (-GR).............................................................................3 – 22
Sec. 3.4.7. Urban Limited (-UL).................................................................3 – 23
Sec. 3.4.8. Urban General (-UG)...............................................................3 – 24
Sec. 3.4.9. Shopfront (-SH)......................................................................3 – 25


Article 3.5. Neighborhood Transitions 	3 – 26Sec. 3.5.1. Applicability ...........................................................................3 – 26
Sec. 3.5.2. Transition Zones......................................................................3 – 26
Sec. 3.5.3. Zone A: Protective Yard............................................................3 – 27
Sec. 3.5.4. Zone B: Use Restrictions .........................................................3 – 28
Sec. 3.5.5. Zone C: Height and Form........................................................3 – 29
Sec. 3.5.6. History Alley Transition...........................................................3 – 30






















* Building separation is measured orthogonally to the wall plane








Sec. 3.4.2. General Requirements




















Page Intentionally Left Blank




CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.1. General Provisions
Sec. 4.1.1. District Intent Statements

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.3. Agriculture Productive (AP)
Sec. 4.3.1. Detached House

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.4. Heavy Industrial (IH)
Sec. 4.4.1. General Building

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.5. ..Manufactured Housing (MH)
Sec. 4.5.3. Manufactured Home Space Standards

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.6. ..Campus (CMP)
Sec. 4.6.1. Campus Areas

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.6. ..Campus (CMP)
Sec. 4.6.4. Master Plan Amendments

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.7. ..Planned Development (PD)
Sec. 4.7.4. Application Requirements

CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS   |   Article 4.7. ..Planned Development (PD)
Sec. 4.7.6. Master Plan Amendments

.CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 .

Article 4.2. ..Conservation Management (CM)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.2.1. General Provisions

Article 4.3. Agriculture Productive (AP)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.3.2. General Building

Article 4.5. ..Manufactured Housing (MH)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.5.1. Site Size, Residential Density and Land Use

Article 4.5. ..Manufactured Housing (MH)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.5.3. Manufactured Home Space Standards

Article 4.6. ..Campus (CMP)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.6.3. Application Requirements

Article 4.7. ..Planned Development (PD)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.7.1. Establishment of a PD District

Article 4.7. ..Planned Development (PD)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 4.7.5. ..General Design Principles

Article 4.7. ..Planned Development (PD)   |   CHAPTER 4. ..SPECIAL DISTRICTS  
Sec. 4.7.6. Master Plan Amendments

Chapter 4. 
Special Districts

Article 4.1. 
General Provisions

Sec. 4.1.1. 
District Intent Statements

A.	
Conservation Management (CM)  
1.	
The CM District is intended to preserve and enhance land as permanent open space to meet the passive and recreational needs of the City. 

2.	
All property within the district must be predominately unoccupied by buildings or other impervious surfaces. 



B.	
Agriculture Productive (AP) 
1.	
The AP District is intended to conserve agricultural land and undeveloped natural amenities while preventing the encroachment of incompatible land uses on farm land and other undeveloped areas.

2.	
 The types, area and intensity of land uses in an AP District are designed to encourage and protect agricultural uses and the conservation of undeveloped areas.



C.	
Heavy Industrial (IH)


The IH District is intended to accommodate high-impact manufacturing, industrial or other uses, including extractive and waste-related uses, which are not properly associated with or are not compatible with nearby Residential, Mixed Use or Special Districts.
D.	
Manufactured Housing (MH) 
1.	
The MH District permits manufactured homes in manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions. 

2.	
The MH District is intented to provide a suitable living environment in manufactured home developments and to ensure the compatibility of such developments with adjacent property. 




E.	
Campus (CMP) 
1.	
The CMP District is established to allow for growth and development of colleges and universities and other campus-like uses such as hospitals while protecting the larger community, nearby neighborhoods and the environment from impacts accompanying major new development.

2.	
The CMP District allows for flexible placement of buildings, and unified treatment of signs, open space, landscaping and other site elements that may be recognized through a master plan. 

3.	
Retail, restaurant and commercial uses are allowed, such uses are intended primarily for the convenience of employees or users of the district.

4.	
Development is encouraged to reduce auto use, mitigate environmental impacts, conserve energy resources and achieve visual continuity in the siting and scale of buildings. 



F.	
Planned Development (PD)
1.	
The PD District is intended as a relief mechanism from the prescriptive standards of a general use zoning district.

2.	
The PD District intended to be used to achieve a higher quality of project design than could be accomplished through the strict application of a general use district or set of general use districts, without adversely impacting the adequate facilities required to serve the property and surrounding area. 



Article 4.2. 
Conservation Management (CM)

Sec. 4.2.1. 
General Provisions

A.	
Prior to the approval of any subdivision plan or site plan on a site 2 acres or greater in size, whichever occurs first, the property owner shall delineate a minimum of 30% of CM-zoned land as primary tree conservation area.  

B.	
The remaining 70% of the CM-zoned land not in a tree conservation area may either be developed pursuant to this section or part or all of the remaining 70% may, at the election of the owner, be established as primary tree conservation area.  

C.	
All CM-zoned primary tree conservation areas shall have tree cover by either preserving existing trees with a basal area of at least 30 square feet per acre as determined by increments of 50 feet in length, or if such trees are not present, shall be planted with shade trees in accordance with Sec. 9.1.10.

D.	
Watercourse buffers under Sec. 9.2.3. must be established along all primary and secondary watercourses.

Sec. 4.2.2. 
Open LotCM
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 n/a
 
A3
 Building coverage (max)
 5%
 

B.	
Protective Yard


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 50'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 50'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 50'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 50'
 
A primary street, side street or rear lot line that adjoins any street must comply with the planting requirements for a SHOD-1 under Sec. 5.3.1.F. 
 

C.	
Height


 
C1
 All buildings/structures (max)
 40'/3 stories
 

D.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.11. for specific building element requirements.
 




Article 4.3. 
Agriculture Productive (AP) 

Sec. 4.3.1. 
Detached House

AP
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 125,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 350'
 
A3
 Density (max)
 1 unit per agriculture tract
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 150'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 150'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 150'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 150'
 
AP
 

C.	
Height


 
C1
 All structures (max)
 40'/3 stories
 

D.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Porch, stoop
 
Balcony
 
See Sec. 1.5.11. for specific building element requirements.
 




Sec. 4.3.2. 
General Building

AP
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 100,000 sf
 
A2
 Width (min)
 350'
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 150'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 150'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 150'
 
B4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 150'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 100'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 100'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 100'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 100'
 
AP
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 All structures (max)
 40'/3 stories
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.11. for specific building element requirements.
 



Article 4.4. 
Heavy Industrial (IH)

Sec. 4.4.1. 
General Building


IH
 

A.	
Lot Dimensions


 
A1
 Area (min)
 n/a
 
A2
 Width (min)
 n/a
 

B.	
Building/Structure Setbacks


 
B1
 From primary street (min)
 50'
 
B2
 From side street (min)
 50'
 
B3
 From side lot line (min)
 0'
 
B4
 Sum of side interior setbacks (min)
 40'
 
B5
 From rear lot line (min) 
 0'
 
B6
 Sum of rear and primary street setbacks (min)
 70'
 

C.	
Parking Setbacks


 
C1
 From primary street (min)
 10'
 
C2
 From side street (min)
 10'
 
C3
 From side lot line (min)
 10'
 
C4
 From rear lot line (min) 
 10'
 
IH
 

D.	
Height


 
D1
 All structures (max)
 50' / 3 stories
 

E.	
Allowed Building Elements


 
Balcony
 
Gallery, awning
 
See Sec. 1.5.11. for specific building element requirements.
 

F.	
Protective Yards


 
A Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established where an IH District abuts any other district other than another IH District.
A Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way.
 





Article 4.5. 
Manufactured Housing (MH)

Sec. 4.5.1. 
Site Size, Residential Density and Land Use

A.	
A manufactured home development must be at least 10 acres in size and be devoted to one or more of the following uses:
1.	
Leasing of space for manufactured homes;

2.	
Manufactured homes for rent or sale for use within the manufactured home development, provided that the sold manufactured home is connected to on-site utilities and the manufactured home remains on the site for a minimum of 1 year; and

3.	
Unit ownership (condominium) pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. §47C.



B.	
A manufactured home development may not exceed a density of 6 units per acre.

C.	
A manufactured home development may contain accessory uses under Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures.

D.	
Single-Unit Living
1.	
Single unit living is permitted on pre-existing lots of land within the MH district provided such lots conform to the site and design characteristics for single-unit living in the R-6 Zoning District as specified in Article 2.2.1.



Sec. 4.5.2. 
Site Development Standards

A.	
Phasing


Every manufactured home development must contain at least 10 manufactured home spaces in each phase.
B.	
Streets, Sidewalks and Protective Yards
1.	
All manufactured home spaces and lots must front a street meeting the requirements of Article 8.4. New Streets or Article 8.5. Existing Streets

2.	
Sidewalks must provide pedestrian access within the development served and connect with public sidewalks, public streets and greenway access points.

3.	
A Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along all perimeter property lines. 

4.	
A Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way. 



C.	
Open Space Standards
1.	
Minimum Acreage Required
a.	
The required minimum outdoor open space provided for a manufactured home development shall be the greater of either:
i.	
10% of the land area of the development, excluding dedicated rights-of-way unless density transfer is allowed from that right-of-way; or

ii.	
435.6 square feet per unit.



b.	
Required minimum open space may be conveyed to the government, and if accepted, without reimbursement as part of a greenway easement. 

c.	
No off-street parking, drives or buildings shall be located in the open space, except when required to serve recreation facilities located within the open space (See Sec. 6.7.3.G.)



2.	
Open Space Configuration
a.	
With the exception of parks and greenways dedicated to the City, the minimum average open space quotient may not be less than 75 feet. The minimum open space quotient shall be calculated by dividing the square footage of open space used to comply with this requirement by 1/4 of the linear footage of its periphery.

b.	
A minimum of 1/3 or 2 acres, whichever is less, of the required open space must be in 1 continuous part with a maximum average slope of 8% or less.



3.	
Location
a.	
The required open space must be contiguous to the manufactured home development. 

b.	
In the event that a manufactured home development is divided by a Thoroughfare, the amount of required open space for the tracts created by the Thoroughfare shall be allotted to those tracts in the same proportion as the units approved to be located on each tract.





D.	
Grading and Drainage Plan
1.	
A grading and drainage plan allowing positive drainage away from the manufactured home pad shall be approved by the City prior to any grading around any manufactured home pad.

2.	
The surface of each manufactured home space shall have a manufactured home stand or pad graded for proper drainage and shall be covered by a paved slab or compacted earth, gravel or crushed stone adequate to meet Building Code requirements for foundation footings for manufactured homes. The remainder of the space shall be graded for drainage and graded areas grassed or otherwise provided with protective cover to prevent erosion.



E.	
Clearing of Drainage Ways


During the construction, preparation, arrangement and installation of improvements and facilities in a manufactured home development, the stream bed of each stream, creek or backwash channel located within the manufactured home development shall be maintained in an unobstructed state and the channel and banks of the stream shall be kept free of all debris, logs, timber, junk and other accumulations of a nature that would, in time of flood, clog or dam the passage of waters in their downstream course. Installation of appropriately sized stormwater drains, culverts, bridges or dams for water impoundments shall not be construed as obstructions in the stream.
F.	
Floodplain Evacuation Plan


An evacuation plan must be filed with the Wake County Office of Emergency Management indicating alternative vehicular access and escape routes from manufactured home developments located within floodprone areas.
G.	
Utilities and Sanitary Services


All utility installations shall comply with applicable codes of the City, Wake County and the State of North Carolina, and the requirements of the North Carolina Utilities Commission.
1.	
Each manufactured home space shall be connected to all utilities provided including water and sanitary sewer.

2.	
Each manufactured home development shall connect to the City water system, and either the City sewer system if available or a community sewer system. All sewage wastes from each manufactured home development including wastes from toilets, showers, bathtubs, lavatories, wash basins, refrigerator drains, sinks, faucets and water-using appliances not mentioned here shall be piped into the manufactured home development sewage disposal system or City utility system.


Sec. 4.5.3. 
Manufactured Home Space Standards

A.	
Minimum Lot Size


The required minimum lot area is 7,260 square feet per unit.
B.	
Height


No building or structure may exceed a height of 40 feet.
C.	
Setbacks
1.	
Manufactured Home




Each manufactured home shall comply with the following setbacks. 
a.	
Primary street and side setback: 20 feet minimum.

b.	
Interior side setback: 5 feet minimum.

c.	
Rear setback: 20 feet minimum.

d.	
Building to building separation may be no less than 20 feet.  


2.	
Other Buildings and Uses


Buildings and uses located in a manufactured home development, other than manufactured homes, shall not locate within 30 feet of a manufactured home or 20 feet of a street right-of-way, or within 5 feet of a side or rear property line.
D.	
Skirting
1.	
Foundation skirting shall be installed around all sides of a manufactured home and shall be uninterrupted except for required ventilation and access. 

2.	
Foundation skirting shall consist of brick, stone, siding material consistent with the siding material used on the structure or any rigid weatherproof material providing a solid barrier between the underside of the manufactured home and the stand.



E.	
Accessory Structures
1.	
A detached accessory structure, including but not limited to a storage shed, storage tank, greenhouse or gazebo, can be no larger than 100 square feet in size and can be located no closer than 10 feet to a manufactured home located on the same lot. 

2.	
No detached accessory structure may be located within 10 feet of any other structure, including other manufactured homes.

3.	
Open structures, including but not limited to a deck, porch, stairway or any noncombustible awning, eave or carport, that exceed 3½ feet in height shall not be located within 10 feet of another manufactured home or 10 feet of another open structure associated with another manufactured home.

4.	
Garages may not exceed 300 square feet in size and may not be located within 20 feet of any manufactured home or 10 feet of an open structure associated with another manufactured home. Garage and carport placement must comply with the standards of Sec. 1.5.12.

5.	
No structure that exceeds 3½ feet in height is allowed to be located in the space between the manufactured home and the public right-of-way or private street.

6.	
The allowed building elements for a manufactured home are a porch or stoop in accordance with Sec. 1.5.11.



F.	
Unit Numbering


Unit numbers for each manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with Sec. 7.3.13.K.
Article 4.6. 
Campus (CMP) 

Sec. 4.6.1. 
Campus Areas

A.	
Single Entity
1.	
Each CMP District must be under the control of a single entity and have a significant governmental interest or be a hospital, college or university.

2.	
Each CMP District must either have a minimum site area of 5 acres or one or more contiguous city blocks.  

3.	
In the event that a portion of the property zoned CMP is sold to a third-party who is not governmental or a hospital, college or university (therefore becoming non-compliant with this Article), the non-compliant property must be rezoned. The third-party property owner shall submit a petition to rezone the property not owned by a governmental interest or a hospital, college or university within 6 months of the sale of the property.



B.	
District Dimensional Standards


The controlling entity must follow the district standards below. 
1.	
Building height: 50 feet or 3 stories maximum.

2.	
Primary street setback: 5 feet minimum.

3.	
Side street setback: 5 feet minimum.

4.	
Interior side or rear setback: 10 feet minimum.


C.	
Neighborhood Transitions 


Neighborhood transitions under Article 3.5. Neighborhood Transitions apply to a CMP District.
Sec. 4.6.2. 
Modification of District Standards

A.	
Master Plan Required


The CMP District standards may be modified through City Council approval of a CMP Master Plan under Sec. 10.2.4. A CMP Master Plan allows modification of the district dimensional standards above and the following elements:
B.	
Height
1.	
A CMP Master Plan may include one or more of the following height designations. The designations establish the maximum height of buildings and structures in stories and feet within the district. For example, CMP-7 has a maximum height limit of 7 stories or 90 feet.  




-3
 3 stories  / 50 feet max
 
-4
 4 stories / 62 feet max
 
-5
 5 stories / 75 feet max
 
-7
 7 stories / 90 feet max
 
-12
 12 stories / 150 feet max
 
-20
 20 stories / 250 feet max
 
-40 
 40 stories / 500 feet max
 


2.	
Height on the edges of the CMP District should be compatible with adjacent development, and consider existing built patterns, mass, scale and character.


C.	
General Development Standards


A CMP Master Plan may modify the following requirements of Chapter 7. General Development Standards:
1.	
Article 7.1. Parking .The entire campus may be treated as a single development for the purposes of calculating and sharing required parking.

2.	
Article 7.2. Landscaping and Screening.

3.	
Article 7.3. Signs.

4.	
Article 7.4. Site Lighting. 

5.	
Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage.


D.	
Street and Blocks


A CMP Master Plan may modify the following requirements of Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Standards:
1.	
Article 8.3. Blocks, Lots, Access.

2.	
Article 8.4. New Streets.

3.	
Article 8.5. Existing Streets.


Sec. 4.6.3. 
Application Requirements

A.	
In addition to a rezoning application, a CMP Master Plan application must include the following required elements. More than one required element may be combined onto a single map/plan sheet so long as legibility is not adversely impacted.
1.	
Vicinity Map.

2.	
Existing Conditions Map. 

3.	
Street and Block Plan.

4.	
General Layout Map delineating the boundaries of all district boundaries including Height and Frontage designations (if any). In lieu of designating Frontages on the General Layout Map, a more fine-grained map may be included that specifies the maximum and minimum building setback lines for all structures and parking areas.

5.	
Development Plan showing the proposed location of buildings.

6.	
Pedestrian Circulation Plan.

7.	
Parking Plan.

8.	
Open Space Plan. 

9.	
Tree Conservation Area Plan. 

10.	
Major Utilities Plan.

11.	
Generalized Stormwater Plan.

12.	
Phasing Plan, if more than one phase is contemplated.

13.	
An illustrative 3-dimensional model or rendering that shows building elevations, location of streets and prominent site features. The 3-dimensional model must illustrate the potential massing and scale of the proposed development, but will not be regulatory.

14.	
Common Signage Plan (see Sec. 7.3.16.H.).



B.	
Each application must also include the following.
1.	
The specific standards intended to be modified as part the approval process. If a standard is not listed as being modified, then the standard is considered applicable and must be adhered to. However, subsequent requests for alternative compliance and variances may still be submitted. 

2.	
The proposed maximum number of dwelling units by block.

3.	
The proposed maximum square footage of nonresidential floor area by block.

4.	
A general description of how the CMP District conforms with the Comprehensive Plan.

5.	
A general description of how the CMP District meets the intent of Sec. 4.1.1.E.



Sec. 4.6.4. 
Master Plan Amendments


Any amendment to an approved CMP Master Plan shall follow the procedures below. 
A.	
Administrative Amendments


The Planning Director shall administratively approve CMP Master Plan amendments that propose any of the following alterations.
1.	
An increase or decrease to the allowable residential density, total number of dwelling units not to exceed 10%.

2.	
An increase or decrease to the minimum required nonresidential square footage or maximum permitted nonresidential square footage, not to exceed 10%.

3.	
An increase to allowable height (as measured in feet), provided the increase does not exceed the maximum number of feet permitted by story in the height categories contained within Article 3.3. Height Requirements. The Planning Director may not administratively approve an increase in number of stories as specified in the Master Plan. 

4.	
A transfer of nonresidential floor area or residential dwelling units, from one area to another, not to exceed a 20% maximum for each standard. 

5.	
Minor adjustments in location of building, parking, recreation or sporting facilities and open space areas. A minor adjustment shall be a modification in orientation or distance to property line; however, the adjustment shall not exceed 100 feet in distance from the approved location, and shall not be located any closer than 50 feet to the boundary of the CMP District. However, where a building or parking area is shown on the approved Master Plan within 50 feet of a property line, the building or parking area adjustment may not be located any closer to the property line than as shown on the approved Master Plan. An adjustment to the location of transit facilities is permitted, provided the adjustment occurs prior to the recordation of the transit easement. 

6.	
An exchange of open space area, provided the exchanged properties are of like acreage, value and utility and that no tree conservation area or Open Space Plan has been recorded for the requested exchanged properties with the register of deeds office in the county where the property is located.

7.	
An exchange of above ground stormwater control facilities of like size. The Planning Director may not administratively approve the relocation of an above ground stormwater facility to a location closer than 50 feet from the boundary of the CMP District boundary.

8.	
A relocation of access points, driveways or sidewalks either within or outside of the public right-of-way with the concurrence of the Development Services Department. 

9.	
A relocation of a fence, wall, sign or utility. Fences or walls required for transition areas or buffer yards may not be removed or relocated to an area that conflicts with the buffering requirement. 

10.	
Any requirement associated with a permitted change must be shown on the Master Plan. By example, if a 10% increase in density requires a different street cross-section, the street cross-section must be updated on the Street and Block Plan.


B.	
Non-Administrative Amendments


Any other amendment not listed in Sec. 4.6.4.A. shall be subject to the rezoning process specified in Sec. 10.2.4.
C.	
Committed Elements


Where a CMP Master Plan specifies certain committed timed elements, the applicant may request an extension for up to 1 year, to be granted by the Planning Director provided development within the Master Plan or in the vicinity has not created the need for the committed timed elements.  
Article 4.7. 
Planned Development (PD)

Sec. 4.7.1. 
Establishment of a PD District 


A PD District is a customized general use zoning district or set of general use zoning districts that must be approved along with a Planned Development Master Plan in accordance with Sec. 10.2.4.
Sec. 4.7.2. 
Modification of Standards

A.	
Except as noted in this Article, development in a PD District must conform to all applicable provisions of this UDO.

B.	
The PD District allows modification of the following, as approved by the City Council under Sec. 10.2.4.:
1.	
Chapter 2. Residential Districts; 

2.	
Chapter 3. Mixed Use Districts;

3.	
Chapter 6. Use Regulations; 

4.	
Chapter 7. General Development Standards; 

5.	
Article 8.3. Blocks, Lots, Access; 

6.	
Article 8.4. New Streets; and

7.	
Article 8.5. Existing Streets.



C.	
A PD district may be of any size. A PD District that specifies a single structure must include a mixed use building type. A PD District that includes multiple buildings must include at least one of the following building types: townhouse, apartment, mixed-use building or a general building. For a PD District with multiple buildings, at least 2 building types must be included in the first phase of development.

D.	
Proposed density modifications in the districts that permit residential uses may propose lower maximum densities than the district currently allows, but cannot propose densities that exceed the district maximum.

E.	
Proposed use changes may remove a use or convert a permitted or limited use to a special use, or convert a permitted use to a limited use, but cannot allow a prohibited use, make a special use a permitted or limited use or make a limited use a permitted use.

F.	
Proposed modifications to the street cross-sections within Article 8.4. New Streets may only be requested for Sensitive, Local and Mixed Use Streets. Major Streets, Industrial and Service Streets and Accessways may not be modified or altered. The approval of alternative street cross-sections and minimum block length standards may not cause the Level of Service to fall below Level of Service D (LOS “D”).

G.	
Each Planned Development is required to provide at least 10% of the gross site area as open space. This open space shall adhere to Sec. 2.5.

Sec. 4.7.3. 
Allowed Sign Modifications


Within a PD District, the requirements of Article 7.3. Signs may be modified according to an approved common signage plan developed as part of the Master Plan. No modification shall be allowed until all of the following are met.
A.	
A common signage plan under Sec. 7.3.16.H. is provided.

B.	
In lieu of the maximum signage area for ground signs as set forth in Article 7.3. Signs, the Master Plan may allow up to 75 square feet of ground signage per 200 feet of street frontage adjoining any nonresidential or mixed use area identified on the Master Plan. 

C.	
There is no minimum setback requirement for buildings and structures to have a ground sign. 

D.	
No ground sign shall exceed 15 feet in height. 

E.	
No ground sign shall exceed 100 square feet in sign area. 

F.	
All ground signs shall comply with of Sec. 7.3.16. and limitations on lines of copy and miscellaneous provisions of Sec. 7.3.11. 

G.	
No premise shall exceed the maximum signage allowed for each premise by Sec. 7.3.16.B.  

H.	
For awning, marquee and canopy signs; directory signs; product and information signs; projecting signs; tract identification signs; wall signs; and windblown signs, the height, sign size and the total sign area may be modified provided that: 
1.	
The modification is specified in the sign criteria;  

2.	
No maximum sign area, size or height may be increased over 100% from the maximums established in Article 7.3. Signs for that sign type; and 

3.	
The amount of allowable signage shall be transferred from allowable ground signage as set forth in Sec. 4.7.3.B., and this transfer shall be the exclusive amount of allowable signage. 



I.	
Signage located within 100 feet of the perimeter of the PD District shall comply with all the provisions of Article 7.3. Signs.

J.	
For PD Districts 5 acres or more in size, a Low or Medium Profile Ground Sign not exceeding 10 feet may be specified in the approved Master Plan.

K.	
Permits for signs shall only be issued to 1 entity who is responsible for allocating signage to each premise. This entity shall keep an inventory of all existing signage and submit it to the City with each permit. 

L.	
If any amendment is made to the common signage plan, all existing signs that do not comply with the new sign criteria shall be removed within 30 days of approval of such amendment. 

M.	
Public street signs are allowed to have non-standard supports if a written agreement is submitted to and approved by the City. The agreement shall state that: 
1.	
Damaged signs shall be replaced by the property owners association within 5 days of being damaged or the City will replace them with standard signs and supports; 

2.	
The cost of replacement shall be borne by the property owners association; and

3.	
The property owners association shall assume sole responsibility for any loss, injury or death or damage resulting from such use of non-standard supports and shall maintain insurance and agreement to indemnify the City, its officers, council members and employees. 



Sec. 4.7.4. 
Application Requirements

A.	
In addition to a rezoning application, a PD Master Plan Application must include the following required elements. More than one required element may be combined onto a single map/plan sheet so long as legibility is not adversely impacted.
1.	
Vicinity Map.

2.	
Existing Conditions Map. 

3.	
Street and Block Plan.

4.	
General Layout Map delineating the boundaries of all general and overlay zoning district boundaries including Height and Frontage designations (if any).

5.	
In lieu of designating Height and Frontages on the General Layout Map, a Detailed Layout Map may be included that specifies the maximum and minimum building heights, maximum and minimum building setback lines for all structures and parking areas, and locations of nonresidential land uses.

6.	
Description of modifications to general district use regulations made in accordance with Sec. 4.7.2.E.

7.	
Development Plan showing the location of proposed building types.

8.	
Pedestrian Circulation Plan.

9.	
Parking Plan.

10.	
Open Space Plan. 

11.	
Tree Conservation Area Plan, if the site is 2 acres in size or larger. 

12.	
Major Utilities Plan.

13.	
Generalized Stormwater Plan.

14.	
Phasing Plan, if more than one phase is contemplated.

15.	
If residential lots to be created are less than 4,000 square feet in size, a Utility Service Plan shall be required. 

16.	
An illustrative 3-dimensional model or rendering that shows building elevations, location of streets and prominent site features. The 3-dimensional model must illustrate the potential massing and scale of the proposed development, but will not be regulatory.

17.	
Common Signage Plan (see Sec. 7.3.16.H.).



B.	
Each application must also include the following.
1.	
The specific standards intended to be modified as part of the approval process. If a standard of this UDO is not listed as being modified, then the standard is considered applicable and must be adhered to. However, subsequent requests for alternative compliance and variances may still be submitted. 

2.	
The proposed maximum number of dwelling units by building type for each PD subdistrict.

3.	
The proposed maximum square footage of nonresidential floor area by building type for each PD subdistrict.




4.	
	For all Master Plans that include a Mixed Use District, a general description of how the PD District conforms with the Urban Design Guidelines for Mixed Use Developments in the Comprehensive Plan and the General Design Principles for PD Districts listed in Sec. 4.7.5. 

5.	
	A general description of how the PD District conforms with the Comprehensive Plan.

6.	
A description of how the PD District meets the intent of Sec. 4.1.1.F.


C.	
In lieu of the establishment of a property owners' association, if a unit of government or its institutions owns all of the land in the Planned Development District, it may contract with the City of Raleigh to be fully responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of open space areas, private drives and	walkways, private utility lines located outside City of Raleigh utility easements or public street rights of way, stormwater control facilities and any other shared facility not conveyed to the City which serves more than one lot in a Planned Development District. 

D.	
The open space shall be available to all persons within the development. This contract shall further provide that if any portion of the Planned Development District is sold to a non-governmental entity without first establishing a property owners' association, the property shall automatically and without further public hearing be rezoned to the zoning district(s) which preceded the establishment of the Planned Development District. 

E.	
A memorandum of this contract describing the property and the provisions of the contract shall be recorded with the local county register of deeds office. All documents required herein shall be submitted prior to the recording of any plats or issuance of any construction permit in those instances where the property is already subdivided.

Sec. 4.7.5. 
General Design Principles 


If applicable, the following general design principles will be considered when reviewing an application for a PD District.
A.	
When at least 20 residential units are proposed, the project includes a variety of housing stock that serves a range of incomes and age groups, and may include detached houses, attached houses, townhouses, apartments and dwelling units above first floor commercial spaces. 

B.	
Uses are compact and well-integrated, rather than widely separated and buffered.

C.	
Compatibility among different uses is achieved through effective site planning and architectural design.

D.	
A variety of business types are accommodated, from retail and professional offices to live-work. Office uses vary from space for home occupations to conventional office buildings. Retail uses range from corner stores to larger format supermarkets. 

E.	
Special sites, such as those at a terminated vista, are reserved for public or civic buildings and spaces that serve as symbols of the community, enhancing community identity. 

F.	
The project includes a variety of street types designed to be accessible to the pedestrian, bicycle and automobile. Streets are connected in a way that encourages walking and reduces the number and length of automobile trips.

G.	
Bicycle circulation is accommodated on streets and on dedicated bicycle paths, greenways or trails with adequate bicycle parking facilities being provided at appropriate locations.

H.	
Building facades spatially delineate the streets and civic spaces, and mask parking lots. 

I.	
Architecture and landscape design are based on the local climate, topography, history and building practice. 

J.	
The project includes open space as a significant element of the project's design. Formal and informal, active and passive open spaces are included. Open spaces may include, but are not limited to, squares, plazas, greens, preserves, farmers markets, greenways and parks. 

K.	
The project is compatibly integrated into established adjacent areas, and considers existing development patterns, scale and use.

L.	
The project is a clearly identifiable or legible place with a unique character or unique tradition. 

M.	
Public art, including but not limited to, monuments, sculpture and water features, is encouraged.

N.	
Entertainment facilities, including but not limited to, live music venues and theatres, are encouraged.

Sec. 4.7.6. 
Master Plan Amendments


Any amendment to an approved PD Master Plan, including those approved prior to September 1, 2013, shall follow the procedures below. 
A.	
Administrative Amendments


The Planning Director shall administratively approve PD Master Plan amendments that propose any of the following alterations.
1.	
An increase or decrease to the allowable residential density, total number of dwelling units not to exceed 10%.

2.	
An increase or decrease to the minimum required nonresidential square footage or maximum permitted nonresidential square footage, not to exceed 10%.

3.	
An increase to allowable height (as measured in feet), provided the increase does not exceed the maximum number of feet permitted by story in the height categories contained within Article 3.3. Height Requirements The Planning Director may not administratively approve an increase in number of stories as specified in the Master Plan. 

4.	
A transfer of nonresidential floor area or residential dwelling units, from one area to another, not to exceed a 20% maximum for each standard. 

5.	
Minor adjustments in location of building, parking and open space areas. A minor adjustment shall be a modification in orientation or distance to property line; however, the adjustment shall not exceed 100 feet in distance from the approved location, and shall not be located any closer than 50 feet to the boundary of the PD District. However, where a building or parking area is shown on the approved Master Plan within 50 feet of a property line, the building or parking area adjustment may not be located any closer to the property line than as shown on the approved Master Plan. An adjustment to the location of transit facilities is permitted, provided the adjustment occurs prior to the recordation of the transit easement. 

6.	
An exchange of open space area, provided the exchanged properties are of like acreage, value and utility and that no tree conservation area or Open Space Plan has been recorded for the requested exchanged properties with register of deeds office in the county where the property is located.

7.	
An exchange of above ground stormwater control facilities of like size. The Planning Director may not administratively approve the relocation of an above ground stormwater facility to a location closer than 50 feet from the boundary of the PD District.

8.	
A relocation of access points, driveways or sidewalks either within or outside of the public right-of-way with the concurrence of the Development Services Department. 

9.	
A relocation of a fence, wall, sign or utility. Fences or walls required for transition areas or buffer yards may not be removed or relocated to an area that conflicts with the buffering requirement. 

10.	
Any requirement associated with a permitted change must be shown on the Master Plan. By example, if a 10% increase in density requires a different street cross-section, the street cross-section must be updated on the Street and Block Plan.

11.	
Modifications to the approved unified sign criteria for the master plan area with the concurrence of the Development Services Department.
a.	
Color, design and script alterations.

b.	
Reallocation of maximum square footage within the master plan area.

c.	
The addition of a ground sign in excess of the provisions in Article 7.3, provided:
i.	
No more than one ground sign may be added administratively;

ii.	
The master plan must be at least 25 acres in size; contain at least 60,000 developed square feet of non-residential uses and at least 200 developed dwelling units; 

iii.	
The ground sign must be at least 250 feet from any other ground sign within the master plan area and at least 200 feet from a mixed use building; and

iv.	
All other provisions of Article 7.3 are met.






B.	
Non-Administrative Amendments


Any other amendment not listed in Sec. 4.7.6.A.shall be subject to the rezoning process specified in Sec. 10.2.4.
C.	
Existing Master Plan Documents


All PD Master Plans in existence prior to September 1, 2013, shall not be considered nonconforming; where conflicting provisions exist in this UDO, these previously approved Master Plans may be constructed in accordance with the approved Master Plan.
D.	
Committed Elements


Where a PD Master Plan specifies certain committed timed elements, the applicant may request an extension for up to 1 year, to be granted by the Planning Director provided development within the PD District or in the vicinity has not created the need for the committed timed elements.

Article 4.1. General Provisions	4 – 2Sec. 4.1.1. District Intent Statements.........................................................4 – 2


Article 4.2. Conservation Management (CM)	4 – 3Sec. 4.2.1. General Provisions....................................................................4 – 3
Sec. 4.2.2. Open Lot..................................................................................4 – 3


Article 4.3. Agriculture Productive (AP) 	4 – 4Sec. 4.3.1. Detached House.......................................................................4 – 4
Sec. 4.3.2. General Building.......................................................................4 – 5


Article 4.4. Heavy Industrial (IH)	4 – 6Sec. 4.4.1. General Building.......................................................................4 – 6


Article 4.5. Manufactured Housing (MH)	4 – 7Sec. 4.5.1. Site Size, Residential Density and Land Use..............................4 – 7
Sec. 4.5.2. Site Development Standards....................................................4 – 7
Sec. 4.5.3. Manufactured Home Space Standards......................................4 – 8


Article 4.6. Campus (CMP) 	4 – 10Sec. 4.6.1. Campus Areas.........................................................................4 – 10
Sec. 4.6.2. Modification of District Standards..........................................4 – 10
Sec. 4.6.3. Application Requirements.......................................................4 – 11
Sec. 4.6.4. Master Plan Amendments......................................................4 – 11


Article 4.7. Planned Development (PD)	4 – 13Sec. 4.7.1. Establishment of a PD District .................................................4 – 13
Sec. 4.7.2. Modification of Standards........................................................4 – 13
Sec. 4.7.3. Allowed Sign Modifications......................................................4 – 13
Sec. 4.7.4. Application Requirements.......................................................4 – 14
Sec. 4.7.5. General Design Principles .......................................................4 – 15
Sec. 4.7.6. Master Plan Amendments.......................................................4 – 15











Page Intentionally Left Blank




CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.1. General Provisions
Sec. 5.1.1. District Intent Statements

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.1. General Provisions
Sec. 5.1.1. District Intent Statements

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.2. Environmental Overlays
Sec. 5.2.2. ..Metro-Park Overlay District (-MPOD)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.3. Corridor Overlays
Sec. 5.3.1. ..Special Highway Overlay Districts (-SHOD-)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays
Sec. 5.4.1. General Historic Overlay District (-HOD-G)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays
Sec. 5.4.3. Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays
Sec. 5.4.3. ..Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays
Sec. 5.4.3. ..Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.5. Transit Overlays
Sec. 5.5.1. Transit Overlay District (-TOD)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.6. Parking Overlays
Sec. 5.6.1. ..Special Residential Parking Overlay District (-SRPOD)

.CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 .

Article 5.1. General Provisions   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.1.1. District Intent Statements

Article 5.2. Environmental Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.2.1. Airport Overlay District (-AOD)

Article 5.2. Environmental Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.2.3. Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD)

Article 5.3. Corridor Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.3.1. ..Special Highway Overlay Districts (-SHOD-)

Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.4.1. General History Overlay Districts (-HOD-G)

Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.4.2. Streetside Historic Overlay District (-HOD-S)

Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.4.3. ..Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)

Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.4.3. ..Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)

Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.4.3. ..Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)

Article 5.6. Parking Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.6.1. Special Residential Parking Overlay District (-SRPOD)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.2. Environmental Overlays
Sec. 5.2.5. ..Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)

Article 5.3. Corridor Overlays   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.3.1. Special Highway Overlay Districts (-SHOD-)

CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS   |   Article 5.2. Environmental Overlays
Sec. 5.3.1. ..Special Highway Overlay District (-SHOD)

Article 5.7. Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.7.1. Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD)

Article 5.7. Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay   |   CHAPTER 5. ..OVERLAY DISTRICTS  
 Sec. 5.7.1. Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD)

Chapter 5. 
Overlay Districts

Article 5.1. 
General Provisions

Sec. 5.1.1. 
District Intent Statements

A.	
General Purpose
1.	
The intent of the Overlay Districts is to apply regulations that achieve a specific purpose to a targeted area.

2.	
If a use is prohibited in either an applicable Overlay District or the General Use District, then that use is prohibited, even though one of the districts allows the use. The enumeration of expressly prohibited uses shall not be deemed either exclusive or all-inclusive.

3.	
In the event of a conflict with the General Use District, the overlay standards shall apply.



B.	
Environmental Overlays
1.	
Airport Overlay District (-AOD)
a.	
The -AOD protects the efficiency and long term usefulness of an area's aviation facilities, highways, arterials and major streets by controlling the type and design of land uses in proximity to such facilities. 

b.	
Provisions are made to ensure the attractiveness of this significant gateway to the City, and to protect the public from adverse health effects and annoyance by aircraft noise. 

c.	
Residential and similar uses are prohibited in the -AOD. The uses permitted are better able to protect themselves from aircraft noise and implement the functions of the airport.



2.	
Metro-Park Overlay District (-MPOD)
a.	
The -MPOD preserves and protects the integrity of large natural parks that serve the citizens of Raleigh, the region and the state. 

b.	
Parks are protected from incompatible uses and intense developments, by the application of impervious surface and building height limitations near the boundaries of any Metro-Park.

c.	
In general, land in a -MPOD is approximately 1,000 to 1,500 feet deep, as measured from the boundary of a Metro-Park, and follows identifiable features or boundaries, wherever possible.



3.	
Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD)
a.	
The -UWPOD is intended to protect the integrity of drinking water in Raleigh and surrounding communities, so as to provide clean and safe water for residents, business, industries, plant and animal life at a reasonable cost.

b.	
 The -UWPOD is applicable to Class WS-IV waters only and is divided into 2 areas: a primary water supply watershed protection area and a secondary water supply watershed protection area. 

c.	
Regulations in the -UWPOD include impervious surface limitations and natural resource buffer yards. Use limitations are imposed by this overlay district.



4.	
Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-FWPOD)
a.	
The -FWPOD is intended to protect the integrity of drinking water in Raleigh and surrounding communities, so as to provide clean and safe water for residents, businesses, industries, plant and animal life at a reasonable cost. 

b.	
The -FWPOD is applicable to Class WS-IV waters only and is divided into 2 areas: a primary reservoir watershed protection area and a secondary reservoir watershed protection area. 

c.	
Regulations in the -FWPOD include impervious surface limitations and natural resource buffer yards. Along watercourses, additional design standards are applied. Use limitations are imposed by this 0verlay district.



5.	
Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)
a.	
The -SWPOD is intended to protect the integrity of drinking water in Raleigh and surrounding communities, so as to provide clean and safe water for residents, businesses, industries, plant and animal life at a reasonable cost. 

b.	
The -SWPOD is applicable to Class WS-III waters only and is divided into 2 areas: a primary reservoir watershed protection area and a secondary reservoir watershed protection area. 

c.	
Regulations in the -SWPOD include impervious surface limitations and natural resource buffer yards. Along watercourses, additional design standards are applied. Use limitations are imposed by this overlay district.





C.	
Corridor Overlays
1.	
Special Highway Overlay Districts (-SHOD-1 and -SHOD-2)




-SHOD-1 and -SHOD-2 protect and preserve the natural scenic beauty along designated major access corridors and specified principal arterials. Maintaining the attractiveness of these corridors and arterials enhances the economic value of the community by encouraging tourism and trade. -SHOD-1 and -SHOD-2 are established for the purpose of:
a.	
Protecting the public investment in and lengthening the time during which major access corridors and specified principal arterials can continue to serve their functions without expansion or relocation by expediting the free flow of traffic and reducing the hazards arising from unnecessary points of ingress and egress and cluttered roadside development;

b.	
Reducing the costs of future roadway expansions by requiring that buildings and structures be sufficiently set back from the right-of-way to provide adequate storage for vehicles until they can safely enter the highway;

c.	
Reserving adequate roadside space through which neighborhood traffic may be admitted to and from the roadway system in a manner that avoids undue traffic concentrations, sudden turning and stopping and other hazards; and

d.	
In contrast to -SHOD-1, -SHOD-2 contains no additional height or gross site size. -SHOD-2 requires a narrower protective yard and less planting than -SHOD-1.


D.	
Character Protection Overlays
1.	
General Historic Overlay District (-HOD-G)
a.	
The -HOD-G preserves and protects certain areas, structures, buildings and objects within the City's zoning jurisdiction that are considered to be valued and important assets and have special significance in terms of one or more of the following: history, prehistory, archaeology, architecture and culture and possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and association. 

b.	
Regulations promote the use of and conservation of Historic Districts for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of Raleigh, Wake County and the State of North Carolina.



2.	
Streetside Historic Overlay District (-HOD-S)
a.	
The -HOD-S preserves and protects certain areas, structures, buildings and objects within the City's zoning jurisdiction that are considered to be valued and important assets and have special significance in terms of one or more of the following: history, prehistory, archaeology, architecture and culture and possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and association. 

b.	
Regulations promote the use of and conservation of Historic Districts for education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of Raleigh, Wake County and the State of North Carolina. 

c.	
In contrast to the -HOD-G, a -HOD-S applies only to structures as viewed from the adjacent street.



3.	
Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)
a.	
The -NCOD preserves and enhances the general quality and appearance of older neighborhoods, for it is recognized that built environmental characteristics are a major part of the identity and positive image of the City. 

b.	
Through the regulation of street design, greenways, rights-of-way and built environmental characteristics, -NCOD stabilizes and improves property values and promotes local design qualities. 

c.	
By respecting the context of existing built environmental characteristics, the -NCOD reduces conflicts between new construction and existing development, and it encourages compatible infill development.





E.	
Transit Overlays
1.	
Transit Overlay District (-TOD)
a.	
When combined with the appropriate base district, height and frontage, the -TOD allows for intense, compact and walkable mixed-use development in core areas around planned transit stations as designated on the Urban Form Map or in an adopted station area plan.

b.	
The -TOD modifies the underlying district, height and frontage standards to promote a vibrant pedestrian core by prohibiting certain incompatible uses, reducing required parking and limiting surface parking and requiring that buildings have a minimum of 2 stories. 





F.	
Parking Overlays
1.	
Special Residential Parking Overlay District (-SRPOD)
a.	
The -SRPOD restricts parking area, location and surfacing for detached structures used for single unit living. 

b.	
The requirement to park vehicles on an improved surface reduces soil compaction and erosion, which is detrimental to the City’s storm sewer utility. 

c.	
The standards permit the orderly parking of vehicles on-site. 





G.	
Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay
1.	
Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD)
a.	
The -ADUOD permits accessory dwelling units (ADUs).

b.	
The permitting of Accessory Dwelling Units promotes efficient land use, improves market affordability, and responds to demand for expanded housing options.

c.	
Through the regulation of minimum lot dimension requirements; maximum occupancy; and building standards, including maximum square footage, building setbacks and building height, among other standards and requirements as provided in Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures. -ADUOD promotes development of accessory dwelling units within a well-regulated framework.






Article 5.2. 
Environmental Overlays

Sec. 5.2.1. 
Airport Overlay District (-AOD)

A.	
Uses
1.	
Permitted Uses




Unless prohibited in Sec. 5.2.1.A.3., those uses permitted in the underlying district shall be permitted in the -AOD.  In addition, the following uses are subject to the use standards stated in Sec. 5.2.1.A.2.a.	Allowed outdoor storage under Sec. 7.5.3.; and b.	Concrete and cement mixing plants, including the outdoor storage of materials used in production.2.	Use Standards for Allowed UsesThe following use standards apply to those uses identified in Sec. 5.2.1.A.1. Uses shall be fully shielded with either a permanent overhead cover or a canopy of shade trees that meets all of the following.a.	There must be at least 1 locally-adapted shade tree for every 2,000 square feet of total site area.b.	The shade trees must be adequately protected from damage due to activities performed or materials stored on the site.c.	The shade trees must be distributed within the site area so that at maturity the expected combined tree canopy covers at least 35% of the site area.d.	If the site area is greater than 5 acres, the site must be divided in segments of no greater than 5 acres in size and all segments must be separated from one another by an expected canopy of shade trees of at least 100 feet wide.e.	Compliance with all the above conditions must be achieved without including trees located in a required protective yard. 3.	Prohibited UsesThe following uses are prohibited in an -AOD:a.	All household living; b.	All group living; c.	All social service; d.	All civic except for cemeteries and police, fire and EMS stations; e.	Day cares; f.	Hospitals; g.	Detention centers, jails, prisons; h.	Resource extraction, landfills;i.	Off-premise signs; andj.	Any use that involves dangerous, noxious or offensive activity that has excessive smoke, odor, noise, glare, fumes, gas, vibration, threat of fire or explosion, emission of particulate matter, interference with radio, television reception, radiation or any other likely cause.B.	Setbacks and Height1.	SetbacksThe setbacks of the underlying district apply in the -AOD.2.	HeightThe maximum height limits of the underlying zoning district apply unless the height regulations adopted by the Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive height limits apply.C.	Supplemental Regulations1.	LightingAll outdoor lighting shall be full cutoff. FAA-approved warning lights to mark obstructions to aircraft are exempted from this regulation.2.	RooftopsRooftops shall be uniform in color and made of non-reflective material.Sec. 5.2.2. Metro-Park Overlay District (-MPOD) A.	ApplicabilityNo building, structure, use, impervious surface, tree conservation area or light shall be constructed, established, moved, altered, changed or increased in size within a -MPOD except in conformity with the regulations contained in this section for the adopted -MPOD.B.	Permitted UsesUses permitted in the underlying district are permitted in a -MPOD.C.	Prohibited Uses and ActivitiesProhibited uses and activities in a -MPOD:1.	Any establishment, use or trade that emits detectable odor at a Metro-Park boundary more than 15 minutes in any 1 day or more than 2 days out of the calendar month;2.	Above-ground storage of hazardous waste, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations 2161.3 and 263.33, or as the same may be amended by law, except up to 55 gallons which shall be stored inside a fully impervious structure. This prohibition does not include underground storage in tanks which meet applicable fire prevention standards and federal and state regulations and otherwise comply with the City Code; and3.	Use of outdoor speakers within 500 feet of a Metro-Park boundary.D.	Setbacks1.	Separation and Protective Yards a.	The setbacks of the underlying zoning district shall apply with the exception that any portion of a lot abutting a Metro-Park boundary requires a 32-foot wide primary tree conservation area along the entire length of the property boundary.b.	No tree or land disturbing activity, animal pen, structure, septic system, stormwater facility or vehicular surface area may be located within 32 feet of a Metro-Park boundary.2.	Natural Resource Buffer YardsAll watercourses that both drain into a Metro-Park and have concentrated flow from a drainage area of at least 5 acres must establish a primary tree conservation in accordance with Sec. 9.2.3.3.	Heighta.	Buildings and structures located within 1,000 feet of a Metro-Park boundary shall be limited to a maximum height of 45 feet, provided that no building is greater than 2½ stories.b.	Buildings and structures not otherwise restricted to a lower height located further than 1,000 feet from a Metro-Park boundary, which are more than 45 feet high or contain more than 2½ stories can add 25 feet of additional setback from the 1,000-foot distance from the edge of the Metro-Park boundary for each foot of height greater than 45 feet.E.	Supplementary Regulations1.	Lightinga.	No exterior lighting may cause illumination in excess of 0.4 footcandles measured at the boundary of the Metro-Park. b.	Full-cutoff lights must be used for all lighting.c.	No external illumination of buildings that face the boundary of the Metro-Park is allowed except for the exterior lighting of building entrances, exits or loading docks.d.	No provision of a -MPOD shall be in conflict with applicable FAA lighting regulations. 2.	Impervious Surface CoverageExcluding streets, impervious surface areas may not be added so that the impervious surface lot coverage exceeds 45% in areas that drain into the Metro-Park. Impervious surface coverage greater than 30% but less than 45% of the lot is allowed but only when identified pollutants (such as nitrogen and/or phosphorous) are reduced by a minimum of 25%. F.	Hardships1.	In those instances where in accordance with Sec. 10.2.10






























., the Board of Adjustment determines that the application of these regulations would deprive the landowners of reasonable use of their land, the Board of Adjustment may alter the impervious surface coverage limits, increase height restrictions and reduce the widths of the protective yard as determined necessary. 

2.	
Maintenance of the protective yard should be given the highest priority by the Board of Adjustment when making its determination to modify one or more of these regulations.



G.	
Existing Structures, Uses and Impervious Surfaces
1.	
All structures, uses and impervious surfaces, watercourses and lighting existing at the time that the -MPOD is first applied to the property shall not be deemed a zoning nonconformity solely because of this overlay district.

2.	
All additions, changes, expansions and alterations to existing structures, impervious surfaces, lighting and uses must comply with the regulations of the -MPOD, unless the Board of Adjustment approves a special use permit under Sec. 10.2.9. allowing the addition, change, expansion or alteration.

3.	
In addition to the showings required by Sec. 10.2.9.E.4. through 8., all of the following standards shall be met:
a.	
The expansion does not, singularly or collectively, exceed 25% of the total gross floor area of the building or use existing at the time the -MPOD overlay zoning district regulations were first applied to the property.

b.	
The building or use existed at the time the -MPOD overlay zoning district regulations requirements were first applied to the property.

c.	
The requested activity complies with all requirements and regulations of this UDO other than the -MPOD overlay zoning district regulations.

d.	
Except where pre-existing structures, septic systems, wells, stormwater facilities, vehicular surface drives and parking surfaces needed for UDO required off-street parking prevent the planting of trees, tree conservation areas are established in accordance with Sections 5.2.2.C.1.a. and 5.2.2.C.2.



4.	
 Nothing shall be deemed to permit the reconstruction—similar or different, whole or in part—of a building, improvement or use existing at the time the NCOD overlay zoning regulations were first applied to the property that has been voluntarily demolished or discontinued. Voluntarily torn down buildings and improvements or discontinued uses shall be replaced with buildings, improvements and uses that comply with the regulations of the -MPOD.



Sec. 5.2.3. 
Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD)

A.	
Base Standards Apply


Unless specifically set forth in this section, allowed uses, dimensional requirements, height limits and general development standards of the underlying zoning district apply.
B.	
Prohibited Uses


The following uses are prohibited:
1.	
New landfills; and

2.	
New sites for land application of sludge, residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.


C.	
Additional Development Standards


Watercourse buffer, impervious surface, stormwater runoff and water quality requirements are set forth in Sec. 9.5.1.Sec. 5.2.4. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-FWPOD)A.	Base Standards ApplyUnless specifically set forth in this section, allowed uses, dimensional requirements, height limits and general development standards of the underlying zoning district apply.B.	Prohibited UsesThe following uses are prohibited:1.	New landfills.2.	New sites for land application of sludge, residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.C.	Additional Development StandardsWatercourse buffer, impervious surface, stormwater runoff and water quality requirements are set forth in Sec. 9.5.2.Sec. 5.2.5. Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)A.	Base Standards ApplyUnless specifically set forth in this section, allowed uses, dimensional requirements, height limits and general development standards of the underlying zoning district apply.B.	Prohibited UsesThe following uses are prohibited:1.	New landfills.2.	New sites for land application of sludge, residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.C.	Additional Development StandardsWatercourse buffer, impervious surface, stormwater runoff and water quality requirements are set forth in Sec. 9.5.3.Article 5.3. Corridor OverlaysSec. 5.3.1. Special Highway Overlay Districts (-SHOD-)A.	District Designation 1.	-SHOD-1 and -SHOD-2 are located on either side of a Major Access Corridor, Thoroughfare or Arterial, near or adjacent to Metro-Parks, airports, research parks or Wake County Special Highway Overlay Districts, beginning at the outer edge of the right-of-way. 2.	Each Special Highway Overlay District should be 1,000 to 1,500 feet deep, except a lesser distance should be applied where identifiable conditions exist to screen the visibility of motorists. 3.	District boundaries should follow identifiable boundaries whenever possible. However, when a new right-of-way has been established by the Comprehensive Plan, the district boundaries shall be calculated from the newly established right-of-way line. B.	Prohibited UsesOff-premise signs are prohibited. C.	Lot Area and Subdivision1.	The minimum gross site size is 2 acres within the -SHOD-1, except for detached, attached, townhouse and apartment buildings, cottage courts, congregate care facilities and life care communities. 2.	Lots and uses on sites less than 2 acres in size are not to be deemed nonconforming by virtue of this Article.3.	Uses and lots must be developed in accordance with a unified plan for landscaping, access, parking, loading, lighting, noise and siting of buildings. D.	Protective Yards 1.	In Generala.	If there is a conflict between a protective yard required by a Special Highway Overlay District and a protective yard established by the underlying district, the protective yard with the greater width controls. b.	Where necessity requires the location of a public or private utility easement adjacent to the Major Access Corridor that prohibits locating the required planting of the protective yard immediately adjacent to the right-of-way, the required protective yard must be provided adjacent to the utility easement.2.	Protective Yards in -SHOD-1 a.	Any portion of a lot abutting a Major Access Corridor requires a 50-foot protective yard landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F., or on parcels 2 acres and larger in size, the protective yard must be established as tree conservation area in accordance with Article 9.1. Tree Conservation. When 2 Major Access Corridors intersect, the 50-foot wide protective yard applies for the entire length adjoining the Major Access Corridor inside the -SHOD-1. b.	Any portion of a lot abutting a Major Access Corridor where the property both adjoins and gains access from a public Marginal Access Street and parallel to a Major Access Corridor requires a 25-foot protective yard landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F., or on parcels 2 acres and larger in size, the protective yard must be established as tree conservation area in accordance with Article 9.1. Tree Conservation.c.	Any portion of a lot abutting a Thoroughfare or Commercial Street, other than a Major Access Corridor, that intersects with and gains access from a Major Access Corridor requires a 50-foot protective yard for a distance of 200 feet from the intersection of the rights-of-way. All protective yards must be landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F., or on parcels 2 acres and larger in size, the protective yard must be established as tree conservation area in accordance with Article 9.1. Tree Conservation.3.	Protective Yards in -SHOD-2a.	Any portion of a lot abutting a Major Access Corridor requires a 25-foot protective yard landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F., or on parcels 2 acres and larger in size, the protective yard must be established as tree conservation area in accordance with Article 9.1. Tree Conservation. When 2 Major Access Corridors intersect, the 25-foot wide protective yard must apply for the entire length adjoining the Major Access Corridor inside the -SHOD-2. b.	Any portion of a lot abutting a Major Access Corridor where the property both adjoins and gains access from a public Marginal Access Street and parallel to a Major Access Corridor requires a 25-foot protective yard landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F., or on parcels 2 acres and larger in size, the protective yard must be established as tree conservation area in accordance with Article 9.1. Tree Conservation.c.	Any portion of a lot abutting a Thoroughfare or Commercial Street, other than a Major Access Corridor, that intersects with and gains access from a Major Access Corridor requires a 25-foot protective yard for a distance of 200 feet from the intersection of the rights-of-way. All protective yards must be landscaped in accordance with Sec. 5.3.1.F. or on parcels 2 acres and larger in size, the protective yard must be established as tree conservation area in accordance with Article 9.1. Tree Conservation.E.	Height1.	Height in -SHOD-1Buildings and structures cannot exceed a height of 75 feet or 5 stories. 2.	Height in -SHOD-2Buildings and structures cannot exceed the maximum allowed height of the underlying district.F.	Planting Requirements in Protective Yards1.	Required Plant Materials All required protective yards shall contain the following plantings.




























Planting per 100 Lineal Feet
 
SHOD-1
 SHOD-2
 
Shade Trees
 
Deciduous
 7
 3
 
Evergreen
 3
 2
 
Understory Trees
 6
 3
 
Shrubs
 32
 16
 
  % Deciduous (max)
 40%
 40%
 
  Shrub Alternates
 Wall, Fence or Berm
 Wall, Fence or Berm
 


2.	
Shade Trees
a.	
All required trees must be a locally-adapted species with an expected mature height of 35 feet or greater and an expected mature crown spread of at least 30 feet or greater unless subject to an overhead power line in which case the mature height may be less.

b.	
Each deciduous tree must be at least 14 feet in height and have a minimum caliper of 3½ inches at time of planting.

c.	
Each evergreen tree must be at least 8 feet in height and have a minimum caliper of 2 inches at time of planting. 

d.	
Two evergreen trees a minimum of 4½ feet in height when planted may be substituted for each required evergreen tree. 

e.	
Trees cannot be planted within a tree conservation area or the critical root zone of an existing tree and must be planted at least 15 feet from any other tree and no further than 50 feet from any other tree, measured from tree trunk to tree trunk.



3.	
Understory Trees
a.	
Understory trees must be a locally-adapted species with an expected mature height of at least 15 feet  and an expected mature crown spread of at least 15 feet.

b.	
Each understory tree must be a minimum height of 6 feet tall at time of planting. 

c.	
Trees cannot be planted within a tree conservation area or the critical root zone of an existing tree and must be planted at least 15 feet from any other tree and no further than 50 feet from any other tree, measured from tree trunk to tree trunk.



4.	
Shrubs
a.	
All shrubs must be locally-adapted species, and when planted must be a minimum height of 24 inches. The expected maintained minimum height of the shrubs must be 5 feet within 3 years of planting.

b.	
Shrub planting must form at least 1 continuous row of shrubs spaced 5 feet on center across the entire protective yard except for driveways. Shrubs must be planted outside of and adjacent to any tree conservation area. Shrubs cannot be planted within the critical root zone of any tree in protective yards that are not tree conservation areas. 

c.	
Either a wall or a solid fence at least 5 feet in height may be erected in lieu of the required shrubs in protective yards that are not tree conservation areas. The wall or fence in terms of appearance, texture, and quality must be made of the same or compatible material and color as the principal building. The erected wall or fence must be landscaped so that no more than two-thirds of its surface area will be visible within 3 years after the erection of the structure; 40% of the plant material may be deciduous. No planting is required for decorative fences. 

d.	
A berm with a minimum height of 3 feet, measured perpendicular to the center of the crown, may be substituted for a portion of the required shrubs. The berm must contain a rounded crown suitable for planting, and have a stabilized side slope of no greater than 3-to-1. A steeper side slope may be used in exceptional cases when all of the following are met: 
i.	
This steeper slope is sufficiently stabilized; and

ii.	
The landscape objectives of the overlay district are better achieved; and

iii.	
Physical constraints of the site prevent the use of a flatter slope.



e.	
The berm must be planted with ¾ of the required number of shrubs. 

f.	
Shrubs planted on the berm may have a lesser mature height; provided that the expected combined height of the berm and planting after 3 years is 5 feet. 

g.	
A berm cannot be built in any protective yard whenever the protective yard is also a tree conservation area.



5.	
General
a.	
Maintenance of a required protective yard must conform to Sec. 7.2.4.D. b.	No protective yard may remain denuded or exposed with bare soil. c.	The location of required landscaping may not obstruct the views of motorists using any street, private driveway or the approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard, a condition dangerous to the public safety or violate the specifications under the Raleigh Street Design Manual.G.	Existing Vegetation1.	GeneralWhere the protective yard basal area is less than 30 square feet per acre for each 50 linear feet, existing vegetation that meets or exceeds the quantity, spacing and height standards may be used to satisfy the protective yard requirements. Where the protective yard basal area is 30 square feet per acre or more for each 50 linear feet, such areas shall be primary tree conservation areas and must meet the requirements of Article 9.1. Tree Conservation.2.	Tree Preservation CreditPreservation of existing live natural trees between the principal building and the street right-of-way can be credited towards the tree planting requirements of this section. a.	Method of Calculation and Minimum SizeCredit toward the required number of trees for each 100 feet will be given on a tree-for-tree basis for each preserved tree 3 inches DBH and larger provided such trees are evenly distributed across each 100 feet.b.	Protected Ground Areai.	The critical root zone of each preserved tree must be entirely within the protective yard with no tree disturbing activity within any critical root zone.ii.	During construction, the protective yard shall be protected with a tree protection fence. Credit for existing trees will not be allowed if there are any tree disturbing activities or encroachments in the protective yard. c.	Unsafe and Diseased TreesNo credit is allowed for any tree if the tree is unhealthy or dead or is a hazardous tree. The death of or replacement of any preserved tree which was used for credit requires the owner to plant new trees equal to the number of credited trees; such plantings must meet the requirements of this section. d.	Minimum Tree RequirementsIn no case may credits for preserved trees eliminate the shade and understory tree spacing requirement above; no protective yard may contain less than 1 tree. 3.	Reduction of ShrubsThe amount of required shrubs may be reduced by 50% if existing trees located in the protective yard meet the space, quantity and specification requirements are at least 25 feet tall and are preserved and protected from encroachments under Sec. 5.3.1.G.2.b. 4.	Supplemental PlantingSupplemental plantings may be required, if it can be reasonably inferred that after 5 years, the existing vegetation will not meet the requirements of this section. Where such supplemental plantings are required, the plantings must meet the requirements of Sec. 5.3.1.F.H.	Expansions and Additions 1.	General Requirements Any new and expanded loading, utility service, and display area, building, structure, surface area of the use or vehicular surface may not locate in any protective yard.2.	In -SHOD-1a.	A protective yard at least 12 feet wide and containing 25% of the plantings required in Sec. 5.3.1.F. must be provided on the property if the gross floor area, surface area, vehicular surface area or any combination is increased by 25% of the existing area. b.	For each additional percent of expansion greater than 25%, an additional  1½  feet of protective yard width and 3% of additional planting material must be added to the initial requirements until 100%  of the requirements are met. 3.	In -SHOD-2a.	A protective yard at least 10 feet wide and containing 40% of the plantings required in Sec. 5.3.1.F. must be provided on the property if the gross floor area, surface area, vehicular surface area or any combination is increased by 25% of the existing area. b.	For each additional percent of expansion greater than 25%, an additional factor of 6/1o of a foot of protective yard width and 2.4/1o% of additional planting material must be added to the initial requirements until 100% of the requirements are met. I.	Lighting 1.	All outdoor lighting shall be full cutoff. 2.	No exterior lighting may cause illumination in excess of .4/1o maintained footcandle on any lot containing a dwelling, congregate care facility, continuing care retirement community or Residential District. J.	Outdoor Service FacilitiesAny outdoor pay window, drive-in facility, drive-thru facility, automated teller machine or any other outdoor service facility that is located on a lot that abuts a dwelling, congregate care facility, life care community or a Residential District, other than in a street, must be located at least 100 feet away from the abutting property line. Article 5.4. Character Protection OverlaysSec. 5.4.1. General Historic Overlay District (-HOD-G)A.	ApplicabilityThis section applies to all individual Historic Landmarks and each General Historic Overlay District (-HOD-G) designated by the City Council.B.		Purpose and Objectives1.		The -HOD-G is intended to preserve the historic significance of properties that are formally designated by the City. Locally designated historic districts are areas which are deemed to be of special significance in terms of their history, prehistory, architecture, archeology or culture, and to possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and association. The -HOD-G seeks to preserve the overall historic character of the district, as well as the key, character-defining details of each of the contributing resources, and to assure that new construction is compatible with this historic context.2.		The -HOD-G has the following objectives: a.		To promote the preservation and continued use of individual properties and districts of historic significance;b.		To preserve the integrity of historically significant resources; c.		To support sustainability by reusing existing built resources; andd.		To assure that new construction is compatible with the historic context of landmark properties and historic districts. C.		Certificate of Appropriateness Required1.		In addition to all other approval processes, within the -HOD-G and for any Historic Landmark, no portion of the exterior features of any building or other structure (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, path or any other appurtenant features), trees, or above ground utility structure nor any type of outdoor advertising sign, or portion of the designated interior features of a Historic Landmark is to be erected, altered, restored, demolished or moved unless and until after an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness as to the exterior features, or portion of the designated interior features of a Historic Landmark, has been submitted and approved. 2.		A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued prior to any application for a building permit or other permit granted for the purpose of constructing, altering, moving or demolishing structures or appurtenant features being made, and shall be issued or denied, subject to such reasonable conditions as the Historic Development Commission may impose, according to such procedures as may be set forth elsewhere in this UDO or adopted by the Historic Development Commission. 3.		A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for all activities specified in this section whether a building permit or other permit is otherwise required or not; except that no Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for: a.		The ordinary maintenance or repair of any features that do not involve a change in: i.		Design;ii.		Material;iii.		Color; or iv.		Outer appearance. b.		The construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of any feature which the Development Services Director certifies is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. c.	In the event of equipment failure, accidental damage or natural occurrences (such as electrical storms, tornadoes, ice storms and the like), the ordinary maintenance or repair of: i.		Streets; ii.		Sidewalks; iii.		Pavement markings;iv.		Above-ground utility service lines; orv.		Street signs, traffic signs or replacement of streetlight fixtures. 4.		All of the provisions of this section are applicable to construction, alteration, restoration, moving and demolition by the State of North Carolina, its political subdivisions, agencies, instrumentalities and public utilities. 5.		Individual certificates of appropriateness for each change may be requested, or if the activity is of the same character and involves a number of objects, as is the case with utility pole replacement, a programmatic certificate of appropriateness may be requested. D.		Prohibited Activities1.	Prohibited activities within a -HOD-G or Historic Landmark include the following when conducted without an approved Certificate of Appropriateness: a.	The erection, alteration, changing, restoration, moving or demolition of:i.	Any entire building or structure;ii.	Any exterior features of a building or structure; iii.	Any site features (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, paths or any other appurtenant features); iv.	Trees; v.	Any above-ground utility structure; vi.	Any type of outdoor advertising sign; orvii.	Any portion of the designated interior features of a Historic Landmark.b.	The demolition by neglect (Article 11.8. Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts) of: i.	Any contributing building or structure; ii.	Any exterior features of a contributing building or structure; iii.	Site features (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, paths or any other appurtenant features); oriv.	Any contributing outdoor advertising sign. 2.	The demolition of any entire building, site or structure within a pending -HOD-G or pending Historic Landmark is prohibited when conducted without an approved Certificate of Appropriateness:a.	Any demolition during the pending designation may be delayed for a period up to 180 days from the date of issuance (unless the Historic Development Commission votes to waive or shorten it) or until the City Council takes final action, whichever occurs first.b.	Should the City Council approve the designation prior to the expiration of the 180 day delay period, a new application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition must then be filed; however, the maximum period of delay for such demolition certificate shall be reduced by the Historic Development Commission equal to the period of delay while the designation was pending.E.		Setbacks1.		The minimum and maximum setbacks within the -HOD-G and for Historic Landmarks shall be congruous with the setbacks of any typical well-related nearby building and structure within 1½ blocks and in the overlay district, and congruous with the character of the Historic Landmark, as set forth in the historic development standards below or as defined in the designation documents or nomination.2.		Where the setbacks or allowed encroachments of the underlying district conflict with these setback requirements, the setbacks of the historic development standards shall control. F.		Height1.		Buildings and structures shall be congruous with the height of typical well-related nearby buildings and structures in the overlay district, and congruous with the character of the Historic Landmark, as set forth in the historic development standards below or as defined in the designation documents or nomination.2.		Where the height regulations or allowed height encroachments of the underlying district conflict with these height requirements, the height requirements of the historic development standards shall control. G.		SignsNo sign shall be erected, altered, restored or moved except in compliance with a Certificate of Appropriateness. H.		Historic Development Standards1.		See documents entitled: "Design Guidelines for Raleigh Historic Districts and Landmarks dated May 2, 2017," “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings,” and “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and the Guidelines for the Treatment of Cultural Landscapes.” These documents are incorporated by reference as authorized by N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-76, are made a part of this UDO and are on file with City Planning. These documents contain architectural guidelines and design standards that will be applied in considering applications for Certificates of Appropriateness to ensure as far as possible that the exterior features of buildings, structures and their associated features located within a -HOD-G, and designated as a Historic Landmark, remain in harmony with other buildings, structures and appurtenant features in the overlay district, and the character of the Historic Landmark. 2.		The current edition of “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings” shall be the sole standards and guidelines used in reviewing applications submitted by the State of North Carolina for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 3.		The issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be prohibited in situations where, owing to special conditions affecting the structure (such as topography, availability of materials, and lot size) but not affecting the -HOD-G or Historic Landmarks generally, compliance with the historic development standards would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the property owner beyond that which other property owners in the -HOD-G or of Historic Landmarks would meet. Sec. 5.4.2. Streetside Historic Overlay District (-HOD-S)A.	Purpose and Objectives1.		The -HOD-S is established to provide for protection of the traditional development patterns of an area and to preserve historic resources found in it. The focus is on maintaining that character and on preserving those key character-defining features of individual historic resources within the district, as viewed from the street right-of-way, excluding alleys (as further defined below).2.	A -HOD-S consists of areas that are deemed to be of special significance in terms of their history, prehistory, architecture, archeology or culture, and to possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling, and association.3.		The -HOD-S has the following objectives: a.		To promote the preservation and continued use of areas that contain a number of properties of historic significance;b.		To preserve the integrity of historically significant resources found in the area; c.		To support sustainability by reusing existing built resources; andd.		To assure that new construction is compatible with the broader characteristics of the historic context of area, as viewed from the street.B.	Applicability1.	This section applies to each -HOD-S designated by the City Council.2.	The provisions of Sec. 5.4.1.C through 5.4.1.H





























































., with the exception of Sec.5.4.1.C.3.iii., govern the administration of a -HOD-S, but apply only to the following areas within the boundaries of each -HOD-S: 
a.	
The public right-of-way for primary and side streets;

b.	
The lot area between the public rights-of-way and the facade of any existing primary building or structure;

c.	
25% of the depth of the lot area adjacent to the public right-of-way for vacant lots;

d.	
The first 50% of the depth of any existing principal building from the facade adjacent to a public right-of-way;

e.	
	Any addition to a building or structure that projects beyond an existing building’s maximum front and side wall and roof plane envelope regardless of distance from the public right-of-way;

f.	
	The entirety of any new principal building construction on a vacant lot;

g.	
The entirety of any new accessory building construction located in whole or in part in areas Sec. 5.4.2.B.2.b. through Sec. 5.4.2.B.2.d. above; andh.	The entirety of any Historic Landmark and its designated boundary area that may be located within a -HOD-S.Sec. 5.4.3. Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD)A.	Applicability1.	No building, structure, lot boundary, dwelling unit, vehicular surface area, street right-of-way or greenway shall be constructed, established, moved, alter, changed or increased in size or number within a -NCOD except in conformity with the regulations contained in this section for the adopted -NCOD.2.	All lots and structures existing at the time that the -NCOD is first applied to the property shall not be deemed a zoning nonconformity solely because of this overlay district.3.	All additions, changes, expansions and alterations to existing structures, impervious surfaces and uses must comply with the regulations of the -NCOD, unless the Board of Adjustment approves a special use permit under Sec. 10.2.9. allowing the addition, change, expansion or alteration.4.	In addition to the showings required by Sec. 10.2.9.E.4. through 8.








, all of the following standards shall be met:
a.	
The expansion does not, singularly or collectively, exceed 25% of the total gross floor area of the building or use existing at the time the -NCOD overlay zoning district regulations were first applied to the property.

b.	
The building or use existed at the time the -NCOD overlay zoning district regulations requirements were first applied to the property.

c.	
The requested activity complies with all requirements and regulations of this UDO other than the -NCOD overlay zoning district regulations.



5.	
 Nothing shall be deemed to permit the reconstruction—similar or different, whole or in part—of a building, improvement or use existing at the time the -NCOD overlay zoning regulations were first applied to the property that has been voluntarily demolished or discontinued. Voluntarily torn down buildings and improvements or discontinued uses shall be replaced with buildings, improvements and uses that comply with the regulations of the -NCOD.



B.	
Locational Guidelines


Except for applications filed by the City or otherwise authorized by the City Council, City Planning is instructed not to accept -NCOD applications unless the application meets all the following:
1.	
Is requesting that either at least a minimum of 15 contiguous acres be zoned -NCOD or that an existing -NCOD be extended. If allowed in the underlying zoning district, all uses in the civic use category can be excluded when determining the minimum 15 acre requirement;

2.	
Is signed by a majority of the property owners within the area proposed to be rezoned -NCOD;

3.	
Is applied to an area where at least 75% of the lots are developed; and

4.	
It is located in an area in which the City Council has adopted into Sec. 5.4.3.D. specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations.C.	Designation of a -NCODWithin 4 years following the City Council adoption of specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations, the Department of City Planning may accept an application to rezone property to a -NCOD.D.	Approval ProcessApplication to rezone a property to a -NCOD shall be in accordance with the following process. 1.	Submittal of a petition to the City Clerk requesting City Council consideration for a neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations analysis. The petition shall define the study area, provide evidence to support that the area complies with the locational guidelines and identify the specific built environmental characteristics and regulations to be analyzed. Prior to the petition being scheduled for the City Council meeting, City Planning shall be granted a 2-week period to review the adequacy of the petition and prepare a compliance report consistent to accompany the City Council’s receipt of the petition. 2.	Following City Council’s review of the petition, the City Council shall determine whether to direct City Planning to complete the neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations analysis. 3.	In accordance with City Council’s directive, City Planning shall complete an analysis of the specific built environmental characteristics and regulations for the neighborhood study area and identify the specific built environmental characteristics and regulations that reflect the predominant representation of the lots within the neighborhood study area. For the purposes of this paragraph, predominant shall mean greater than 75%. Upon completion of the analysis, City Planning shall by first-class mail notify all persons owning property within the study area the results of the analysis and the date, time and location of a meeting to be held for the neighborhood. The notice shall be mailed between 14 and 21 days prior to the date of the scheduled neighborhood meeting. Following the neighborhood meeting, the neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations analysis and summary of the neighborhood meeting shall be presented to the City Council. 4.	Upon receiving the neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations analysis, the City Council shall review the results of the analysis and determine whether to authorize a public hearing to propose any specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations into this section. If the City Council proposes that specific built environmental characteristics and regulations for the neighborhood study area be considered for inclusion in this section, a text change petition may be submitted and processed for review under Sec. 10.2.3. 5.	If the City Council adopts a text change incorporating specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations into this section, an application to rezone property within the designated neighborhood study area to a -NCOD in order to apply the adopted built environmental characteristics and regulations may be accepted by City Planning within a 4-year period following the adoption of the regulations. The rezoning petition must be submitted and signed by at least a majority of the private property owners that own a majority of the acreage within the -NCOD area; in both instances, the City Council, at its discretion, may direct staff to accept a rezoning petition that does not contain 51% of the property owners as signatories on the petition. In this instance, the City would process the petition as the applicant.6.	Following the adoption of the initial -NCOD, City Planning may accept an application to expand a specific -NCOD and applicable built environmental characteristics and regulations for properties either located within the original neighborhood study area or contiguous to it. 7.	Following the original adoption of specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations into this section, any subsequent proposed text change to revise the specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations in this section, having first been authorized by City Council, shall require the applicant to notify by first class mail all persons owning property (mailing addresses as shown on the County tax abstract at the time of the City Council’s authorization of the public hearing) within the original neighborhood study area. The notification shall identify the proposed changes and inform the property owners of the date, time and location of the scheduled public hearing. Within a period of no more than 25 days nor less than 15 days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing, the applicant shall deliver a copy of the letter and the sealed, addressed, stamped envelopes to City Planning. E.	Development StandardsSubject to any other applicable overlay district, the development standards listed below shall apply as stated in this section for the specific adopted –NCOD.1.	Required minimum net area for any dwelling unit;2.	Minimum lot size. This also sets maximum residential density for a dwelling unit within a detached house building type;3.	Maximum lot size;4.	Maximum residential density;5.	Setbacks;6.	Height;7.	Vehicular surface areas;8.	Lot width (minimum and/or maximum);9.	Building entrances (where permitted by State Law);10.	Building placement on the lot; and11.	Distances between buildings.F.	Neighborhood Built Environmental Characteristics and RegulationsFollowing the adoption of both neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations by the City Council and the approval of a -NCOD in accordance with this section for properties located within the specifically designated neighborhood listed below, the following neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations for properties located within the applicable neighborhood shall control. 1.	Brookhaven Neighborhood a.	South District (south of Millbrook Road) i.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.ii.	Lot width at the building setback line: Minimum of 100 feet. iii.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 50 feet. iv.	Maximum building height: 2½ stories. b.	North District (north of Millbrook Road) i.	Minimum lot size: 14,000 square feet.ii.	Maximum building height: 2½ stories. 2.	Cameron Park Neighborhood a.	Core Areai.	Maximum lot size: 21,779 square feet.ii.	Front yard setback: Within 10% of the average front yard setback of houses on the same block face. No portion of any garage or carport shall protrude beyond the primary facade of the principal structure. Covered porches shall be considered part of the primary facade. For corner lots with driveway access from the secondary side, attached garage entrances must be set back at least 10 feet from the secondary side building elevation. A secondary side elevation is the alternative side of a corner lot house that faces a roadway, but does not include a primary entrance to the house.iii.	Side yard setback: Within 5 feet of the average side yard setback and corner side yard setback of other properties on the block face, but no less than 5 feet.iv.	Setback for accessory structures: Side and rear yard setbacks for accessory structures, including those greater than 150 square feet shall be a minimum of 3 feet. v.	Maximum building height: 38 feet with the exception of those lots fronting on Park Drive between Oberlin Road and Forest Road (except the lots fronting the south side of Park Drive, between Oberlin Road and Groveland Avenue), all lots fronting on West Johnson Street and on the south side of Peace Street, and the 3  lots fronting the south side and the 4 lots fronting the north side of Park Drive immediately west of St. Mary’s Street (Wake County Registry: DB 08350, PG 1823; DB 02660, PG O-E-; DB 11659, PG 1800; DB 02425, PG 0670; DB 12811, PG 0908; DB 07129, PG 0713; DB 09060, PG 1175), which shall be limited to a maximum building height of 34 feet.vi.	Building placement and building entrance: The orientation of the building and entry level of the main entrance to the building shall be located in a manner that is the same as the majority of the buildings on the block face.vii.	Vehicular surface areas: New driveways onto public streets shall not be allowed for lots adjacent to alleys.  Within that portion of the front yard area (as measured perpendicular to the right-of-way), between the principal building and the public street, new vehicular surface area shall not be permitted except where there are no adjacent alleys and when driveways are constructed alongside the house in the shortest practical distance from the right-of-way to the rear of the building. Parking areas and any other vehicular surface area installed prior to the August 3, 2010 shall not be deemed a zoning nonconformity. No vehicular entrance to a garage attached to the principal structure shall face the front yard. Maximum driveway width shall be limited to 12 feet for single driveways and 20 feet for shared driveways.b.	Transition Area Bi.	Maximum building height: 40 feet when located within 75 feet of an adjacent Core Area lot.3.	Five Points East Neighborhooda.	Core Areai.	Maximum lot size: 13,067 square feet. ii.	Front yard setback: Within 10% of the average front yard setback of houses on the same block face as the new construction.iii.	Maximum building height: 2 stories, 35 feet. Buildings may exceed 35 feet when the average height of houses on the same block face as the new construction exceeds 35 feet, and then the allowed height shall be within 10% of the average height of houses in the same block face as the new construction. 4.	Foxcroft Neighborhood a.	Minimum lot size: 108,900 square feet. b.	Minimum lot width: 200 feet as measured at the required front yard setback. c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 50 feet. d.	Side yard setback: Minimum of 40 feet. e.	Rear yard setback: Minimum of 40 feet. f.	Setbacks for accessory structures: Side and rear yard setbacks for accessory structures shall be a minimum of 20 feet. g.	Maximum building height: 40 feet for the principal building and 25 feet for accessory structures. 5.	Glen Forest Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 17,424 square feet. b.	Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet. c.	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 6.	King Charles Neighborhooda.	South District (south of New Bern Avenue, south of Bertie Drive and Albemarle Avenue, frontage lots on north side of Bertie Drive and Albemarle Avenue east of Locke Lane) i.	Minimum lot size: 33,541 square feet. ii.	Minimum lot width: 144 feet. iii.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 76 feet. iv.	Maximum building height: 2 stories.7.	Laurel Hills Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 21,780 square feet.b.	Minimum lot frontage: 45 feet.c.	Minimum lot width: 100 feet as measured 80 feet from the front property line. d.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 50 feet. e.	Maximum building height: 35 feet.8.	Mordecai Neighborhooda.	Conservation District 1 (west of Wake Forest Road and north of Cedar Street, except for part of the north side of Courtland Drive - see Mordecai Plan boundaries)i.	Minimum lot size: 7,260 square feet.ii.	Maximum lot size: 14,520 square feet.iii.	Minimum lot width: 50 feet.iv.	Maximum lot width: 100 feet. v.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 35 feet. vi.	Maximum building height: 35 feet.b.	Conservation District 2  (east of Wake Forest Road, south of Cedar Street and portions of Courtland Drive - see Mordecai Plan boundaries) i.	Minimum lot size: 7,260 square feet.ii.	Maximum lot size: 14,520 square feet. iii.	Minimum lot width: 50 feet.iv.	Maximum lot width: 100 feet.v.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 15 feet; maximum of 25 feet. vi.	Maximum building height: 35 feet.9.	New Bern - Edenton Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet. b.	Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet. c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 10 feet, maximum of 25 feet. d.	Side yard setback: Minimum of 0 feet when minimum building separation is met. e.	Building separation: Minimum of 10 feet. f.	Maximum building height: 35 feet. 10.	North Boylan Neighborhooda.	Front Yard Setback: Within 10%  of the average front yard setbacks established by buildings on the same side of the block face as the proposed building, but not less than 5 feet or greater than 25 feet. b.	Building placement and building entrance: Buildings and their primary entrances shall be oriented towards a public street. Additional entrances may be oriented towards the block interior so long as a direct pedestrian connection is provided to the public street. c.	Maximum building height: 24 feet with a maximum of 40 feet when the building includes a minimum roof pitch of 5:12 and the facade is detailed with a minimum 4-foot offset at least every 25 linear feet of building wall and a minimum 10-foot offset at least every 50 linear feet of building wall. d.	Vehicular surface areas: Vehicular surface areas, even if located on a separate lot, shall be located behind the principle building. A vehicular surface area may be located at the side of a building if: 1) It does not extend in front of the building facade line; 2) For any lot with street frontage in excess of 100 feet, the linear frontage of vehicular surface area facing the street does not exceed 25% of the linear street frontage of the lot. Ramp type driveways shall be used to maintain a continuous sidewalk along the block face. 11.	North Hills Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 14,000 square feet.b.	Minimum lot width - interior lot: 90 feet.c.	Minimum lot width - corner lot: 110 feet.12.	North Ridge South Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 17,900 square feet.b.	Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 40 feet.d.	Side street setback: Minimum of 30 feet.13.	North Ridge West Neighborhood a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.b.	Minimum lot width - interior lot: 100 feet.c.	Minimum lot width - corner lot: 151 feet.d.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 49 feet.e.	Side yard setback: Minimum of 11 feet.f.	Side street setback: 35 feet.g.	Maximum building height: 29 feet.h.	Maximum residential density: 2.2 dwellings per acre.14.	Oakwood Park Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size (residential): 6,000 square feet.b.	Minimum lot width (residential): 55 feet. c.	Maximum lot width (residential): 80 feet.15.	Oberlin Village Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. b.	Maximum lot size: 12,500 square feet. c.	Minimum lot width: 50 feet.d.	Front yard setback: Within 10% of the median front yard setback established by buildings on the same side of the block face of the proposed building. e.	Building entrance: All buildings shall have a minimum of 1 entrance facing the public street. f.	Maximum building height: 28.7 feet and 2 stories. 16.	Roylene Acres Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.b.	Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet. c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 50 feet. d.	Maximum building height: 30 feet and no greater than 2½ stories.17.	Runnymede Road Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 17,424 square feet. b.	Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 30 feet. d.	Maximum building height: 24 feet as measured at the 30-foot front yard setback line. Building height may be increased 1 foot of height for each 

1 foot of increase in the front yard setback beyond 30 feet. 18.	South Park Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 3,000 square feet.b.	Maximum lot size: 8,000 square feet.c.	Minimum lot width: 40 feet.d.	Maximum lot width: 80 feet. e.	Front yard setback: Within 10% of the average front yard setback established by buildings on the same side of the block face of the proposed building, but not less than 8 feet or greater than 30 feet. f.	Building entrance: The main building entrance shall face the street from which the building is addressed. No upper story entrance shall be visible from an adjacent public street right-of-way. g.	Maximum building height: 28.7 feet.h.	Off-street parking: Parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building. With the exception of single-unit living, no parking areas shall be located in front of any principal building. Single-unit living parking shall be regulated according to Article 7.1. 19.	Trailwood Neighborhood a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.b.	Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 60 feet. d.	Side yard setback: Minimum of 20 feet within the front 100 feet of the lot; otherwise, minimum of 10 feet. e.	Maximum building height: 2½ stories and 30 feet from finished grade of the main entry floor. 20.	West Idlewild Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet.b.	Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet .c.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 10 feet; maximum of 25 feet. d.	Side yard setback: Minimum of 0 feet when minimum building separation is met. e.	Building separation: Minimum of 10 feet. f.	Maximum building height: 35 feet.21.	Willow Run South Neighborhooda.	Minimum lot size: 32,670 square feet.Article 5.5. Transit OverlaysSec. 5.5.1. Transit Overlay District (-TOD)A.	Base Standards ApplyUnless specifically set forth in this section, the allowed uses, the dimensional requirements, height limits and general development standards of the underlying zoning district apply.B.	Uses The following uses are not allowed in a -TOD:1.	Single-unit living;2.	Two-unit living;3.	Cemetery;4.	Outdoor recreation;5.	Vehicle sales/rental;6.	Vehicle repair (major);7.	Vehicle repair (commercial vehicle);8.	Car wash; and9.	Drive-thru facility.C.	FrontagesThe Parkway and Detached frontages are not allowed (see Article 3.4. Frontage Requirements).D.	ParkingParking requirements for a -TOD are set forth in Sec. 7.1.3.B.E.	Outdoor StorageLimited and general outdoor storage is not allowed (see Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage).F.	HeightThe minimum height of any principal building in the -TOD shall be 2 stories.G.	Applicability1.	No building, structure, or use shall be constructed, moved, altered, changed or increased in size within a -TOD except in conformity with the regulations contained in this section for the adopted -TOD.2.	All lots, uses, and structures existing at the time that the -TOD is first applied to the property shall not be deemed a zoning nonconformity solely because of this overlay district.3.	All additions, changes, expansions and alterations to existing structures, impervious surfaces and uses must comply with the regulations of the -TOD, unless the Board of Adjustment approves a special use permit under Sec. 10.2.9 allowing the addition, change, expansion or alteration.4.	In addition to the showings required by Sec. 10.2.9. E.4. through 8










































































., all of the following standards shall be met:
a.	
The expansion does not, singularly or collectively, exceed 25% of the total gross floor area of the building or use existing at the time the -TOD overlay zoning district regulations were first applied to the property.

b.	
The building or use existed at the time the -TOD overlay zoning district regulations requirements were first applied to the property.

c.	
The requested activity complies with all requirements and regulations of this UDO other than the -TOD overlay zoning district regulations.



5.	
Nothing shall be deemed to permit the reconstruction—similar or different, whole or in part—of a building, improvement or use existing at the time the -TOD overlay zoning regulations were first applied to the property that has been voluntarily demolished or discontinued. Voluntarily torn down buildings and improvements or discontinued uses shall be replaced with buildings, improvements and uses that comply with the regulations of the -TOD.




Article 5.6. 
Parking Overlays

Sec. 5.6.1. 
Special Residential Parking Overlay District (-SRPOD)

A.	
Base Standards Apply


Unless specifically set forth in this section, the allowed uses, the dimensional requirements, height limits and general development standards of the underlying zoning district apply.
B.	
Parking Surfaces
1.	
Vehicular surface areas located within the front yard area of a single-unit living in a detached house constructed after July 19, 2012 shall be constructed of permanent, nonerodible surface treatment, which may include porous and semi-porous monolithic or paver materials, masonry or concrete pavers, poured concrete and asphalt, or constructed with a minimum depth of 4 inches of crushed stone or crush and run. 

2.	
The borders of any vehicular surface area constructed of crushed stone or crush and run shall be delineated with anchored man-made or natural landscape edging materials such that the vehicular surface area is clearly defined and helps to contain the crushed stone or crush and run.

3.	
Except for circular and semi-circular drives, vehicular surface areas located within the front yard area of a single-unit living in a detached house shall not be located in front of the dwelling’s primary entrance.



C.	
Arrangement, Size and Orientation of Parking Areas 


Vehicular surface areas located within the front yard area of single-unit living in a detached house shall comply with one of the following.
1.	
The linear depth of the front yard area multiplied by 12 feet plus 380 square feet or 40% of the front yard area, whichever is less. 

2.	
A circular or semi-circular driveway, not to exceed a width of 12 feet, with no more than two access points on the premises and an additional 380 square feet, or 40% of the front yard area, whichever is less. 


3.	
Vehicular surface areas lawfully existing prior to July 19, 2012 and are constructed of permanent, nonerodible surface treatment.

4.	
Erodible vehicular surface areas may be used for off-street parking without retrofitting to the standards of this overlay district when all of the following conditions are met.
a.	
Erodible vehicular surface areas exist in front yard areas prior to July 19, 2012 and such vehicular areas do not comply with Sec. 5.6.1.C.1. and Sec. 5.6.1.C.2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a turn-around area no greater than 8 feet by 18 feet is allowed for any front yard vehicular surface area with access to a street with a posted speed limit of greater than 35 miles per hour.b.	Parking shall be limited to single-file, perpendicular to the street right-of-way in front of the existing curb-cut. The Development Services Director is authorized to permit in writing angled parking for 1 vehicle or side by side parking for 2 vehicles only when all of the following conditions are present:i.	Existing man-made structures on the lot prevent the establishing of a parking area of at least 44 feet in length measured from the property side of an existing sidewalk, or in the absence of a sidewalk to the face of the curb or edge of street pavement.ii.	The vehicular surface areas do not exceed the limits of this subsection.  iii.	Cars are angled with headlights toward the building on the lot and do not extend 10 feet beyond the face of the adjoining car, which is parked perpendicular to the street.5.	No vehicle shall be parked or stored outside of the vehicular surface areas described above within the front yard area with the exception of temporary parking under Sec. 5.6.1.E. and vehicles actively and continuously being unloaded, loaded, washed or repaired. For purposes of this provision, vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, passenger vehicle, truck, van, motorized recreation vehicle, motor vehicle as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 20, camper, golf cart, boat trailer, car trailer or other similar vehicle.D.	Landscaping Requirements1.	When vehicular surface areas are constructed in the front yard area of a single-unit living in a detached house and a parking space is designed to be within 45 degrees or less of the public street, a continuous berm or row of evergreen shrubs shall be provided within 5 feet of the edge of the parking space on the side nearest the public street in order to screen the broad side of the parked vehicle from view of the public street.2.	Berms shall have a minimum height of 1½ feet and a minimum crown width of 2 feet and a side slope of no greater than two-to-one, and shall be planted and covered with live vegetation. 3.	Evergreen shrubs installed to satisfy the requirements of this subsection shall be a locally-adapted species expected to reach a minimum height of 36 inches and a minimum spread of 36 inches within 2 years of planting. 4.	All shrubs shall be a minimum 24 inches tall when planted and shall be planted a maximum distance between shrubs of 5 feet on center. Shrubs planted on berms may have a lesser mature height provided that the combined height of the berm and the plantings after 2 years are at least 36 inches high. E.	Temporary ParkingThe property owner may apply for a zoning permit to allow temporary parking in the front yard area on grass or surfaces other than the grass or other erodible minimum surfacing requirements. This permit shall be issued to the property owner once in any 3-year period per premise basis, shall not exceed an initial period of 90 days and may be extended by the Development Services Director for additional periods of 30 days.F.	Locational Guidelines The general characteristics desired of the land placed in the Special Residential Parking Overlay District are the following: 1.	At least 75% of the land within the district is developed.2.	The district contains at least 15 contiguous acres. Public and Institutional uses and outdoor recreation may be included within the boundaries of a Special Residential Parking Overlay District; however, such uses shall not be included within the calculation for establishing the minimum 15 acre requirement.Article 5.7. Accessory Dwelling Unit OverlaySec. 5.7.1.  Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD)A.	Purpose and ObjectivesThe -ADUOD provides for the development of accessory dwelling units on properties in neighborhoods that have elected to apply the overlay district to the underlying zoning district. Accessory dwelling units shall not be permitted within an existing NCOD without prior approval of an -ADUOD through the rezoning process as stated in Sec. 10.2.4












.
B.	
Base Standards Apply


Except as specifically set forth in this section, the allowed uses, the dimensional requirements, height limits and general development standards of the underlying zoning district apply.
C.	
Use


A self-contained dwelling unit that is located on the same lot as a principal dwelling but is used independent and subordinate of the principal dwelling. Accessory Dwelling Units typically include a living room, sleeping area, kitchen, and bathroom, and have a lockable entrance door. An Accessory Dwelling Unit may be located above a garage. Accessory Dwelling Units may be detached or attached to the principal dwelling. Only residential uses are permitted in Accessory Dwelling Units.
D.	
Locational Guidelines


Except for applications filed by the City or otherwise authorized by the City Council, Department of City Planning is instructed not to accept -ADUOD applications unless the application is requesting that either a minimum of 10 contiguous acres be zoned -ADUOD or that an existing -ADUOD be extended. If allowed in the underlying zoning district, all uses in the civic use category may be excluded when determining the 10 acre requirement.
E.	
Accessory Dwelling Unit Regulations


Following the approval of an -ADUOD in accordance with this section for properties located within the specifically designated neighborhoods, the following development regulations for accessory dwelling units shall apply:
1.	
It shall be located on the same lot as a principal dwelling and, when detached, shall be constructed on a permanent foundation and not be a moveable structure;

2.	
There shall be no more than one ADU on the same lot as a principal dwelling;

3.	
It shall be occupied by no more than two adults with no limitation on minors;

4.	
It shall be separated from the principal dwelling or the primary living areas of the principal dwelling;

5.	
In addition to all other regulations within this Section, an ADU, when attached, shall:
a.	
Be no more than ¼ of the gross floor area of the total principal dwelling; and

b.	
Shall be permitted when the lot area of the combined principal dwelling and the attached ADU meet the minimum lot area for a detached single family dwelling within the underlying zoning district.



6.	
It shall be accessed by a separate external entrance;

7.	
It shall not be sold apart from the principal dwelling unit;

8.	
It shall not be used for overnight lodging;

9.	
It shall not be used as a live-work unit;

10.	
Landscaping should be provided for any detached ADU that has a length that is 2 ½ times its allowable width. Any such landscaping shall be consistent with the standards set forth in the underlying zoning district;

11.	
Exterior lighting shall meet the standards of the UDO;

12.	
It shall meet all relevant standards and requirements for accessory uses and structures as provided in Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures;

13.	
It shall comply with all applicable building and development standards for dwelling units in the zoning district in which the accessory dwelling unit will be located. An accessory dwelling unit shall also comply with all applicable standards for the principal dwelling;

14.	
The provisions of this Section may not be varied by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the terms of Section 10.2.10. or otherwise.



Article 5.1. General Provisions	5 – 2Sec. 5.1.1. District Intent Statements.....................................................................5 – 2


Article 5.2. Environmental Overlays	5 – 5Sec. 5.2.1. Airport Overlay District (-AOD).............................................................5 – 5
Sec. 5.2.2. Metro-Park Overlay District (-MPOD) ...................................................5 – 6
Sec. 5.2.3. Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD)......................5 – 7
Sec. 5.2.4. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-FWPOD).........................5 – 7
Sec. 5.2.5. Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)..............5 – 8


Article 5.3. Corridor Overlays	5 – 9Sec. 5.3.1. Special Highway Overlay Districts (-SHOD-)..........................................5 – 9


Article 5.4. Character Protection Overlays	5 – 13Sec. 5.4.1. General Historic Overlay District (-HOD-G).........................................5 – 13
Sec. 5.4.2. Streetside Historic Overlay District (-HOD-S)......................................5 – 15
Sec. 5.4.3. Neighborhood Conservation District (-NCOD).....................................5 – 16


Article 5.5. Transit Overlays	5 – 22Sec. 5.5.1. Transit Overlay District (-TOD).............................................................5 – 22


Article 5.6. Parking Overlays	5 – 23Sec. 5.6.1. Special Residential Parking Overlay District (-SRPOD)........................5 – 23


Article 5.7. Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay	5 – 25Sec. 5.7.1.  Accessory Dwelling Unit Overlay District (-ADUOD)...........................5 – 25




5 – 7
  Effective Date: September 01, 2013  

Part 10A: Unified Development Ordinance
City of Raleigh, North Carolina




CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.1. Allowed Uses
Sec. 6.1.1. Classification of Uses

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.2. Residential Uses
Sec. 6.2.1. Household Living

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.2. Residential Uses
Sec. 6.2.2. Group Living

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.2. ..Residential Uses
Sec. 6.2.3. Social Service

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses
Sec. 6.3.3. Utilities

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses
Sec. 6.3.3. Utilities

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses
Sec. 6.4.3 Medical

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses 
Sec. 6.4.5. Outdoor Recreation

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses
Sec. 6.4.6. Overnight Lodging

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses
Sec. 6.4.8. Passenger Terminal

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses
Sec. 6.4.9 Personal Service

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses
Sec. 6.4.10. Restaurant/Bar

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.5. Industrial Uses
Sec. 6.5.12. Vehicle Sales/Rental

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.5. Industrial Uses
Sec. 6.5.1. Heavy Industrial

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.5. Industrial Uses
Sec. 6.5.6. Vehicle Service

.CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 .

Article 6.1. Allowed Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.1.4. ..Allowed Principal Use Table

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.2. Residential Uses
Sec. 6.2.1. Household Living

Article 6.2. Residential Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
Sec. 6.2.2. Group Living

Article 6.2. Residential Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.2.3. Social Service

Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.3.3. Utilities

Article 6.4. Commercial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.4.2. Indoor Recreation

Article 6.4. Commercial Uses    |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.4.6. Overnight Lodging

Article 6.4. Commercial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.4.7. Parking

Article 6.4. Commercial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.4.9 Personal Service

Article 6.4. Commercial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.4.10. Restaurant/Bar

Article 6.4. Commercial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.4.11. Retail Sales

Article 6.5. Industrial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.5.12. Vehicle Sales/Rental

Article 6.4. Industrial Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.5.3. Light Manufacturing

Article 6.6. Open Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.5.7. Warehouse & Distribution

Article 6.6. Open Uses  |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.6.2. Resource Extraction

Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.7.1 In General 

 Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures  |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
Sec. 6.7.3. Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses

 Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures  CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
Sec. 6.7.3. Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.6. Open Uses 
Sec. 6.6.2. Resource Extraction

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures
Sec. 6.7.3. Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |    Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures
Sec. 6.7.3. Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses

Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.3.3. Utilities

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.6. Open Uses
Sec. 6.6.1. Agriculture

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.4. Commercial Uses
Sec. 6.4.1. Day Care

Article 6.1. Allowed Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.1.4. ..Allowed Principal Use Table

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.1. Allowed Uses
Sec. 6.1.4. ..Allowed Principal Use Table

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.1. Allowed Uses
Sec. 6.1.4. ..Allowed Principal Use Table

Article 6.1. Allowed Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.1.5. Prohibited Uses

Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.3.2 Parks, Open Spaces and Greenways

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses
Sec. 6.3.1. Civic

Article 6.6. Open Uses   |   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.5.6. Vehicle Service

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.8. Temporary Uses
Sec. 6.8.1. Applicability

Article 6.8. Temporary Uses|   CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS  
 Sec. 6.8.2. Temporary Use Permit Required

CHAPTER 6. ..USE REGULATIONS   |   Article 6.8. Temporary Uses
Sec. 6.8.2. Temporary Use Permit Required

Chapter 6. 
Use Regulations

Article 6.1. 
Allowed Uses

Sec. 6.1.1. 
Classification of Uses

A.	
Use Categories 
1.	
In order to regulate use, categories of uses have been established. Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to appropriate categories with other similar uses. Use categories classify land uses and activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics. 

2.	
Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the hours of operation, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties and site conditions.

3.	
Use category definitions are included in Article 6.2. Residential Uses through Article 6.6. Open Uses.4.	Where a use category contains a list of included uses, the list is to be considered example uses, and not all-inclusive. The Zoning Administrator has the responsibility for categorizing all uses.B.	Principal UsesAllowed principal uses by district are listed in Sec. 6.1.4. Principal uses are grouped into categories of uses. C.	Accessory UsesAccessory uses are allowed in conjunction with a permitted principal use as set forth in Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures.D.	Temporary UsesTemporary uses are allowed as set forth in Article 6.8. Temporary Uses.Sec. 6.1.2. Use DeterminationA.	Interpretation by the Zoning Administrator The Zoning Administrator is responsible for categorizing all uses. If a proposed use is not listed in a use category, but is similar to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator may consider the proposed use part of that use category. When determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator will consider the following criteria:1.	The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use;2.	The relative amount of site area or floor area and equipment devoted to the proposed use;3.	Relative amounts of sales;4.	The customer type;5.	The relative number of employees;6.	Hours of operation;7.	Building and site arrangement;8.	Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements;9.	The number of vehicle trips generated; 10.	Signs;11.	How the proposed use is advertised;12.	The likely impact on surrounding properties; and13.	Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site. B.	Uses Not Specifically Listed A use not specifically listed is prohibited unless the Zoning Administrator determines the use to be part of a use category as described in Sec. 6.1.1.A.C.	Zoning Administrator ActionFollowing a determination by the Zoning Administrator, a written record shall be kept by the City (see Sec. 10.2.14.).Sec. 6.1.3. Key to Use TableThe allowed use table in Sec. 6.1.4. identifies uses permitted in each zoning district. The use table key is set forth below.A.	Permitted Use (P)Indicates that the use is permitted by right in the district.B.	Limited Use (L)Indicates that the use, while allowed by right in the district, must meet the use standards  associated with the specific use (see right-hand column for definitions/use standards).C.	Special Use (S)Indicates that the use requires approval by the Board of Adjustment as a special use (see Sec. 10.2.9.) before it is allowed in the district. Use standards associated with the specific use may also apply.D.	Use Not Permitted (--)Indicates that a use is not permitted.Sec. 6.1.4. Allowed Principal Use Table















Use Category 
     Specific Use 
 RESIDENTIAL
 MIXED USE
 SPECIAL 
 Definition/ 
Use Standards
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 RX-
 OP-
 OX-
 NX-
 CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 CM
 AP
 IH
 MH
 CMP
 
RESIDENTIAL
 
Household Living, as listed below:
 Sec. 6.2.1.A.Single-unit livingPPPPPP--PPPP----P--PPSec. 6.2.1.B.Two-unit living--LLPPP--PPPP----------PSec. 6.2.1.C.Multi-unit living----LLPP--PPPPL--------PSec. 6.2.1.D.Cottage court --LLPPP--PPP--------------Sec. 6.2.1.E.Conservation development PPPPP------------------------Sec. 6.2.1.F.Compact development PPPPP------------------------Sec. 6.2.1.G.Manufactured home development------------------------------L--Sec. 6.2.1.H.Multi-unit supportive housing residenceLLLLLL--LLLLL--L----LSec. 6.2.1.I.Supportive housing residenceLLLLLL--LLLLL--L----LSec. 6.2.1.J.Group Living, except as listed belowSSSSSP--PPPPP--------PSec. 6.2.2.A.Boardinghouse--------SL--LLLL----------LSec. 6.2.2.B.Congregate careSSSSLL--LLLLL--------LSec. 6.2.2.C.Dormitory, fraternity, sorority----------P--P--PPP--------PSec. 6.2.2.D.Continuing care retirement communitySSSSLL--LLLLL--------SSec. 6.2.2.E.Rest home SSSLLP--PPPPP--------PSec. 6.2.2.F.Social Service, as listed below:Sec. 6.2.3.A.Emergency shelter type A--------------S--SSS----L----Sec. 6.2.3.B.Emergency shelter type B----------L--L--LLL----L----Sec. 6.2.3.C.Special care facilitySSSSSSLLLLLL----L--LSec. 6.2.3.D.PUBLIC & INSTITUTIONALCivic, except as listed below:LLLLLPPPPPPP--PPLPSec. 6.3.1.A. & E.CemeteryLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLSec. 6.3.1.B.College, community college, university------------PP--PPP--------PSec. 6.3.1.C.Key:        P  =  Permitted Use     L =  Limited Use      S =  Special Use     --  =  Use Not Permitted
 
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
  
                   
                   
                   
 
                   
                   
                   
 
Use Category 
     Specific Use 
 RESIDENTIAL
 MIXED USE
 SPECIAL 
 Definition/ 
Use Standards
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 RX-
 OP-
 OX-
 NX-
 CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 CM
 AP
 IH
 MH
 CMP
 
School, public or private (K-12)
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 --
 L
 --
 L
 L
 Sec. 6.3.1.D.Parks, Open Space and GreenwaysPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPSec. 6.3.2.A.Minor utilitiesPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPSec. 6.3.3.A.Major utilities, except as listed below----------------------S----S----Sec. 6.3.3.B.Telecommunication tower (<250 ft)LLLLLLLLLLLL--LLLLSec. 6.3.3.C.Telecommunication tower (=250 ft)SSSSSSSSSSSS--SSSSSec. 6.3.3.D.COMMERCIALDay Care, as listed below:Sec. 6.4.1.A.Day care, homeLLLLLL--LLLLL--L--LLSec. 6.4.1.B.Day care centerSSSSSSLLLLLL------SLSec. 6.4.1.C.Indoor Recreation, except as listed below:----------------PPPP--------PSec. 6.4.2.A.Adult establishment------------------SSS----S----Sec. 6.4.2.B.Dance, martial arts, music studio or classroom--------------PPPPP--------PHealth club----------LPPPPPP----------Sec. 6.4.2.C.Sports academy--------------PPPPP----------Sec. 6.4.2.D.Medical----------LPPPPPP--------PSec. 6.4.3.A. & B.Office----------LPPPPPP----P--PSec. 6.4.4.A. & B.Outdoor Recreation, except as listed below:------------------PPP--------PSec. 6.4.5.A.Golf courseLLLLL--------P--P--------PSec. 6.4.5.B.Outdoor sports or entertainment 

facility (=250 seats)PPPPPPPPPPPP--P--PPSec. 6.4.5.C.Outdoor sports or entertainment 

facility (>250 seats)SSSSSSSSSSSS--SSSSSec. 6.4.5.C.Riding stablesL--------------------L--L------Sec. 6.4.5.D.Overnight Lodging, except as listed below:------------PS--PPP--------PSec. 6.4.6.A.Key:        P  =  Permitted Use     L =  Limited Use      S =  Special Use     --  =  Use Not Permitted
 
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
  
                   
                   
                   
                   
                  
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
Use Category 
     Specific Use 
 RESIDENTIAL
 MIXED USE
 SPECIAL 
 Definition/ 
Use Standards
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 RX-
 OP-
 OX-
 NX-
 CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 CM
 AP
 IH
 MH
 CMP
 
   Homestay
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 L
 --
 L
 L
 L
 L
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 Sec. 6.4.6.E
 
Bed and breakfast
 --
 --
 --
 --
 L
 L
 --
 P
 P
 P
 P
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 P
 Sec. 6.4.6.B.Hospitality house--------LP--P--PPP--------PSec. 6.4.6.C.Parking, as listed belowSec. 6.4.7.A.Commercial parking facility--------------PPPPP----P--PSec. 6.4.7.B.Remote parking facilitySSSSSLLLSLLL----L--LSec. 6.4.7.C.Passenger Terminal , except as listed below: ------------------PPP----P--PSec. 6.4.8.A.Airfield, landing strip----------------------S--SS--SSec. 6.4.8.B.Heliport, serving hospitals--------------L--LLL--------LSec. 6.4.8.C.Heliport, all others ------------SS--SSS--SS--SSec. 6.4.8.D.Personal service, except as listed below:----------L--LPPPP--------PSec. 6.4.9.A. & G.Animal care (indoor) Except as Listed Below:----------------LLLL--LL--LSec. 6.4.9.B.     Veterinary Clinic/Hospital--------------LLLLL--LL--LSec. 6.4.9.B.Animal care (outdoor)----------------------S--SS----Sec. 6.4.9.C.Beauty/hair salon----------LPPPPPP--------PSec. 6.4.9.D.Copy center----------LPPPPPP--------PSec. 6.4.9.E.Optometrist ----------LPPPPPP--------PSec. 6.4.9.F.Restaurant/bar, as listed below:Sec. 6.4.10.A.Bar, nightclub, tavern, lounge ----------------LPPP----------Sec. 6.4.10.B.Eating establishment----------L--LPPPP--------LSec. 6.4.10.C.Food truck------------LLLLLL----L--LSec. 6.4.10.D.Retail Sales,  except as listed below:----------L--LPPPP--------PSec. 6.4.11.A.& C.Pawnshop--------------------PP----------Sec. 6.4.11.B.Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel)----------------LLLL----------Sec.6.4.11.C.3Key:        P  =  Permitted Use     L =  Limited Use      S =  Special Use     --  =  Use Not Permitted
 
                   
  
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
  
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
Use Category 
     Specific Use 
 RESIDENTIAL
 MIXED USE
 SPECIAL 
 Definition/ 
Use Standards
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 RX-
 OP-
 OX-
 NX-
 CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 CM
 AP
 IH
 MH
 CMP
 
Vehicle Sales/Rental
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 L
 L
 L
 L
 --
 --
 P
 --
 --
 Sec. 6.4.12.A.& B.INDUSTRIALHeavy Industrial, except as listed below:----------------------------P----Sec. 6.5.1.A.Detention center, jail, prisonSSSSSSPSec. 6.5.1.B.Towing yard for vehicles----------------------------S----Sec. 6.5.1.C.Light Industrial, Except as listed below----------------------P----P----Sec. 6.5.2.A.Brewery, winery, distillery, cidery--------------------LP----P----Sec. 6.5.2.A.Light Manufacturing------------P----PPP----P--PSec. 6.5.3.A.Research & Development------------PP--PPP----P--PSec. 6.5.4.A.Self-Service Storage------------------LLL----P----Sec. 6.5.5.A. & B.Vehicle Service, as listed below:Sec. 6.5.6.A.Car wash------------------L--L----P----Sec. 6.5.6.B.Vehicle repair (minor)----------------LLLP----P----Sec. 6.5.6.C.Vehicle repair (major)------------------LLP----P----Sec. 6.5.6.D.Vehicle repair (commercial vehicle)----------------------P----P----Sec. 6.5.6.E.Warehouse & Distribution----------------------L----P----Sec. 6.5.7.A. & B.Waste-Related Service ----------------------------P----Sec. 6.5.8.A.Wholesale Trade----------------------P----P----Sec. 6.5.9.A.OPENAgriculture, except as listed below:--------------------------P------Sec. 6.6.1.A.Community gardenLSSSLLLLLLLL--L--SLSec. 6.6.1.B.Plant nurseryS------------PPPPP--L------Sec. 6.6.1.C.Produce stand LLLLLLLLLLLL--LLLLSec. 6.8.2.D.Restricted agricultureP----------------------PP------Sec. 6.6.1.D.Urban farm----------SSSSSSS----------Sec. 6.6.1.E.Resource Extraction--------------------------LL----Sec. 6.6.2.A.Key:        P  =  Permitted Use     L =  Limited Use      S =  Special Use     --  =  Use Not PermittedSec. 6.1.5. Prohibited UsesExcept for improvements made pursuant to Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Stan­
dards or use determinations made pursuant to Sec. 6.1.2., any use not explicitly al­
lowed as a permitted use by right, a limited  use or a special use in the zoning district by the Allowed Principal Uses Table, Sec. 6.1.4., is prohibited. The enumerations of prohibited uses below are expressly prohibited, but such enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive or all-inclusive. Prohibited uses include:A.	Any use of prima fascia business, commercial, or industrial character not otherwise specifically allowed in an R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6, R-10, RX-, OP- or OX- district;B.	Any use prohibited by an applicable conditional use zoning district;C.	Any use prohibited by an applicable overlay zoning district;D.	Manufactured home or travel trailer except in a -MH or allowed in a PD District; E.	Open dump; F.	School administrative personnel offices located outside a school in a Residential District;G.	A sign not explicitly allowed in the zoning district by the table of Signs Allowed by Districts, Sec. 7.3.2. or signs erected in violation of Article 7.3. Signs; andH.	 Storage of 2 or more unlicensed, uninspected, wrecked, crushed, dismantled, or partially dismantled automotive vehicles  except as temporarily allowed in towing yards for vehicles.Article 6.2. Residential UsesSec. 6.2.1. Household LivingA.	Household Living Use CategoryResidential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Household living includes the following uses.1.	Single-unit living, two-unit living, multi-unit living.2.	Cottage court.3.	Conservation development.4.	Compact development.5.	Manufactured home development.6.	Multi-unit supportive housing residence.7.	Supportive housing residence.B.	Single-Unit Living1.	DefinedOne dwelling unit in a single principal structure.C.	Two-Unit Living1.	DefinedTwo dwelling units in a single principal structure.2.	Use StandardsWhere two-unit living is allowed as a limited use, it is allowed only in a conservation development (see Article 2.4. Conservation Development
 
 
                   
         
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
  
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 














).
D.	
Multi-Unit Living
1.	
Defined




Three or more dwelling units in a single principal structure. Multiple principal buildings are allowed on the same lot.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
In a Residential District where multi-unit living is allowed as a limited use, it is allowed only in a conservation development (see Article 2.4. Conservation Development).

b.	
In an IX- District where multi-unit living is allowed as a limited use, it is allowed only in the upper stories of a building. A lobby or other entrance is allowed on the ground floor.




E.	
Cottage Court
1.	
Defined




A group of small detached houses centered around a common open space or courtyard.
2.	
Use Standards


Only permitted in the R-2 and R-4 districts in association with a Conservation Development or Compact Development.
F.	
Conservation Development
1.	
Defined




A conservation development trades smaller lot sizes (with smaller setbacks) and additional density in exchange for protecting a significant amount of open space.
G.	
Compact Development
1.	
Defined




A compact development permits a reduction in lot size for residential subdivisions in exchange for an increase in common open space. This allows for efficient residential subdivisions and ample amenity area for the residents. 
H.	
Manufactured Home Development
1.	
Defined




A site which contains or is intended for the long-term location of manufactured homes that may include services and facilities for the residents. Includes both manufactured home park (with leased or condominium spaces) and manufactured home subdivision (individually platted spaces).
2.	
Use Standards


Manufactured home developments must meet standards in Article 4.5. Manufactured Housing (MH).I.	Multi-Unit Supportive Housing Residence1.	DefinedA facility housing persons who are disabled emotionally, mentally or physically or otherwise possess a disability that is protected by the provisions of either the Americans with Disabilities Act 42 USC 12101 or N.C. Gen. Stat. Article 3, Chapter 168, along with support or supervisory personnel or family members who may reside, but are not required to reside, at the facility.2.	Use Standardsa.	Each multi-unit supportive housing residence must be composed of no less than 2 and no more than 4 attached dwelling units. b.	The total number of individuals occupying a multi-unit supportive housing residence cannot exceed 6. c.	Each multi-unit supportive housing residence must be treated for zoning purposes in the same manner as single-unit living, except parking must be provided in accordance with Article 7.1. Parking.d.	No multi-unit supportive housing residence can be located within 300 feet of another multi-unit supportive housing residence or supportive housing residence (determined by a straight line from property line to property line). e.	The multi-unit supportive housing residence must conform to one of the following: i.	It is licensed by the federal or state government; orii.	It is funded in part by a government grant or loan.f.	Nothing in this section can prevent 4 or fewer persons with disabilities from occupying any lawful dwelling as a household. J.	Supportive Housing Residence1.	DefinedA facility in which more than 4 unrelated persons may reside who are battered individuals, abused children, pregnant women and their children, runaway children, temporarily or permanently disabled mentally, emotionally or physically, individuals recovering from drug or alcohol abuse, and all other persons who possess a disability that is protected by the provisions of either the Americans with Disabilities Act 42 USC 12101 or N.C. Gen. Stat. Article 3, Chapter 168, along with family members and support and supervisory personnel.2.	Use Standardsa.	The total number of individuals occupying a supportive housing residence cannot exceed 12. b.	A resident manager must reside permanently on the premise. c.	No supportive housing residence can be located within 1,125 feet of another multi-unit supportive housing residence or supportive housing residence (determined by a straight line from property line to property line).d.	The supportive housing residence must conform to one of the following: i.	It is licensed by the federal or state government; orii.	It is funded in part by a government grant or loan.Sec. 6.2.2. Group LivingA.	Group Living Use CategoryResidential occupancy of a structure by a group of people that does not meet the definition of household living. Generally, group living facilities have a common eating area for residents and residents may receive care or training. Group living includes the following uses.1.	Boardinghouse.2.	Congregate care.3.	Dormitory, fraternity, sorority.4.	Hospice.5.	Continuing care retirement community.6.	Monastery, convent. 7.	Orphanage.8.	Rest home.B.	Boardinghouse1.	DefinedA facility that contains individual rooms that are rented to the general public to more than 4 unrelated persons for periods in excess of 30 days, and which includes a rooming house.2.	Use Standardsa.	The facility was constructed originally as a detached house. b.	The total number of individuals occupying a boardinghouse is limited to 6. c.	In a Residential District, there is no exterior advertising except 1 unlit announcement sign not to exceed 2 square feet in area. d.	No boardinghouse can be located within 1,200 feet of another boardinghouse (determined by a straight line from property line to property line).e.	The minimum tenant rental period exceeds 30 days.f.	Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in the rented rooms of the boarding house.g.	The facility shall comply with the City’s Housing Code, Article 11.6 of this UDO.C.	Congregate Care1.	DefinedA long-term care facility for elderly people who are able to get around on their own but who may need help with some daily activities and have staff on call. Includes assisted living and independent living. 2.	Use Standardsa.	The facility is limited in occupancy to persons 62 years or older, their spouses and their surviving spouses, except for rooming units or dwelling units occupied by resident staff personnel performing duties directly related to the operation of the facility. b.	In the R-6 and R-10 districts, a congregate care facility is allowed a number of rooming units and dwelling units equal to 2 times the density of the applicable district.c.	Each rooming unit or dwelling unit may be occupied by no more than 2 persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption. d.	Facilities for resident managers or custodians providing administrative services and medical services for the exclusive use of the residents shall be located on site and open and staffed for at least 4 hours, one day a week. e.	The facility must contain indoor shared food preparation service, common dining halls and common recreation rooms, for the exclusive use of all residents and their guests, and these facilities together shall total a minimum of 30 square feet per constructed rooming unit or dwelling unit, as applicable, exclusive of circulation space. Common indoor social and related service facilities may also be part of the facility. f.	Structures shall demonstrate a comprehensive pedestrian circulation plan, including internal accessible walkways, is submitted and approved with provisions for alternative transportation services for the residents of the facility. Alternative transportation services may include, but are not limited to, regularly scheduled or on-call van services, tram services and full bus service. g.	Outdoor open space or park area must be provided at a minimum rate of the greater of either 10% of the land area of the facility or 218 square feet per rooming unit or dwelling unit, as applicable, excluding private drives and off-street parking areas. A majority of the open space or park area must be located no further than 300 feet from the controlled entranceway of the facility.D.	Dormitory, Fraternity, Sorority1.	DefinedA social organization of students providing group living accommodations for a college or university.  E.	Continuing Care Retirement Community1.	DefinedFacility providing a continuum of residential and health care services to persons aged 62 years or older. Allows residents to continue living in the same complex as their housing and health care needs change. Continuing care retirement communities may offer a variety of services such as congregate care, skilled nursing, rest home, health and wellness, recreational facilities, support services and entertainment and social uses, as well as offering a range of residential opportunities (apartments, townhouses, cottages). A rest home must be provided as a component of a continuing care retirement community.2.	Use Standardsa.	The continuing care retirement community and accessory facilities must be designed and used to serve its residents and their guests only.b.	The continuing care retirement community must be planned, developed and operated according to a unified plan under the direction of a single owner or agent for the owner.c.	The minimum site size and density limits must be in accordance with Sec. 2.3.1. for a Residential District. There is no minimum size or density limitation in any other district.d.	The continuing care retirement community may provide individual dwelling units in any combination of residential building types or housing options as allowed in the respective zoning district under Article 2.3. Compact Development and Article 2.4. Conservation Development Option.e.	If provided, a congregate care facility must meet the requirements under Sec. 6.2.2.C.f.	If provided, a rest home must meet the requirements under Sec. 6.2.2.F.g.	Additional facilities designed only to serve members of the continuing care retirement community may include, but not be limited to, health and wellness, medical, recreation and support services such as a private chapel, bank, hairdressers, pharmacy, library and convenience shopping. h.	A minimum of 10% of the total site area must be designated and maintained as common open space under Sec. 2.5.




































 The required protective yard described in subsection E.2.i below shall not be included in this minimum common open space standard.

i.	
A Type B1 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along any side of the property abutting a residential use.

j.	
If provided, the density of a congregate care is calculated in keeping with Sec. 6.2.2.C.2.b.

k.	
The density of a rest home is calculated in keeping with Sec. 6.2.2.F.2.




F.	
Rest Home
1.	
Defined




A long-term care facility for individuals who need full-time assistance and supervision. The focus is on individuals who cannot live independently and require full-time nursing assistance, and on younger individuals who have physical or mental handicaps.
2.	
Use Standards


The number of total occupants allowed is based on 4 persons being the equivalent of 1 dwelling unit. The number of occupants cannot exceed the equivalent number of units per acre allowed in the respective zoning district. 
Sec. 6.2.3. 
Social Service

A.	
Social Service Use Category


Facilities that provide treatment for psychiatric, alcohol or drug problems. Also includes facilities that provide transient housing related to social service programs. Social service includes the following uses.
1.	
Emergency Shelter Type A.

2.	
Emergency Shelter Type B.

3.	
Special care facility. 


B.	
Emergency Shelter Type A
1.	
Defined




A facility providing temporary sleeping facilities for displaced persons with no limit on the number of individuals accommodated.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
The shelter must provide a minimum of 50 square feet of sleeping space per person. 

b.	
An employee or volunteer must maintain continuous on-site supervision during hours of operation. 

c.	
No shelter can be located within 2,640 feet of another emergency shelter Type A or emergency shelter Type B (determined by a straight line from property line to property line).

d.	
No emergency shelter Type A can be located within 300 feet of a supportive housing residence or multi-unit supportive housing residence (determined by a straight line from property line to property line). No later establishment of a supportive housing residence or multi-unit supportive housing residence closer than 300 feet to a previously permitted emergency shelter may be construed to create a nonconformity or illegality on the part of the existing emergency shelter. 

e.	
The shelter is not allowed in an Airport Overlay District.




C.	
Emergency Shelter Type B
1.	
Defined




A facility providing temporary sleeping facilities for not more than 10 displaced persons at any one time.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
No individual shall remain in the facility longer than 30 consecutive days per calendar year. No individual shall be readmitted until at least 14 days have elapsed from their last residency at that shelter. 

b.	
No counseling or therapeutic activities may be conducted. Referral of residents to employment agencies and other personal service agencies shall not be deemed to be counseling. 

c.	
No shelter can be located within 2,640 feet of another emergency shelter Type B, or emergency shelter Type A (determined by a straight line from property line to property line).

d.	
No emergency shelter Type B can be located within 300 feet of a supportive housing residence or multi-unit supportive housing residence (determined by a straight line from property line to property line). No later establishment of a supportive housing residence or multi-unit supportive housing residence closer than 300 feet to the previously permitted emergency shelter shall be construed to create a nonconformity or illegality on the part of the existing emergency shelter. 

e.	
The shelter is not allowed in an Airport Overlay District.




D.	
Special Care Facility
1.	
Defined




A facility which provides psychosocial rehabilitation, skill development activities, educational services and pre-vocational training and transitional and supported employment services to individuals with severe and persistent mental illness. Incudes a rehabilitative clinic and adult rehabilitation center.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
No special care facility can be located within 1,200 feet of another special care facility (determined by a straight line from property line to property line). 

b.	
To permit a special care facility in a Residential District, the following minimum lot areas per enrollee apply: 
i.	
R-1, R-2, and R-4: 1,040 square feet;

ii.	
R-6: 640 square feet; and

iii.	
R-10: 240 square feet.



c.	
In a Residential District, 1 unlit announcement sign not to exceed 
2 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height is permitted. 

d.	
Only 1 vehicle used in connection with the special care facility may 
be parked or stored on the premises or residential street. 




Article 6.3. 
Public & Institutional Uses

Sec. 6.3.1. 
Civic

A.	
Civic Use Category


Places of public assembly that provide ongoing governmental, life safety, educational and cultural services to the general public, as well as meeting areas for religious practice. Civic includes the following uses.
1.	
Cemetery.

2.	
College, community college, university.

3.	
Civic club.

4.	
Museum, library.

5.	
Places of worship including church, mosque, synagogue, temple.

6.	
Police, fire, EMS station.

7.	
School, public or private (K-12).


B.	
Cemetery
1.	
Defined




A facility used for the permanent interment of humans or animals or their cremated remains. Includes mausoleum, columbarium, memorial park and pet cemetery.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
If the cemetery exceeds 2 acres in size or is planned and phased to exceed 2 acres in size, it must comply with the City’s public facility dedication and improvements requirements. 

b.	
If an existing cemetery increases the land area for cemetery use by one-half acre or more from its size that results in a cemetery greater than 2 acres in size, the cemetery must comply with the City’s public facility dedication and improvements requirements. 

c.	
The cemetery use must take into account present and future public improvements, including those expressed in the Comprehensive Plan. 

d.	
No grave space, mausoleum, vault, crypt or columbarium shall be located within 40 feet of any street right-of-way (including existing or proposed right-of-way) or thoroughfare designated on the Comprehensive Plan. The requirements of this subsection may be waived in whole or in part by the Planning Director if the Transportation Director certifies that the full 40-foot buffer will not be required for the construction of future public improvements. 




C.	
College, Community College, University
1.	
Defined




An institution of higher education, including general or liberal arts education, graduate level education and technical or professional training.
D.	
School, Public or Private (K-12)
1.	
Defined




A public or private (including charter or religious) school at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high or high school level that provides basic academic education.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Meet the curricular teaching certification of instruction approved by the State Board of Education. 

b.	
Be located on a lot with total area of 500 square feet area per enrolled pupil unless within a DX- District in which case no minimum area per pupil shall be required.

c.	
Be located outside any Airport Overlay District or Primary Reservoir Watershed Protection Area. 

d.	
The additional traffic generated to and from the site during peak travel periods, combined with the background traffic volume traveling on the roadway would not reduce the roadway or nearby intersections’ capacity below level-of-service “D,” as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual, 1994.

e.	
In a Residential District, a Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along any side of the property abutting any residential use.

f.	
In a Residential District, a Type C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way.




E.	
Use Standards for All Other Civic Uses


A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along any side of the property abutting a residential use.
Sec. 6.3.2. 
Parks, Open Space and Greenways

A.	
Parks, Open Space and Greenways Use Category


Uses focusing on natural areas consisting mostly of vegetation, passive or active outdoor recreation areas and having few structures. Parks, open space and greenways includes the following uses.
1.	
Botanical garden, nature preserve, recreational trail, greenway.

2.	
Game preserve, wildlife management area, refuge, animal sanctuary.

3.	
Park, recreation field. A public park may contain civic uses such as a community center, museum or library. 

4.	
Reservoir, control structure, water supply, water well.


Sec. 6.3.3. 
Utilities

A.	
Minor Utilities Use Category
1.	
Defined




Public or private infrastructure serving a limited area with no on-site personnel. Minor utilities includes the following uses. 
a.	
On-site stormwater retention or detention facility.

b.	
Neighborhood-serving cable, telephone, gas or electric facility.

c.	
Sustainable energy system.

d.	
Water and wastewater pump station or lift station.

e.	
Electrical substation.

f.	
Utility service.


B.	
Major Utilities Use Category
1.	
Defined




Public or private infrastructure serving the general community and possibly having on-site personnel. Major utilities includes the following uses.
a.	
Aeration facility, artesian well.

b.	
Electric or gas generation plant.

c.	
Telecommunication tower.

d.	
Water or sanitary sewer treatment plant.


C.	
Telecommunication Tower (less than 250 feet)
1.	
Defined




Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers that is less than 250 feet in height. Does not include any structure erected solely for a residential, noncommercial individual use, such as television antennas, satellite dishes or amateur radio antennas.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Radio or television or similar reception for adjoining properties will not be disturbed or diminished. 

b.	
The height of the tower cannot exceed 250 feet.

c.	
The lighting of the tower cannot exceed the minimum standards of the Federal Aviation Administration for red obstruction lighting system contained in Advisory Circular No. 70/7460-IF dated 27 September, 1978, as the same may be amended. 

d.	
The minimum setback from the outside dimensions of the tower, not from guy anchors, and not located within the property of a civic use in a Residential District, are as follows: 
i.	
Installation of a new tower where no tower is being replaced.
a)	
20 feet from the property line of either any adjoining lot that is developed without a dwelling, congregate care facility or vacant lot located in a Mixed Use or Special district, unless increased by Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.b)  and Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.c) below. b)	200% of the tower height, unless the tower is constructed as a monopole in which case the minimum setback shall be 100% of the tower height, but no less than 50 feet from the property line of an abutting Residential District. c)	100% of the tower height from the property line of an abutting Mixed Use or Special district. d)	20 feet from any public street. e)	The setbacks required by Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.b)  and Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.c) above shall not be applicable to any residential dwelling that is not a permitted use in the district.f)	If a telecommunication tower is located on the property of a civic use in a Residential District, the setbacks in Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.a) through Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.d) above apply, except that in no case shall a tower be located less than 200% of the tower height to the property line of a lot developed with a dwelling, congregate care facility, or a vacant lot located in a Residential District, unless a protective yard is preserved or installed adjacent to the property line of a lot developed with a dwelling, congregate care facility or a vacant lot located in a Residential District. The protective yard shall be of a width equal to the tower height, and shall contain plantings meeting the minimum standards of a Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.

) and Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.ii.e) below. ii.	Installation of a new tower where an existing tower is being replaced.a)	If one or more existing telecommunication towers is to be concurrently removed and replaced by a new tower, then the required setback exceeding 100 feet in Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.b) and Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.c) above may be reduced by 15% for each additional telecommunication user in excess of that of the existing tower. Evidence shall be presented by the applicant that each additional user will upon installation occupy the new tower. b)	The Board of Adjustment may grant a further reduction to the setbacks for the removal of an existing tower and replacement with a new tower with more telecommunications users in accordance with Sec. 6.3.3.D.c)	The base of the tower and each guy anchor are surrounded by a fence or wall at least 8 feet in height unless the tower and all guy anchors are mounted entirely on a building over 8 feet in height. Except for fence and wall entrances, all fences and walls shall be screened with plant material so that no more than 2/3 of the surface of the fence or wall is visible within 3 years after erection of the structure from a public street or from any adjoining lot which contains a dwelling, congregate care facility, or from any adjoining lot zoned a Residential District. d)	The area adjoining street rights-of-way shall contain a Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.



) installed parallel to the street right-of-way. No protective yard is required along street frontage located a distance from the tower of more than 200% of the tower height. 

e)	
A protective yard that contains the same plantings required in a Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be installed within all the yard areas required by Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.b) and Sec. 6.3.3.C.2.d.i.c). The installation of any fence, wall, planting or berm shall not reduce or lessen this requirement. f)	The output power from the tower shall not exceed federally-approved levels for exposure to electronic magnetic force (EMF). g)	If determined by the City that the proposed tower is situated in a location which will benefit the City’s telecommunication systems, then the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate the additional telecommunication equipment beneficial to the public system. h)	The tower is either less than 100 feet in height or located no closer than 1,000 feet to a tower greater than 100 feet in height (determined by a straight line and not street distance). i)	If the tower is located within an Overlay District that restricts height, the tower cannot exceed the maximum building height allowed within the more restrictive zoning district. j)	No tower shall be approved unless evidence is presented that at least 1 telecommunication user upon installation will occupy the tower. If the tower is between 100 feet and 150 feet in height, the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of 2 telecommunication users. If the tower equals or exceeds 150 feet in height but is less than 180 feet in height, the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of 3 telecommunication users. If the tower equals or exceeds 180 feet in height, but is less than 200 feet in height, the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of 4 telecommunication users. If the tower equals or exceeds 200 feet in height, the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of 5 telecommunication users. k)	Unless enclosed by a closed fence at least 8 feet in height to totally obscure the building from view, the exterior appearance of all buildings located in a Residential District shall look like a residential dwelling, including without limitation, pitched roofs and frame or brick veneer construction. The closed fence shall be the same or compatible in terms of texture and quality with the material and color of the surrounding dwellings. For each potential telecommunication user to occupy the tower, there shall be a minimum of 600 square feet reserved on the plans for associated buildings and equipment, unless the applicant provides evidence that less space is necessary. l)	Within 6 months after approval of a plot plan for the telecommunication tower, the tower must be installed and operational or the plot plan shall be void. No telecommunication tower approved prior to September 1, 2013, which is discontinued, unused or unoccupied by any telecommunication user for a continuous period 365 days or more shall be restarted, resumed or reoccupied without the prior approval of a new plot plan complying with the then applicable provisions. m)	The applicant must provide evidence that the proposed tower meets Federal Aviation Administration requirements, and will be in accordance with all the tower requirements and standards of the Raleigh Durham Airport Authority. n)	For any telecommunication tower approved after September 1, 2013, that is discontinued, unused or unoccupied by the telecommunication user for a continuous period of 365 days or more, the tower shall be removed within 30 days of notification of the property owner by the Development Services Director. D.	Telecommunication Tower (250 feet and more)1.	DefinedAny structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers that is 250 feet or more in height. It does not include any structure erected solely for a residential, noncommercial individual use, such as television antennas, satellite dishes or amateur radio antennas.2.	Use Standardsa.	Radio or television or similar reception for adjoining properties cannot be disturbed or diminished.b.	The height of the tower cannot exceed 510 feet.c.	The lighting of the tower cannot exceed the minimum standards of the Federal Aviation Administration for red obstruction lighting system contained in Advisory Circular No. 70/7460-IF dated 27 September, 1978, as the same may be amended.d.	The minimum setback from the outside dimensions of the tower, not from guy anchors, are as follows:i.	20 feet from the property line of any adjoining lot or lot across a street that is vacant and zoned as a mixed use or special district or any adjoining lot or lot across a street that is developed without a dwelling or congregate care facility, unless increased by paragraphs  Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.ii. or  Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.iii. below.ii.	100% of the tower height, but no less than 50 feet, from the property line of an abutting Residential District.iii.	50% of the tower height from the property line of an abutting Mixed Use or Special district.iv.	The setbacks required by Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.ii. or  Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.iii. above shall not be applicable to any residential dwelling that is not a permitted use in the zoning district.v.	If one or more existing telecommunications towers is to be removed concurrently and replaced by a new tower, then that portion of the required setback exceeding 100 feet in Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.ii. or  Sec. 











6.3.3.D.2.d.iii. above may be reduced by 15% for each additional telecommunication user in excess of the existing tower.vi.	For towers exceeding a height of 250 feet, or where one or more existing telecommunications towers is concurrently being removed and replaced with a new tower containing additional telecommunication users, this setback may be reduced by the Board of Adjustment. In the case of a replacement tower, the Board of Adjustment shall show that the lesser setback will reduce the number of towers in the area. In all cases, the Board of Adjustment shall also show that the lesser setback will not be injurious to property or improvements in the affected area. In no case shall the setback be reduced to less than 50% of the tower height.e.	The base of the tower and each guy anchor must be surrounded by a fence or wall at least 8 feet in height unless the tower and all guy anchors are mounted entirely on a building over 8 feet in height. Except for fence and wall entrances, all fences and walls shall be screened with plant material so that no more than 2/3 of the surface of the fence or wall is visible, within 3 years after erection of the structure, from a public street or from any adjoining lot which contains a dwelling, congregate care facility or is zoned a Residential District.f.	The area adjoining street rights-of-way shall contain a Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.



) installed parallel to the street right-of-way. No protective yard is required along street frontage located a distance from the tower of more than 200% of tower height. 

g.	
A protective yard that contains the same plantings required in a Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be installed within all the yard areas required by  Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.ii. or  Sec. 6.3.3.D.2.d.iii. The installation of any fence, wall, planting or berm shall not reduce or lessen this requirement.h.	The output power from the tower shall not exceed federally approved levels for exposure to electronic magnetic force (EMF).i.	If determined by the City that the proposed tower is situated in a location which will benefit the City’s telecommunication systems, then the tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate the additional telecommunication equipment beneficial to the public system.j.	If the proposed tower is located on property that is zoned a Residential District at the time of the special use hearing, the tower shall be either less than 75 feet in height or be located no closer than 1,500 feet to a tower greater than 75 feet in height which was constructed after September 1, 2013, (determined by a straight line and not street distance).k.	If the proposed tower is located on property that is zoned a mixed use or heavy industrial district at the time of the special use hearing, the tower shall be either less than 100 feet in height or be located no closer than 1,000 feet to a tower greater than 100 feet in height which was constructed after September 1, 2013, (determined by a straight line and not street distance).l.	The Board of Adjustment may approve the construction of a tower which does not meet the above standards if evidence is provided which demonstrates that reasonable effort has been made to lease space on an existing tower or that no existing tower will technically satisfy the applicant’s specific needs.m.	If the tower is located within an Overlay District that restricts height, the tower cannot exceed the maximum building height allowed within the more restrictive zoning district.n.	The tower shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum of 5 telecommunication users.o.	Unless enclosed by a closed fence at least 8 feet in height, the exterior appearance of all buildings located in a Residential District shall look like a residential dwelling, including without limitation, pitched roofs and frame or brick veneer construction. For each potential telecommunication user to occupy the tower, there shall be a minimum of 600 square feet reserved on the plans for associated buildings and equipment, unless the applicant provides evidence that less space is necessary.p.	The applicant must provide evidence that the proposed tower meets Federal Aviation Administration requirements, and will be in accordance with all the tower requirements and standards of the Raleigh Durham Airport Authority.q.	Associated buildings located in any Residential District may not be used as an employment center for any worker. This provision does not prohibit the periodic maintenance or periodic monitoring of equipment and instruments.r.	The use will not be injurious to property or improvements in the affected area.s.	Unless otherwise specified by this permit, that within one year of approval of the special use permit, a grading permit, building permit or zoning permit is obtained, and the tower is installed and operational, or the special use permit shall be void.t.	For any telecommunication tower approved after September 1, 2013, which is discontinued, unused, or unoccupied by the telecommunication user for a continuous period of 365 days or more, the tower shall be removed within 30 days of notification by the Development Services Director.Article 6.4. Commercial UsesSec. 6.4.1. Day CareA.	Day Care Use CategoryA facility providing care, protection and supervision of children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence. Care is typically provided to a given individual for fewer than 18 hours each day, although the facility may be open 24 hours each day. Day care includes the following uses.1.	Day care, home.2.	Day care center.B.	Day Care, Home 1.	DefinedA day care for a maximum of 8 persons in the residence of the provider.2.	Use Standardsa.	The day care must be carried on by a resident of the structure as either a sole proprietorship or a corporation that is wholly owned by the residents of the structure or a partnership where all partners are residents of the structure. b.	The use of any accessory building or accessory structure for a day care is not allowed. c.	Any outdoor play equipment stored throughout the day and night shall not be permitted in the front yard area and can be located no closer than 15 feet from any adjoining lot containing a dwelling. d.	No person, other than members of the family residing on the premises, shall be engaged or employed. This shall not apply to a substitute non-resident person providing care on the premise while the owner/operator is sick or otherwise unable to provide care. e.	No more than 8 persons shall be cared for at any given time.f.	Must comply with all state and local standards.C.	Day Care Center1.	DefinedA day care for more than 8 persons where staffing complies with state and local regulations. Includes nursery school and preschool.2.	Use Standardsa.	In a Residential District, the following minimum lot areas per enrollee apply: i.	R-1, R-2, and R-4: 1,040 square feet; ii.	R-6: 640 square feet; and iii.	R-10: 240 square feet. b.	In a Residential District, 1 unlit announcement sign is allowed, not to exceed 2 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height. c.	In a Residential District, a Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.

















) must be established along any side of the property abutting a residential use.

d.	
In a Residential District, a Type C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way.

e.	
Must comply with all state and local standards.




Sec. 6.4.2. 
Indoor Recreation

A.	
Indoor Recreation Use Category


Commercial uses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an indoor setting. Indoor recreation includes the following uses.
1.	
Adult establishment.

2.	
Amusement center, game arcade, children’s amusement center. 

3.	
Billiard hall, pool hall.

4.	
Bingo parlor. 

5.	
Bowling alley. 

6.	
Convention center, arena.

7.	
Dance, martial arts, music studio or classroom.

8.	
Health club.

9.	
Shooting range.

10.	
Sports academy.

11.	
Miniature golf facility.

12.	
Motor track.

13.	
Movie theater or other indoor theater.

14.	
Skating rink.


B.	
Adult Establishment
1.	
Defined




Adult cabarets, adult media centers, sadomasochism centers, and any place contained in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202-10(b), excluding masseurs.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Except for permitted on-premise and off-premise signs, advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways.

b.	
An adult establishment cannot be located within 2,000 feet of another adult establishment (determined by a straight line from property line to property line). Adult establishments because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics upon adjacent neighborhoods, particularly when they are concentrated. Special regulation of these establishments is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. To prevent an over concentration of adult establishments and the creation of a de facto downgrading or blighting of surrounding neighborhoods; this spacing requirement is necessary, unless otherwise determined under  Sec. 6.4.2.B.2.d. below. c.	An adult establishment cannot be located within 2,000 feet of a preexisting place of worship, public or private school, day-care facility, or any R-, RX-, OP, OX-, NX-, R-MP, or CMP district (determined by a straight line from property line to property line or district boundary line). Adult establishments, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are located near a Residential District or certain other districts which permit residential uses. Special regulation of these establishments is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to a downgrading or blighting of surrounding Residential Districts or certain other districts which permit residential uses, unless otherwise, determined by  Sec. 6.4.2.B.2.d. below. d.	The Board of Adjustment may vary the spacing requirements in  Sec. 6.4.2.B.2.b. and  Sec. 6.4.2.B.2.c. above when it finds that: i.	Practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from the strict enforcement of the radius requirements.ii.	The proposed use will not be injurious to property or improvements in the affected area. iii.	The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a “skid row” area.iv.	The permitting of an adult establishment in the area will not be contrary to any governmental program of neighborhood conservation, rehabilitation, improvement or revitalization. v.	All other applicable provisions of this Chapter will be observed.vi.	The proposed use will not adversely impact public services and facilities such as parking, traffic, police, and that the secondary effects of such uses will not adversely impact on adjacent properties. The secondary effects would include but not be limited to noise, light, stormwater runoff, parking, pedestrian circulation and safety. e.	When determining preponderance of adult materials, only those objects which have equal access and visibility shall be considered.C.	Health Club 1.	DefinedA facility with equipment for exercising and improving physical fitness.2.	Use StandardsA health club in an RX- District is subject to the following:a.	Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets;b.	The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area; andc.	Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.D.	Sports Academy1.	DefinedA facility for sports education or instruction.Sec. 6.4.3. MedicalA.	Medical Use CategoryA facility providing medical or surgical care to patients. Some facilities may offer overnight care. Medical includes the following uses.1.	Ambulatory surgical center.2.	Blood plasma donation center, medical or dental laboratory.3.	Hospital, urgent care, emergency medical office.4.	Medical, dental office or chiropractor, osteopath, physician, medical practitioner.5.	Medical clinic.6.	Medical day care.7.	Student infirmary.B.	Use StandardsA medical facility in an RX- District is subject to the following:1.	Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets; 2.	The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area;3.	Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries; and4.	Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not permitted.Sec. 6.4.4. OfficeA.	Office Use CategoryActivities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, professional or financial services. Office includes the following:1.	Business services including, but not limited to, advertising, business management consulting, data processing or collection agency.2.	Professional services including, but not limited to, lawyer, accountant, bookkeeper, engineer, architect, sales office or travel agency. 3.	Financial services including but not limited to, lender, investment or brokerage house, bank, call center, bail bonds, insurance adjuster, real estate or insurance agent or mortgage agent.4.	Charitable institution (not providing housing or shelter).5.	Counseling in an office setting.6.	City, county, state, federal government office.7.	Radio, TV or recording studio, utility office.8.	Trade, vocational, business school.B.	Use StandardsAn office in an RX- District is subject to the following:1.	Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets; 2.	The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot;3.	Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries; and4.	Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not permitted.Sec. 6.4.5. Outdoor Recreation A.	Outdoor Recreation Use CategoryUses, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. Activities take place predominately outdoors or within outdoor structures. Outdoor recreation includes the following uses.1.	Drive-in theater. 2.	Camp, campground, travel trailer park, recreational vehicle park.3.	Extreme sports facility such as paintball, BMX or skateboarding.4.	Golf course.5.	Outdoor commercial activity such as batting cage, golf driving range, amusement park, miniature golf facility, water park.6.	Outdoor theater.7.	Outdoor sports or entertainment facility.8.	Riding stable.9.	Shooting range.10.	Racetrack.11.	Sports academy for active recreational or competitive sports.12.	Stadium, arena.B.	Golf Course1.	Defined A facility consisting of a large landscaped area for playing golf. Includes executive or par 3 golf course and support facilities such as a country club, clubhouse and driving range.2.	Use StandardsA golf course in a Residential District is subject to the following:a.	Only the sale of merchandise associated with the golf course is permitted. No merchandise or advertisement shall be visible from the public right-of-way; andb.	There shall be no external advertising or identification in any manner, except for tract identification sign that does not exceed the standards of Sec. 7.3.11.





























C.	
Outdoor Sports or Entertainment Facility
1.	
Defined




A predominantly outdoor facility, including any associated structures, for playing sports and conducting entertainment, including but not limited to, sports fields with or without seating, stadiums, track and field facilities and amphitheaters. 
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
The facility and activities requested to be conducted will not have a substantial adverse impact on surrounding properties; including without limitation, stormwater, dust, smoke or vibration.

b.	
The practical limits of public facilities and services such as stormwater, water and sewer lines, streets, fire, public safety, trash collection and recyclable material are not exceeded.

c.	
The traffic generated to and from the site will not create unsafe or inefficient parking, loading, vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns with consideration, among other things, to: the physical character of roads, the classification of roads, accident experience near the site, traffic volumes existing and projected from approved site plans and subdivisions, interference with any other driveway, and response time of nearby emergency services such as fire and hospital.

d.	
Buffers must be provided that lessen the perceived height and bulk of proposed structures as seen from nearby residential neighborhoods.

e.	
The nearby properties must be protected from sound amplification and lighting. 

f.	
The facility will not be injurious to property or improvements in the affected area. 

g.	
The site is not located in a Primary Watershed Protection Area.




D.	
Riding Stables
1.	
Defined




A facility for the boarding and riding of horses. Includes riding academy and equestrian center.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
No part of any building or structure in which animals are housed shall be closer than 200 feet from any existing residential use, except for property owned or occupied by an owner or operator of the riding stable. 

b.	
All horses connected with the riding stable shall be enclosed by fencing so that horses cannot run at large. 

c.	
Only 1 horse may be kept on a lot less than 1 acre in size. For lots from 1 to 5 acres in size, a maximum of 3 horses per acre may be kept. For lots greater than 5 acres, up to 10 horses per acre maybe boarded if the setbacks listed in  Sec. 6.4.5.D.2.d. below are increased to 200 feet from the property line. d.	Buildings, stables and riding rings may not be placed closer than 50 feet to any property line. However, the main manure storage area shall be no closer than 150 feet to any property line. e.	In the R-1 and AP districts, there shall be no on-premise external advertising or identification in any manner, except for 1 unlit announcement sign not exceeding 9 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height. Sec. 6.4.6. Overnight LodgingA.	Overnight Lodging Use CategoryAccommodations arranged for short term stays. Overnight lodging includes the following uses.1.	Bed and breakfast.2.	Hospitality house.3.	Hotel, motel, inn.4.	Youth hostel.B.	Bed and Breakfast1.	DefinedA detached house or other structure constructed for a use permitted within the district that has no more than 5 guest rooms. Breakfast is customarily served to guests. 2.	Use Standardsa.	The facility is located within one or more of the following:i.	A General Historic Overlay District or Streetside Historic Overlay District;ii.	A property designated as a Historic Landmark;iii.	A property listed on the National Register of Historic Places; oriv.	A property identified as a contributing structure within a National Register Historic District, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended. b.	The use is located in a structure originally constructed as a detached house.c.	In R-1o, no exterior advertising is allowed except a small unlit announcement sign not to exceed 2 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height.d.	In R-10, special events such as wedding receptions are not permitted.C.	Hospitality House1.	DefinedA detached house associated with a hospital or similar long-term stay facility that provides overnight lodging for families of patients.2.	Use StandardsA hospitality house in an R-10 District is subject to the following:a.	Must be associated with a serving hospitals licensed by the State of North Carolina pursuant to N.C.Gen.Stat. §131E-176 et seq;b.	Must be located within one-half mile of the associated hospital (determined by a straight line from property line to property line);c.	Contains rooms without individual cooking facilities for lodging of visitors but not for rent to the general public;d.	Provides a maximum of 6 bedrooms with a maximum occupancy of 12 persons; ande.	Complies with standards for a detached house. D.	Hotel, Motel, Inn1.	DefinedA facility that contains one or more rooms for overnight guests containing registration facilities, on-site management, cleaning services and combined utilities.2.	Use StandardsIn the OP- and OX- districts, the minimum lot size for a hotel, motel, inn is 2½ acres.E.	Homestay1.	DefinedA dwelling unit that is occupied by the resident domiciled at that location, with up to two guest rooms for overnight lodging accommodations that are provided to transients for no longer than 30 days for compensation and where the use is subordinate to and incidental to the main residential use of the building. Rentals of entire dwelling units less than 30 days are considered Overnight Lodging and are permitted as set forth in Sec. 6.1.4.Domicile means the place where an individual has a true, fixed permanent home and principal establishment, and to which place, whenever absent, the individual has the intention of returning. A resident may have only one domicile.2.	Use Standardsa.	Every homestay operator shall first apply for and procure a homestay zoning permit from the City’s Development Services Department. Permits must be renewed annually. Prior to the approval of any homestay operation, the operator must first present proof that a tax account number has been established with Wake County.b.	Every application for the homestay prescribed herein shall be upon a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed with the Development Services Department.c.	At the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall deliver to City Planning first class stamped envelopes addressed to the owners of all property within 100 feet on all sides of the proposed location at the time of submittal. Mailed notice shall be provided to such property owners as listed in the Wake County tax records at the time of submittal.d.	A full-time resident homestay operator who is domiciled at the property shall be present for the entire time that a homestay lodger is staying at the property. The resident homestay operator cannot stay elsewhere overnight while the homestay lodger is present. Temporary day-time absences related to normal residential activity are allowed.e.	In a Residential zoning district, the maximum number of overnight guests shall not exceed two (2) adults and their minor children.f.	Cooking facilities are not permitted in any homestay bedroom or any exclusive homestay area. For the purpose of this regulation, cooking facilities include any refrigerator in excess of seven cubic feet; any stovetop range that operates on 220 volt electric service; any appliance that operates on natural gas; or any cooktop, whether integrated into a countertop or a separate appliance, which contains more than two cooking surfaces or burners.g.	No exterior advertising shall be allowed.h.	In residential zoning districts, homestay lodgers shall not utilize the premises for holding special events or gatherings. No activities other than lodging shall be provided on the premises.i.	The premise shall not be used for “Live-Work”, an “Accessory Dwelling Unit” or a “Day Care, Home”.j.	Homestay operators shall comply with all applicable State and local laws, including those relating to Fire and building codes, smoke detecting and carbon monoxide detecting equipment, housing codes, and payment of taxes to appropriate governmental entities, including occupancy taxes.k.	Every homestay operator shall maintain for a period of three (3) years a list of all homestay lodgers staying at the residence.3.	Civil PenaltyViolations of section 6.4.6.E shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500). All other provisions of section 10.4.2 of this UDO apply to violations of section 6.4.6.E.4.	Revocation of permitThe Planning and Zoning Administrator shall revoke the homestay permit following a written determination that any resident of the facility, resident manager of the facility, the operator of the facility have been:a.	Convicted of violating on the homestay premise a Criminal Law within a 365-day period. “Criminal Law” means a conviction of any of the following:i.	Article 27 of Chapter 14 of the North Carolina General Statutes.ii.	Article 3 of Chapter 18B of the North Carolina General Statutes.iii.	N.C.G.S 14-71.1.iv.	N.C.G.S 14-292.b.	Received within a 365-day period two or more “Verified Violations” of any combination of:i.	Any City Code zoning regulation on the homestay premise.ii.	Any noise regulation on the homestay premise.iii.	Any nuisance prohibited by City Code section 12-6002 on the homestay premise.c.	Any combination of convictions and/or Verified Violations of two or more items from a. and b. above within a 365-day period.A Verified Violation means a determination made by a Code City enforcement official or a judge, with notice of violation of the City Code, opportunity to respond to the noticed alleged offenses and an order or other mandate issued to the owner or any other person imposing a sanction or requiring further actions to comply with the City Code, including, without any limitation, the payment of civil penalties or administrative fees, or implementation of corrective measures, or cessation of activities, or conviction of a criminal Code offense for failure to comply with the Code provisions listed in this subsection. A verified violation that is appealed continues as a verified violation unless it is overturned on appeal. If the violation is reinstated on a further appeal, it resumes its status as a verified violation.Once lawfully revoked, a new permit for a homestay cannot be issued or re-instated for the premise for a period of 365 days.Sec. 6.4.7. ParkingA.	Parking Use CategoryFacilities that provide parking as a principal use. Includes commercial parking and remote parking.B.	Commercial Parking Facility1.	DefinedA facility that provides parking as a principal use on the site. A fee may or may not be charged.C.	Remote Parking Facility1.	DefinedA facility that provides parking as a principal use for a permitted principal use located on a separate lot.2.	Use Standardsa.	The remote parking facility must be located within the specified distance of the principal use served as set forth in Sec. 7.1.5.B.










































b.	
The remote parking facility must be located completely within a zoning district that permits the principal use that the parking is serving. 

c.	
A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along any side of the property abutting a residential use.

d.	
In an R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6, R-10 or R-X district, a fee may not be charged.




Sec. 6.4.8. 
Passenger Terminal

A.	
Passenger Terminal Use Category


Facilities for the takeoff and landing of planes and helicopters, and facilities for trains, buses, taxis or limo services. Passenger terminal includes the following uses.
1.	
Airport.

2.	
Airfield, landing strip.

3.	
Bus passenger terminal, multi-modal facility. 

4.	
Heliport.

5.	
Railroad station.

6.	
Taxi dispatch center, limousine service.


B.	
Airfield, Landing Strip
1.	
Defined




Facility for the taking off and landing of aeroplanes. Does not include accommodations for passengers.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Design standards for an airfield shall be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration requirements.

b.	
The length of the clear zone to be controlled and maintained by the airfield (no buildings allowed) such that future construction is prohibited is 1,000 feet. 

c.	
There shall be a planted area at least 25 feet wide on both sides of the landing strip, provided and maintained by the airfield owner in such a manner as to minimize noise, dust and hazard from the field, in areas where in the opinion of the Board of Adjustment such protection is found to be desirable. 

d.	
The area shall be fenced to prevent trespassing by animals or unauthorized persons. 

e.	
Except in areas properly zoned for such uses, there shall be no business, repair or advertisement, except for the sale of gasoline to the planes based at the field.




C.	
Heliport, Serving Hospitals
1.	
Defined




Facility for the taking off and landing of helicopters serving hospitals licensed by the State of North Carolina pursuant to N.C.Gen.Stat. §131E-176 et seq. that operate acute care beds as defined by 10A N.C.A.C. 14C.3801 as an accessory use.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
The heliport is used only for emergency medical purposes.

b.	
Design standards for a heliport shall be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration requirements.

c.	
Proof of Air Space Clearance from the Federal Aviation Agency is required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or zoning permit.

d.	
Evergreen shrub plantings adjacent to the security fence surrounding any ground-level heliport safety area shall be required. These plantings shall be required to obscure at least 75% of the security fence at the time of planting to a height of 24 inches and all shrub plantings shall be expected to reach a height of 5 feet or greater within 5 years of planting.




D.	
Heliport, All Others
1.	
Defined




Facility for the taking off and landing of helicopters not associated with a hospital licensed by the State of North Carolina.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Design standards for a heliport shall be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration requirements.

b.	
Proof of Air Space Clearance from the Federal Aviation Agency is required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or zoning permit.

c.	
The facility must be designed and placed so that it will not be detrimental to adjoining properties or to properties within a 1,000-foot radius of the heliport site as measured from the center of the final approach and takeoff area.

d.	
Evergreen shrub plantings adjacent to the security fence surrounding any ground-level heliport safety area shall be required. These plantings shall be required to obscure at least 75% of the security fence at the time of planting to a height of 24 inches and all shrub plantings shall be expected to reach a height of 5 feet or greater within 5 years of planting.

e.	
The applicant for a heliport special use permit shall notify by first class mail all property owners within a 1,000-foot radius of the center of the proposed final approach and takeoff area. This notice shall be posted at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing on the request. This notice shall contain the same information as the notice required by Sec. 10.2.1.C.5.a.




Sec. 6.4.9. 
Personal Service

A.	
Personal Service Use Category


Facilities involved in providing personal or repair services to the general public. Personal service includes the following uses.
1.	
Animal care. 

2.	
Beauty/hair salon.

3.	
Catering establishment.

4.	
Cleaning establishment, dry-cleaning or laundry drop-off facility, laundromat, washeteria.

5.	
Copy center.

6.	
Funeral home, funeral parlor, mortuary, undertaking establishment, crematorium, pet crematorium. 

7.	
Locksmith.

8.	
Optometrist.

9.	
Palmist, psychic, medium, fortune telling.

10.	
Post office.

11.	
Repair of appliance, bicycle, canvas product, clock, computer, jewelry, musical instrument, office equipment, radio, shoe, television or watch.

12.	
Tailor, milliner, upholsterer.

13.	
Tattoo parlor, body piercing.

14.	
Taxidermist.

15.	
Wedding chapel.


B.	
Animal Care (Indoor)
1.	
Defined




Any building or land used, designed or arranged for the care of animals without limited outdoor activity. Includes animal grooming, animal hospital, veterinary clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal shelter, cattery, kennel and doggy day care. 
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
No overnight outdoor activity associated with the care of animals.  For the purposes of this section “overnight” constitutes the hours between 11 PM and 7 AM. 

b.	
	Outdoor activity, including but not limited to, walking and bathing of animals, is permitted during the day, provided that no more than 4 animals are engaged in outdoor activity at a time.  For the purposes of this section, “during the day” constitutes the hours between 7 AM and 11 PM.




C.	
Animal Care (Outdoor)
1.	
Defined




Any building or land used, designed or arranged for the care of animals that includes overnight outdoor activity. Includes animal grooming, animal hospital, veterinary clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal shelter, cattery, kennel and doggy day care.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
All exterior exercise areas and runs must be fenced for the safe confinement of animals.

b.	
A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along any exterior areas used to exercise, walk, or keep animals that abut a residential use.

c.	
No part of any building, structure or run in which animals are housed shall be closer than 150 feet from any property line, except property owned or occupied by an owner or operator; provided, that the minimum distance referred to above shall not apply if all portions of the facility in which animals are enclosed is located wholly within a building. 

d.	
In the AP District, 1 unlit announcement sign not exceeding 9 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height is allowed. 




D.	
Beauty/Hair Salon
1.	
Defined 




A facility providing beauty enhancement treatments such as hairdressing, nail, tanning, facials and therapeutic massage. Includes barber. 
2.	
Use Standards


A beauty/hair salon in an RX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets;

b.	
The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot; and

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.


E.	
Copy Center
1.	
Defined 




A facility that provides printing, publishing, photocopying, packing, shipping and quick-sign services.
2.	
Use Standards


A copy center in an RX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets.

b.	
The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot. 

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.


F.	
Optometrist
1.	
Defined 




A primary eye care provider who diagnoses, manages and treats disorders of the visual system and eye diseases.
2.	
Use Standards


An optometrist in an RX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets;

b.	
The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot; and

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.


G.	
Use Standards for All Other Personal Service Uses
1.	
A personal service use in an RX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets.

b.	
The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot.

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.

d.	
Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not permitted.

e.	
Tattoo parlors, body piercing, taxidermists and wedding chapels are not permitted. 



2.	
A personal service use in an OX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be within or attached to a multi-tenant building, cannot be located in a standalone building.

b.	
The floor area of the use cannot exceed 15% of the gross floor area of the entire building or 4,000 square feet, whichever is greater individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot.

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.

d.	
Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not permitted.

e.	
Tattoo parlors, body piercing, taxidermists and wedding chapels are not permitted. 





Sec. 6.4.10. 
Restaurant/Bar

A.	
Restaurant/Bar Use Category


A facility that prepares and sells food and drink for on- or off-premise consumption. Restaurant includes the following uses.
1.	
Bar, nightclub, tavern, lounge.

2.	
Eating establishment.

3.	
Food truck.


B.	
Bar, Nightclub, Tavern, Lounge
1.	
Defined




A facility that prepares and sells food and drink that has alcoholic beverage sales in excess of 70% of the business’s total annual sales.
2.	
Use Standards: 
a.	
A bar, nightclub, tavern or lounge in the NX- District is subject to the following:
i.	
No live performances.

ii.	
No dance floor.

iii.	
No outdoor seating in excess of 8 seats.






C.	
Eating Establishment
1.	
Defined




A facility that prepares and sells food and drink that may or may not have alcoholic beverage sales. If allowed in no case can alcoholic beverage sales exceed 70% of the business’s total annual sales. 
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
An eating establishment in an RX- District is subject to the following:
i.	
Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building located at the intersection of 2 public streets.

ii.	
The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot.

iii.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.

iv.	
Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not allowed.



b.	
An eating establishment in an OX- District is subject to the following:
i.	
Must be within or attached to a multi-tenant building, cannot be located in a standalone building.

ii.	
The floor area cannot exceed 15% of the gross floor area of the entire building or 4,000 square feet, whichever is greater individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot.

iii.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.

iv.	
Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not allowed.

v.	
Must be located at least 150 feet from an abutting Residential District (measured in straight line from the nearest point of the building containing the eating establishment to the boundary line of the district boundary line).



c.	
An eating establishment in a CMP District is subject to the following:
i.	
Drive-thru or drive in facilities are not permitted.

ii.	
Must be located at least 150 feet from an abutting Residential District (measured in straight line from the nearest point of the building containing the eating establishment to the boundary line of the district boundary line).






D.	
Food Truck
1.	
Defined




A licensed, motorized vehicle or mobile food unit which is temporarily stored on a premise where food items are sold to the general public. 
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Food trucks can only be located on a lot containing a principal building or use and the maximum number of food trucks per lot is limited as follows:
i.	
Maximum of 2 food trucks on lots of one-half acre or less;

ii.	
Maximum of 3 food trucks on lots between one-half acre and 1 acre; and

iii.	
Maximum of 4 food trucks on lots greater than 1 acre.



b.	
Food trucks must be located at least 100 feet from the main entrance to any eating establishment or similar food service business, 100 feet from any outdoor dining area and 50 feet from any permitted food vending cart location, as measured from the designated location on the lot accommodating the food truck. In the event that one or more of the aforementioned uses locates within the minimum separation requirement subsequent to food truck location being approved, nothing shall prohibit the property owner from continuing to operate at the approved location until the food truck permit has expired.  

c.	
Food trucks must be located at least 5 feet from the edge of any driveway or public sidewalk, utility boxes and vaults, handicapped ramp, building entrance, exit or emergency access/exit way, or emergency call box and must not locate within any area of the lot that impedes, endangers, or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Food trucks must be located a minimum distance of 15 feet in all directions of a fire hydrant.

d.	
Food trucks and associated seating, if any, must not occupy parking spaces required to fulfill the minimum requirements of the principal use, unless the principal use’s hours of operation do not coincide with those of the food truck business. 

e.	
Food trucks and associated seating, if any, must not occupy parking spaces that may be leased to other businesses and uses to fulfill their minimum parking requirements.

f.	
Food trucks must not occupy any handicap accessible parking space as specified in N.C. Gen. Stat. §20-37.6.    

g.	
No free-standing signage or audio amplification is allowed as part of the food trucks vending operation. Outdoor seating areas associated with a food trucks vending operation are only permitted on lots 2 acres or greater in size. 

h.	
Hours of operation are limited to the hours between 6 AM and 3 AM unless the designated location on the lot accommodating food truck is located within 150 feet of the property line of a single-unit or two-unit dwelling in which case the hours of operation are  limited to the hours between 7 AM and 10 PM.  

i.	
The food truck operator or their designee must be present at all times except in cases of an emergency.

j.	
Food trucks and associated outdoor seating must be removed from all permitted locations during impermissible hours of operation and must not be stored, parked, or left overnight on any public street or sidewalk.

k.	
The food truck vendor is responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash associated with the operation. City trash receptacles are not to be used for this purpose. Vendors must remove all waste and trash from their approved location at the end of each day or as needed to maintain the health and safety of the public.  The vendor must keep all areas within 5 feet of the truck and any associated seating area clean of grease, trash, paper, cups or cans associated with the vending operation. No liquid waste or grease is to be disposed in tree pits, storm drains or onto the sidewalks, streets, or other public space. Under no circumstances can grease be released or disposed of in the City’s sanitary sewer system.   

l.	
With the exception of allowable outdoor seating areas, all equipment required for the operation must be contained within, attached to or within 3 feet of the food truck and all food preparation, storage, and sales/distribution made in compliance with all applicable County, State and Federal Health Department sanitary regulations.  

m.	
A zoning permit must be obtained by the property owner (as listed in the Wake County tax records) for any lot proposed to accommodate one or more food trucks. If at any time evidence is provided that the lot is being used other than in compliance with these regulations, the zoning permit will be rendered null and void, and the owner punished for the violation. This zoning permit must be required to be renewed annually.

n.	
A food truck permit must be obtained for food truck business and all required Wake County and City permits and licenses must be clearly displayed on the food truck. A copy of the approved food truck permit and zoning permit shall be kept in the food truck. The approved food truck as shown on the food truck permit shall be clearly delineated on the improved surface. Prior to the issuance of the food truck permit, the vendor must provide evidence of having obtained a City Business License, NC Sales and Use Certificate for collecting and paying the proper sales taxes and prepared meals taxes, a Wake County Environmental Services – Vending Permit and a means for the disposal of grease within an approved grease disposal facility.  This food truck permit is required to be renewed annually. If at any time evidence of the improper disposal of liquid waste or grease is discovered, the food truck permit will be rendered null and void and the food truck business will be required to cease operation immediately. The operator of the  food truck business will be punished for the violation. 

o.	
If at any time, Wake County revokes or suspends the issued food vending permit, the City permit for the food truck business will be revoked or suspended simultaneously.  




Sec. 6.4.11. 
Retail Sales

A.	
Retail Sales Use Category


Facilities involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products. Retail sales includes the following uses.
1.	
Antiques, appliances, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books, building supplies, cameras, carpet and floor coverings, crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, flowers, fuel (including gasoline and diesel fuel), furniture, garden supplies, gifts or novelties, groceries, hardware, home improvement, household products, jewelry, medical supplies, music, musical instruments, office supplies, package shipping, pets, pet supplies, pharmaceuticals, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, printed materials, produce, seafood, souvenirs, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco, used or secondhand goods, vehicle parts and accessories, videos and related products.

2.	
Art gallery.

3.	
Check cashing, payday loan.

4.	
Pawnshop.


B.	
Pawnshop
1.	
Defined




A shop where loans are made with personal property as security.
C.	
Use Standards
1.	
A retail sales use in an RX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be located on the first floor of a corner unit in an apartment building type located at the intersection of 2 public streets.

b.	
The unit cannot exceed 4,000 square feet in gross floor area individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot.

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.

d.	
Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not permitted.

e.	
Vehicle fuel sales, check cashing and payday loan facilities are not permitted. 



2.	
A retail sales use in an OX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
Must be within or attached to a multi-tenant building, cannot be located in a standalone building.

b.	
The floor area of the retail use cannot exceed 15% of the gross floor area of the entire building or 4,000 square feet, whichever is greater individually or cumulatively in combination with any other allowed Limited Commercial use per lot.

c.	
Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries.

d.	
Drive-thru or drive-in facilities are not permitted.

e.	
Vehicle fuel sales, check cashing and payday loan facilities are not permitted. 



3.	
Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel) in the NX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
If any portion of the property is located within 200 feet of a Residential District (determined by a straight line from the property line to the district boundary line) Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel) shall meet all of the following:
i.	
Width Dimensions:
a)	
Width (min): 100’



ii.	
Any lot that contains Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel) must be located within 300’ of the centerline of an intersection that includes a street from at least one of the following Street Types: Mixed Use Streets or Major Streets.

iii.	
Hours of operation for Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel) can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM. Operations include all deliveries and collections. Preparation, store cleaning and inventory may be allowed during these restricted hours. Uses other than Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel), car washing and vacuuming may continue operation during these restricted hours.

iv.	
The total number of vehicles capable of being simultaneously serviced cannot exceed 8.

v.	
All vacuuming and compression machines located outside of an enclosed building shall be located at least 50 feet from a Residential District or use and shall be of a design that does not exceed a noise level reading of 55 dB(A).

vi.	
Accessory car washing is only allowed if the car wash is equipped only with fully automatic wash equipment so the driver remains in their car during the entire wash process.

vii.	
Backlighting of fuel canopies is prohibited. All canopy lighting shall be flushed mounted underneath the canopy except for signs.

viii.	
Canopies shall be limited to a 16 feet maximum height to the bottom of the underside of the canopy and a 23 feet maximum to the top of the roof of the canopy (absent any required vent stacks).

ix.	
Fuel pumps must be located a minimum of 50 feet from a Residential District.





4.	
Vehicle Fuel Sales (including gasoline and diesel fuel) in a NX-, CX-, DX- or IX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
A Type 2: Medium protective yard, in accordance with Sec. 3.5.3, must be established along any side of the property abutting a Residential District or a residential use. The protective yard must include a wall at least 6.5 feet in height.

b.	
Subject to NC DOT driveway access regulations, no fuel pump island shall be located closer than 25 feet from any public street right-of-way.





Sec. 6.4.12. 
Vehicle Sales/Rental

A.	
Vehicle Sales Use Category


Direct sales, rental or leasing of passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Vehicle sales includes the following.
1.	
Boats and other recreational vehicle sales.

2.	
Vehicle sales, rental or leasing.


B.	
Use Standards 
1.	
A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along all property lines abutting a residential use.

2.	
All vehicular display area with frontage on any portion of a street right-of-of way (not including an alley) must be screened along the street edge by a Type C3 street protective yard under Sec. 7.2.4.B.

3.	
Vehicle displays shall not be artificially elevated above the general topography of the site.

4.	
No outside speaker system is permitted.

5.	
In a NX- District, the sales and leasing of motor vehicles for display shall be conducted within a fully-enclosed building. The outdoor display and storage of vehicles for sale or rental is not be permitted.



Article 6.5. 
Industrial Uses

Sec. 6.5.1. 
Heavy Industrial

A.	
Heavy Industrial Use Category


Any facility that involves dangerous, noxious or offensive uses or a facility that has smoke, odor, noise, glare, fumes, gas, vibration, threat of fire or explosion, emission of particulate matter, interference with radio, television reception, radiation or any other likely cause. Heavy industrial includes the following uses.
1.	
 Asbestos, radioactive materials.

2.	
Animal processing, packing, treating and storage, concentrate plant, processing of food and related products, production of lumber, tobacco, chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, paper, pulp, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products, production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing.

3.	
Automobile dismantlers and recyclers.

4.	
Bulk storage of flammable liquids, chemical, cosmetics, drug, soap, paints, fertilizers and abrasive products.

5.	
Commercial feed lot.

6.	
Concrete batching and asphalt processing and manufacture, batch plant Earth moving, heavy construction equipment, transportation equipment.

7.	
Detention center, jail, prison.

8.	
Explosives.

9.	
Fabricated metal products and machinery.

10.	
Industrial sign-making.

11.	
Leather and leather products includes tanning and finishing.

12.	
Lumberyard and wood products.

13.	
Manufactured or modular housing sales.

14.	
Outdoor storage yard for vehicles.

15.	
Primary metal manufacturing.

16.	
Pulp mill, rubber and plastic products, rubber manufacturing.

17.	
Scrap metal processors, sawmill, secondary materials dealers.

18.	
Trailer leasing, auction vehicle, broker vehicle.

19.	
Tire recapping, tobacco products, transportation equipment.


B.	
Detention Center, Jail, Prison
1.	
Defined




A secured facility for the incarceration of individuals either awaiting trial or convicted of a crime.
C.	
Towing Yard for Vehicles
1.	
Defined




A facility for the impound and temporary storage of vehicles that is operated by someone engaged in the wrecker or towing business.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
The facility must be used exclusively for vehicle storage and no parts from stored vehicles can be sold. 

b.	
A Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along all shared property lines, except for an adjacent heavy industrial use or waste-related service.

c.	
A Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way.

d.	
No towing yard for vehicles can be within 5,280 feet of another towing yard for vehicles (determined by a straight line from property line to property line).




Sec. 6.5.2. 
Light Industrial

A.	
Light Industrial Use Category


Manufacturing, assembly, repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Light industrial includes the following uses.
1.	
Bottling.

2.	
Brewery, winery, distillery, cidery.

3.	
Bus or rail transit vehicle maintenance or storage facility.

4.	
Contractors storage including janitorial and building maintenance service, exterminator, or other maintenance yard or facility, building, heating, plumbing, landscaping or electrical contractor and others who perform services off-site, but store equipment and materials or perform fabrication or similar work on-site.

5.	
Food and beverage products except animal slaughter, stockyards.

6.	
Lawn, tree or garden service.

7.	
Laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants.

8.	
Leather and leather products except tanning and finishing.

9.	
Sheet metal, welding, machine, tool repair shop or studio.

10.	
Stone, clay, glass, and concrete products.

11.	
Woodworking, including cabinet makers and furniture manufacturing.


B.	
Brewery, Winery, Distillery
1.	
Use Standards
a.	
In the DX District, a brewery, winery, distillery or cidery shall not distribute any quantity of beer, wine or spirits off-premises.

b.	
In the DX District, there shall be no allowance for outdoor storage of materials associated with the production of beer, wine or spirits.





Sec. 6.5.3. 
Light Manufacturing

A.	
Light Manufacturing Use Category


A facility conducting light manufacturing operations within a fully-enclosed building. Light manufacturing includes the following uses.
1.	
Clothing, textile apparel manufacturing.

2.	
Facilities engaged in the assembly, design, repair or testing of: analyzing or scientific measuring instruments; semiconductor and related solid state devices, including but not limited to clocks, integrated microcircuits; jewelry, medical, musical instruments, photographic or optical instruments; and timing instruments.

3.	
Office showroom/warehouse.

4.	
Printing, publishing, and lithography.

5.	
Production of artwork and toys, graphic design sign-making, movie production facility, photo-finishing laboratory.

6.	
Repair of scientific or professional instruments and electric motors.


Sec. 6.5.4. 
Research & Development

A.	
Research & Development Use Category


A facility focused primarily on the research and development of new products. Research and development includes the following uses.
1.	
Laboratories, offices and other facilities used for research and development by or for any individual, organization or concern, whether public or private.

2.	
Prototype production facilities that manufacture a limited amount of a product in order to fully investigate the merits of such a product.

3.	
Pilot plants used to test manufacturing processes planned for use in production elsewhere.


Sec. 6.5.5. 
Self-Service Storage

A.	
Self-Service Storage Use Category


Facilities providing separate storage areas for personal or business use designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property. Self-service storage includes the following uses.
1.	
Warehouse, self-service.

2.	
Fully enclosed indoor multi-story storage.

3.	
Mini-warehouse.


B.	
Use Standards
1.	
A self-storage facility in an CX- District is subject to the following.
a.	
The minimum size of the site is at least 2 acres.

b.	
All storage shall be contained within a fully-enclosed building. However, the storage of boats, RV’s or other similar vehicles may be permitted in accordance with Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage.c.	All storage units must be contained in a single building and accessed internally. For properties where an Urban Frontage is applied, storage units are not permitted on the ground floor. The outdoor storage of boats, RV’s or similar vehicles is not permitted.d.	A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.

) must be established along all shared property lines, except for an adjacent self-service storage, heavy industrial use, waste-related service or residential use. 

e.	
A Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.)must be established along all property lines abutting a residential use.

f.	
A Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way.



2.	
A self-storage facility in a DX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
All storage shall be contained within a fully-enclosed building.

b.	
All storage units must be contained in a single building, and accessed internally. Storage units are not permitted on the ground floor. The outdoor storage of boats, RV’s or similar vehicles is not permitted.



3.	
A self-storage facility in an IX- District is subject to the following:
a.	
	The minimum size of the site is at least 2 acres.	

b.	
All storage shall be contained within a fully-enclosed building. However, the storage of boats, RV’s or other similar vehicles may be permitted in accordance with Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage.c.	A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.

) must be established along all shared property lines, except for an adjacent self-service storage, heavy industrial use, waste-related service or residential use. 

d.	
A Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along all property lines abutting a residential use.

e.	
A Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way. 





Sec. 6.5.6. 
Vehicle Service

A.	
Vehicle Service Use Category


Repair and service to passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Vehicle service includes the following uses.
1.	
Vehicle repair (minor).

2.	
Vehicle repair (major).

3.	
Vehicle repair (commercial vehicle).

4.	
Car wash.


B.	
Car Wash
1.	
Defined




Facility with mechanical or hand-operated equipment used for cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Car wash facilities located within 200 feet of a Residential District (determined by a straight line from the property line to the district boundary line) shall meet the following requirements.
i.	
All washing, waxing, machine drying and related activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building (except for vehicular openings a maximum of 12 feet in width) with the exception of vacuuming, hand washing, hand drying and hand waxing of vehicles, the sale of items from vending machines and refuse storage and disposal. 

ii.	
No vehicular openings providing access to the enclosed building shall face the Residential District. For purposes of this section, the building wall providing access shall be at an angle greater than 60 degrees from the Residential District line. 

iii.	
All vacuuming and compression machines located outside of the enclosed building shall be of a design that does not exceed a noise level reading of 45 dB(A), as measured from the property line, between the hour of 6 AM to 7 AM and 55 dB(A) at all other lawful hours of operation.   

iv.	
Operation of the establishment shall be prohibited prior to 6 AM or after 11 PM on all days of the week. The hours of operation shall be required to be posted on site at a conspicuous location and all of the establishment’s car wash equipment shall be rendered inoperable at all times other than during its hours of operation. 



b.	
Accessory car wash facilities shall be prohibited unless one or more of the following exist: 
i.	
Operation of the facility is after 6:00 AM and before 11:00 PM on all days of the week.

ii.	
The car wash is equipped only with fully automatic wash equipment so the driver remains in their car during the entire wash process, and all other outdoor on-site customer activities such as vacuuming is prohibited. 






C.	
Vehicle Repair (Minor)
1.	
Defined




A facility where minor vehicle repair and service is conducted. Includes audio and alarm installation, custom accessories, quick lubrication facilities, minor scratch and dent repair, bed-liner installation and glass repair or replacement. 
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along all property lines abutting a residential use.

b.	
The outdoor overnight storage of vehicles may be permitted in accordance with Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage. Operable vehicles may be parked on-site during business hours.c.	There shall be no dismantling of vehicles for salvage.d.	The storage of impounded vehicles is not permitted.e.	No outside speaker system is permitted. f.	In the NX- District, a maximum of 2 service bay doors no more than 24 feet in width each are permitted on 2 sides of the building. g.	Service doors shall be closed except for entry and exit of automobiles.D.	Vehicle Repair (Major)1.	DefinedA facility where general vehicle repair and service is conducted, including transmission, brake, muffler and tire shops, along with body and paint shops. Major vehicle repair does not include any use meeting the definition for minor vehicle repair or commercial vehicle repair.2.	 Use Standardsa.	A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.







) must be established along all property lines abutting a residential use.

b.	
The outdoor overnight storage of vehicles awaiting repair may be permitted in accordance with Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage. Operable vehicles may be parked on-site during business hours.c.	There shall be no dismantling of vehicles for salvage.d.	The storage of impounded vehicles is not permitted.e.	No outside speaker system is permitted. E.	Vehicle Repair (Commercial Vehicle)1.	DefinedRepair, service, washing, or accessory installation for commercial vehicles, including box trucks, 18-wheelers and construction or other heavy equipment.2.	Use Standardsa.	A Type A1 or A2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.







) must be established along all property lines abutting a residential use.

b.	
The outdoor overnight storage of vehicles awaiting repair may be permitted in accordance with Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage. Operable vehicles may be parked on-site during business hours.c.	There shall be no dismantling of vehicles for salvage.d.	The storage of impounded vehicles is not permitted.e.	No outside speaker system is permitted. Sec. 6.5.7. Warehouse & DistributionA.	Warehouse & Distribution Use CategoryFacilities involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer with little on-site sales activity to customers. Warehouse and distribution includes the following uses.1.	Bulk storage, including nonflammable liquids, cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers, household moving and general freight storage, separate warehouse used by retail store such as furniture or appliance store.2.	Bus barn.3.	Commercial packing for fruits and vegetables.4.	Distribution facility, central postal facility.5.	Freight, service facility.6.	Parcel services.7.	Transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred.8.	Trailer storage, drop off lot.9.	Truck or motor freight terminal, service facility.10.	Trucking operation.11.	Warehouse.B.	Use Standards1.	A Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.






) must be established along all shared property lines, except for an adjacent warehouse and distribution use, heavy industrial use or waste-related service.

2.	
A Type C1 or C2 street protective yard (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right-of-way. 



Sec. 6.5.8. 
Waste-Related Service

A.	
Waste-Related Service Use Category


Characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for transfer to another location and uses that collect sanitary wastes or that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material. Waste-related service includes the following uses.
1.	
Animal waste processing.

2.	
Landfill.

3.	
Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material.

4.	
Outdoor storage of recyclable material.

5.	
Scrap materials (indoor storage).

6.	
Solid or liquid waste transfer station, waste incineration.


Sec. 6.5.9. 
Wholesale Trade

A.	
Wholesale Trade Use Category


Facilities involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products to industrial, institutional or commercial businesses only. The use emphasizes on-site sales or order-taking and often includes display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are not permitted. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Wholesale trade includes the following uses.
1.	
Mail-order house. 

2.	
Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy equipment, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, plumbing supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment and store fixtures.

3.	
Wholesale sales of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware and similar products.


Article 6.6. 
Open Uses

Sec. 6.6.1. 
Agriculture

A.	
Agriculture Use Category


The raising and harvesting of trees, vines, seeds, plants and crops, as well as the keeping, grazing or feeding of animals (including fish) for animal products, animal propagation, or value increase. Agriculture includes the following uses.
1.	
Animal raising including horses, hogs, cows, sheep, goats, swine, poultry, rabbits and other small animals, apiculture, aquaculture, dairying, personal or commercial animal breeding and development.

2.	
Community garden.

3.	
Crop production, soil preparation, agricultural services, large animal and veterinary services, farm labor and management services, research farm.

4.	
Floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, row and field crops, viticulture, tree or sod farm, silviculture, sale of agriculture products.

5.	
Fish hatcheries, fish farm.

6.	
Forestry, timber tracts, forest nursery, gathering of forest products.

7.	
Grain, fruit, field crop and vegetable cultivation and storage.

8.	
Hunting, trapping and game propagation.

9.	
Livestock, horse, dairy, poultry and egg products.

10.	
Livestock auction.

11.	
Milk processing plant.

12.	
Plant nursery.

13.	
Restricted agriculture.

14.	
Urban farm.

15.	
Wildlife sanctuary.


B.	
Community Garden
1.	
Defined




Areas of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and non-food ornamental crops, for personal or group use, consumption, or donation. They may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by the group.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
A community garden shall be primarily used for growing and harvesting food crops and ornamental crops, for consumption or donation or for sale off-site.

b.	
On-site sales are not permitted in the residential districts. On-site sales may be permitted in the mixed use and special districts with the approval of a special use permit, following the procedures set forth in Sec. 10.2.9. Sales shall be restricted to horticultural and agricultural products produced on the premises.c.	Detached accessory structures such as storage or utility buildings, gazebos, trellises, or accessory greenhouse structures are permitted, subject to compliance with the requirements of the zoning district.d.	If security fencing is installed, such fencing shall be of an open design.e.	If lighting is installed, only motion-detecting fixtures shall be permitted. All-night lighting is prohibited.f.	Community gardens shall be managed and maintained in compliance with all applicable standards of this UDO and the City Code, including but not limited to those pertaining to: nuisance abatement, stormwater, site accessibility, signage, soil erosion and sedimentation control and any required tree conservation and landscaping.g.	Raising of animals is not permitted in a Residential District. In all other permitted districts, the raising of animals is subject to the following conditions:i.	The community garden must be in active use for the growing and harvesting of crops.ii.	Hoofed animals are prohibited.iii.	Chickens are permitted at rate of 1 chicken per 1,000 square feet of lot area not to exceed 10 chickens on any single lot. No roosters are allowed. iv.	A maximum of 2 bee hives are permitted.v.	Any coop, hutch, hive, or other structure for housing animals shall be located at least 25 feet from any property line.C.	Plant Nursery 1.	DefinedA facility where horticultural and agricultural products produced on the premises are sold. 2.	Use Standards a.	Sales shall be limited to agricultural products produced on the premises, hand-held garden tools, bags of fertilizer, mulch, and similar items normally associated with nursery or gardening operations. b.	Sales offices shall be limited to 100 square feet of gross floor area per acre of land area, but in no case can the sales office exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. c.	The use shall not be located within a Primary Reservoir Watershed Protection Area. d.	No more than 1 on-premise announcement sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height. D.	Restricted Agriculture1.	DefinedThe raising and harvesting of tree crops (excluding forestry), vine crops and horticultural specialties not requiring intense cultivation. The keeping or grazing of animals for animal products, animal propagation or value increase is not allowed.E.	Urban Farm 1.	DefinedThe raising and harvesting of trees (excluding forestry), vines, seeds, plants and crops, as well as the keeping, grazing or feeding of animals (including fish) for animal products, animal propagation, or value increase when located in an urbanized (developed) area. An urban farm may be owned by an individual, group or organization and may include intensive agriculture, typical  large-scale farm equipment, and animal husbandry. Sec. 6.6.2. Resource ExtractionA.	Resource Extraction Use CategoryCharacterized by uses that extract minerals and other solids and liquids from land. Resource extraction includes the following uses.1.	Dredging, earth extraction, gas extraction.2.	Extraction of phosphate or minerals.3.	Extraction of sand or gravel, borrow pit.4.	Land clearing for the purpose of resource extraction.5.	Metal, sand, stone, gravel, clay, mining and other related processing.6.	Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials.B.	Use Standards1.	A type B3 transitional protective yard with a berm (see Sec. 7.2.4.A.) must be established along all outer perimeter property lines except where the property abuts an IH District or is used for industrial uses listed in Article 6.5. Industrial Uses.2.	For lawful resource extraction facilities established prior to September 1, 2013 that adjoin uses other than household living as listed in Sec. 6.2.1., existing woodland vegetation at least 25 feet in width may be used, in whole or in part, to satisfy the transitional protective yard, provided any gap in woodland vegetation 20 feet or more in width shall be planted with evergreen hollies that have a mature height of at least 25 feet tall.3.	A type C4 street protective yard with a berm (see Sec. 7.2.4.B.) must be established along all property lines abutting a public right of-way. 4.	Except for properties in an IH District or used for industrial uses listed in Article 6.5. Industrial Uses, there shall be provided between overburden storage areas and adjoining properties not owned or leased by the operator, (a) walls, closed fences, berms or any combination equal or greater in height than the height of the overburden or (b) planted vegetation containing the following characteristics:a.	Newly planted landscaping shall be of the following varieties:  loblolly pine, genetically improved stock, Japanese cryptomeria ‘Yoshino’ and ‘Nellie Stevens’ holly;b.	Newly planted pine trees shall be planted double filed with a linear-triangle configuration with 20 foot spacing.  Yoshino and Nellie Stevens shall be installed in the middle of the tree plantings, with at least 25 percent of each variety being planted; andc.	The planted pine trees shall be at least 6 feet tall and the planted Yoshino and Nellie Stevens shall be at least 4 feet tall. 5.	Existing woodland vegetation, at least 25 feet in width, which meets or exceeds the screening characteristics of the planted material may be used, in whole or in part, to satisfy the vegetative planting requirements.  6.	If planted or existing vegetation is used to screen the overburden, the overburden may not exceed a height of 70 feet or other City ordinances, whichever is more stringent. 7.	A property shall be considered “adjoining” if it is separated from the area where overburden is deposited by a street right-of-way 100 feet wide or less.8.	Upon the completion of any deposit of overburden material in any area, the deposit shall be covered with grass or other ground cover.9.	The following hours of operations shall be observed:a.	Blasting on the property is allowed only between the hours of  9 AM and 5 PM Mondays through Fridays except in the case of emergency. No blasting is allowed on the traditional holidays of New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.b.	Crushing equipment shall operate only between the hours of 6 AM and 9 PM Mondays through Saturdays and only between 1 PM and 9 PM on Sundays.c.	Overburden will be deposited, graded or moved about the property only between the hours of 7 AM and 6 PM Mondays through Saturdays.10.	If the operator uses audible back-up warning devices on machinery or equipment, the volume and frequency of the back-up warning devices shall be the minimum required to comply with any applicable law or 	regulation. 11.	All load trucks entering the property shall have a working functioning load cover. Any truck that does not have a working functioning load cover shall not be loaded. Loads on load trucks exiting the property shall be covered.12.	 At each exit driveway utilized by loaded trucks, a sign shall be erected reading that all loads exiting the property are required by City ordinance to be covered, and  that failure to cover is a violation of the City Code.  The sign shall be facing the property and all lettering shall be a minimum of 6 inches tall. 13.	The primary crusher shall not be located closer than 300 feet to any outer property boundary and no closer than 600 feet to any Residential District.  In lieu of meeting these distances, the primary crusher may be located in any area of the excavation pit that is 50 or more feet below the then current grade surface level, so that the wall of the excavation pit will function as a noise baffle.   Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & StructuresSec. 6.7.1. In GeneralA.	Accessory uses and structures are permitted in conjunction with allowed principal uses. Allowed accessory uses and structures include those listed in this Article and additional accessory uses and structures that, as interpreted by the Zoning Administrator, meet the following:1.	Are clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with an allowed principal building or use;2.	Are subordinate to and serving an allowed principal building or use; 3.	Are subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or use served; 4.	Contribute to the comfort, convenience or needs of occupants, business or industry in the principal building or use served; and 5.	Are located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.B.	In addition, no accessory use or structure may be established on a lot prior to the establishment of a permitted principal use.Sec. 6.7.2. Accessory StructuresA.	Setback and height requirements for all accessory structures are established for each building type and are set forth in the district chapter (Chapter 2. Residential Districts, Chapter 3. Mixed Use Districts, and Chapter 4. Special Districts) unless otherwise regulated specifically herein. B.	No accessory structure may be located closer than 6 feet to any other building or structure on the same lot. Two or more structures joined by a breezeway shall be considered attached and part of the same principal structure except when the breezeway meets the following:1.		Is no more than 6 feet in width, including roof overhangs;2.	Is no more than 16 feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less;3.	Meets the accessory structure setbacks;4.	Is open on the sides except for structural support columns;5.	Is located no closer to the primary or side street than the wall plane of the principal structure closest to the street; and6.	Has no walkway on the roof.C.	In Residential Districts, accessory structures associated with Detached or Attached Houses shall comply with the following:1.	Accessory structures with gross floor area of 150 square feet or less and height of 10 feet or less shall have a minimum setback of 5 feet from side and rear property lines;2.	The Accessory structure shall not be located any closer to the primary or side street than the wall plane of the principal structure closest to the street;3.	Accessory structures shall have a minimum setback of 4 feet from an alley;4.	The vehicular opening of a garage on an alley shall have a setback of either 4 feet or 20 feet or more from the alley;5.	Notwithstanding anything herein, accessory structures shall be lower in height than the principal building;6.	No deck or balcony shall be permitted above the finished floor elevation of the ground floor;7.	Vertical encroachments are not permitted; and8.	Encroachments into setbacks are not permitted.D.	In Residential Districts, accessory structures associated with Detached or Attached Houses shall conform to the standards shown in tables 1 and 2 below. Breezeway connections permitted under Sec. 6.7.2.B. 
































shall not count towards the floor area or footprint calculations of this section.




D.1 Floor Area and Footprint Standards for Accessory Structures in Residential Districts
 
The smallest area within a row shall control. Area maximums apply to all accessory structures on a lot combined.
 
Lot Size
 Combined Floor Area (max.)
 Combined footprint (max.)
 Combined footprint (max.)
 
Less than 10,000 sf
 600 sf
 50% of rear yard area
 75% of principal building footprint
 
10,000 sf to 40,000 sf
 900 sf
 50% of rear yard area
 75% of principal building footprint
 
Greater than 40,000 sf
 1,200 sf
 50% of rear yard area
 75 % of principal building footprint
 


D.2 Height and Setback Standards for Accessory Structures in Residential Districts
 
One-story
 One and a half story
 Two-story
 
Max height (ft)
 16
 20.5
 25
 
Max height (stories)
 1
 1
 2
 
Attics
 Not permitted
 Permitted
 Not permitted
 
Side/Rear Setback (ft)
 10
 15
 20
 
Max. wall height (ft)
 12
 12
 N/A
 


E.	
The provisions of this Section may not be varied by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the terms of Section 10.2.10 or otherwise. 


Sec. 6.7.3. 
Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses 

A.	
Caretaker’s Residence


A single dwelling unit as a residence for a caretaker or watchman accessory to a permitted use is permitted in all districts other than a Residential District.
B.	
Dish Antenna


An antenna whose purpose is to receive signals from orbiting satellites. The regulations of this section apply only to dish antennas larger than 1 meter in diameter.
1.	
No dish antenna can be located closer than 30 feet to a public right-of-way. 

2.	
In a Residential District, no dish antenna can have a dish of a diameter greater than 12 feet, unless located more than 100 feet from a property line. 

3.	
In a Residential District, any antenna not mounted on a building that is over 4 feet in diameter shall be screened from the right-of-way and the property boundary of any abutting lot. The screen shall be made of plant materials, berms, closed fences, or walls or any combination of that reduce the view from the abutting lot or right-of-way to a height of 6 feet above ground elevation year round. Fences or walls utilized for screening must be architecturally compatible with other buildings and structures on the site. Planting shall be provided so that no more than 2/3 of the height of the fence or wall is visible from the abutting lot or right-of-way within 5 years of the erection of the fence or wall. 

4.	
Roof-mounted dish antennas shall be screened from any public street that is open to vehicular traffic. All roof-mounted dish antennas exceeding 4 feet in diameter shall be constructed of mesh type material. 


C.	
Garage for 5 or More Vehicles Accessory to a Dwelling


A special use permit may be issued in accordance with Sec. 10.2.9. for a garage for 5 or more motorized vehicles in a Residential District. D.	Home OccupationAn occupation that provides a service or product that is conducted wholly within a residential dwelling in a Residential District. 1.	No nonresident employees are allowed. Clients, customers, patients and visitors are not allowed to visit the premises. 2.	No display of goods, products, or services shall be visible from outside the dwelling. 3.	The home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the livable portion of the dwelling.4.	No business storage or warehousing of material, supplies or equipment is permitted outdoors. Storage is permitted in the principal dwelling unit or a fully-enclosed accessory structure only.5.	There must be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.6.	No equipment, vehicle or process may be used that creates excessive noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference.7.	Only 1 vehicle used in connection with the home occupation shall be parked or stored on the premises; provided, however, the vehicle must not be a bus, truck, van, trailer or other vehicle over 6,000 lbs., as listed on the vehicle registration form, and no advertising or reference to the home occupation may be displayed on the vehicle in any manner. 8.	The requirements for shipping and receiving of materials in connection with the business does not create excessive noise or traffic. E.	Live-WorkAn occupation that provides a service or product that is conducted wholly within a residential dwelling that allows employees, customers, clients or patrons to visit.1.	In a Residential District, a special use permit issued in accordance with  Sec. 10.2.9. is required for a live-work unit.2.	A minimum of 1 individual must occupy the live-work unit as their primary place of residence.3.	The live-work unit may employ no more than 2 individuals not living on the premises at any one time.4.	Work space within the unit may be used as an office, studio, gallery, beauty/hair salon, or for production involving the use of hand tools and small-scale, light equipment.5.	Resale of items such as, but not limited to, antiques, jewelry and clothing may be permitted in addition to handmade items produced in the live-work unit. 6.	No specialty service such as, but not limited to, dance instruction, crafts, or music lessons shall be provided for a group larger than 5 persons. 7.	No business storage or warehousing of material, supplies or equipment is permitted outdoors. Storage is permitted in the live-work unit or a fully-enclosed accessory structure only.8.	Except for permitted signage, there must be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the work inside.9.	Signage is limited to 1 unlit wall or projecting sign no larger than 3 square feet in area, attached to the structure housing the live-work unit.10.	No equipment, vehicle or process may be used that creates excessive noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference.11.	Only 1 vehicle used in connection with the live-work use shall be parked or stored on the premises; provided, however, the vehicle must not be a bus, truck, van, trailer or other vehicle over 6,000 lbs, as listed on the vehicle registration form, and no advertising or reference to the use may be displayed on the vehicle in any manner. 12.	No more than 5 customers are permitted on the premises at any one time.13.	The requirements for shipping and receiving of materials in connection with the business does not create excessive noise or traffic.14.	One additional on-site parking space is required per live-work unit.F.	ReservedG.	Recreational Use Related to a Residential Development1.	Recreational use is limited to the following facilities: clubhouse, docks, exercise rooms, game and craft rooms, gymnasiums, party and reception rooms, bicycle paths, pedestrian and equestrian trails, picnic areas, play courts, such as basketball, racquetball, and tennis courts, golf courses, driving ranges, play fields, playgrounds, sauna baths, swimming pools and tanning facilities. 2.	These uses are allowed only as part of a residential development or subdivision, a compact development, a conservation development, a manufactured home development, or a congregate care facility. Such uses may be located outside of the boundaries of the development, provided that:a.	The lot is owned by the development (through its homeowners association or other similar mechanism); andb.	The lot adjoins the subdivision for at least 50% of its perimeter; orc.	The lot is located across a street or other right-of-way for at least 50% of its perimeter.3.	Nonresident memberships or fees paid by the general public shall not be permitted. This prohibition shall not be construed to disallow membership fees for residents of the development and their guests made on an installment basis of not less than monthly, rather than on any pay-for-use, hourly, daily or weekly basis. Membership fees are allowed for any recreational use related if it also complies with all regulations of a recreational use restricted to membership, either commercial or not for profit. 4.	The recreation facilities shall be owned by either a not for profit organization, a homeowners association, or multi-unit development owner. 5.	Any pool with any linear dimension greater 65 feet or with any area in excess of 4,000 square feet must be approved as special use permit in accordance with Sec. 10.2.9.  6.	No signage, storage, merchandise, or display including display windows shall be visible from outside of the recreational use. 7.	Parking for the recreational uses shall be provided in accordance with  Sec. 7.1.2.C Parking Requirements by Use






. However, the number of required parking spaces may be reduced by the ratio of the total parking required for the residential uses that are located within 400 feet of the recreation use to the total required parking for all residential uses in the development. 



H.	
Religious Shelter Unit


Temporary housing associated with a place of worship that is for counseling, education and referral services for temporary residents. A zoning permit is required for any religious shelter unit.
1.	
The facility is an accessory use to a place of worship and occupies a floor area of no more than 10% of the gross floor area in any 1 complex. 

2.	
It houses no more than 12 residents at any one time provided that a minimum floor space of 100 square feet of space is provided for each individual sheltered. 

3.	
No individual or family resides at the facility for a period longer than 18  months, and no person or family shall be readmitted until at least 14 days have elapsed from their last residency. 

4.	
It is located in a place of worship which is established on the site for a period of 1 year or longer. 

5.	
It provides an employee or volunteer to maintain continuous on-site supervision.

6.	
No religious shelter unit may be located within ¾-mile radius of another religious shelter unit (determined by a straight line from property line to property line). 

7.	
It is not located within a Primary Reservoir Watershed Protection Area or an -AOD. 


I.	
Residential Accessory Service
1.	
A nonresidential accessory use located within an apartment or townhouse development or congregate care facility in an R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6, R-1o or RX- district. Allowed accessory uses are limited to eating establishment, beauty or barber shop, laundry or dry cleaning pickup, drug store, flower shop, gift shop or newsstand. Does not include an adult establishment.

2.	
The gross floor area of all accessory uses can be no more than 25% of the dwelling unit.

3.	
In no case shall the accessory use occupy more than 50% of the building gross floor area or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less (except that laundry facilities shall be excluded from this maximum floor area). 

4.	
The primary entrance to the accessory use must be internal to the main building.

5.	
The display of products and activity of the accessory use must not be visible from outside the building.

6.	
No drive-thru or drive-in facilities are allowed.

7.	
The signage and location must not be designed to attract clientele from outside the building or lot within which the use is sited.

8.	
Residential accessory service uses are not allowed in a Primary Watershed Protection Area.




Article 6.8. 
Temporary Uses

Sec. 6.8.1. 
Applicability


A temporary use permit is intended to allow for the short-term placement of activi­ties, many of which would be not allowed on a permanent basis. The following regulations govern temporary uses.
Sec. 6.8.2. 
Temporary Use Permit Required


The following temporary uses are allowed subject to approval of a temporary use permit issued in accordance with Sec. 10.2.13. and Sec. 11.4.1.
A.	
Temporary Event
1.	
A temporary event lasting 1 day shall be permitted without complying with the conditions below, provided that no more than 4 temporary events in any 1 calendar year shall be permitted on that premise. 

2.	
All temporary events lasting more than 1 day on any premise in any one calendar year shall meet all of the following: 
a.	
No premise shall be the site of a temporary event exceeding a collective total of 20 days, or 3 individual weekends, or both within any one calendar year. In this context, a weekend shall constitute 3 consecutive days.

b.	
Signs associated with a permitted temporary event shall be a maximum size of 64 square feet in area allocated to no more than 5 signs.

c.	
All outdoor activities shall be discontinued by 11 PM when located closer than 500 feet to a residential use or a congregate care facility. 

d.	
No unauthorized encroachments on public rights-of-way are allowed. 

e.	
The temporary event must comply with all applicable floodplain policies.





B.	
Fund Raising Activity for a Civic Use in a Residential District
1.	
The fund raising activity is on a periodic basis.

2.	
Activities are discontinued by 11 PM.



C.	
Outdoor Mobile Vending Cart


An outdoor mobile vending cart is allowed in any mixed use district subject to the following requirements:
1.	
Outdoor mobile vending carts shall be located on the same lot as a principal building. The minimum  lot size is 2½ acres. 

2.	
The maximum number of outdoor mobile vending carts per lot shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.	
One outdoor mobile vending cart on lots less than 5 acres. 

b.	
Two outdoor mobile vending carts on lots of 5 acres or greater but less than 10 acres. 

c.	
Three outdoor mobile vending carts on lots of 10 acres or greater but less than 15 acres. 

d.	
Four outdoor mobile vending carts on lots of 15 acres or greater.

e.	
A maximum of 1 outdoor mobile vending cart when tenant occupancy equates to less than 50% of the gross floor area of the principal buildings. 

f.	
The amount of space occupied by outdoor mobile vending carts shall not exceed 1% of the occupied floor area gross of the principal buildings. 



3.	
The dimensions of any outdoor mobile vending cart may not exceed the following: 
a.	
50 square feet in area.

b.	
A maximum length or width of 10 feet and a maximum height of 8 feet. 

c.	
The maximum height of 8 feet shall include any protection provided for the vendor or customer from outdoor conditions in the form of an umbrella, or other protective covering which must be attached to the cart. 



4.	
All signage must be attached to the cart and shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet. 

5.	
All required Wake County and City of Raleigh permits and licenses shall be clearly displayed on the vending cart. 

6.	
The vending cart must be located within 25 feet of a principal building facade containing a primary pedestrian entrance, located no closer than 10 feet to any entrance or exit and may not be situated such that the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic is restricted. 

7.	
Hours of operation for any outdoor mobile vending cart shall be limited to the hours of operation of the associated principal use, but in no event be in operation between the hours of 11 PM and 8 AM. 

8.	
Sales of goods and merchandise shall be limited to food and beverage items, fresh cut flowers and original artworks and handicrafts.


D.	
Produce Stand
1.	
Defined




A produce stand permits the itinerant sale of agricultural produce and home-made food goods without a permanent structure or improvements.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Sales shall be limited to agricultural produce not exceeding a maximum of 2,000 square feet per lot (not including areas devoted to driveways and off-street parking). In addition to the sales of agricultural produce, 25% of the produce stand area may be devoted to the sales of home-made food goods such as baked goods, jams and relishes. For produce stands not removed from the lot on a daily basis, the use shall be limited to a maximum of 8 months per calendar year.  All tents, stands, signs and structures associated with the produce stand shall be removed from the property within 5 calendar days following the termination of the approved time period.  

b.	
Produce stands locating within a Residential District shall be required to locate on the property of a civic building or use (such as a place of worship or school), or within the common area of an apartment building or series of buildings containing a minimum of 100 dwelling units, or on property fronting a Major Street as designated on the Comprehensive Plan. In the event that the property fronting a Major Street is developed with a detached house used for single-unit living, no parking associated with the produce stand may be located within the front yard area. 

c.	
Tents, stands, signs or other related structures shall provide a minimum 10-foot setback from all property lines and public rights-of-way and shall not be located within sight distance triangles.

d.	
One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 200 square feet of area devoted to the produce stand activities, but no less than 3 parking spaces. Areas devoted to off-street parking shall be oriented to provide for safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation and arranged so that vehicular ingress and egress to the parking areas is by forward motion of the vehicle. Produce stands shall be exempt from the parking surfaces requirements and the required landscaping regulations.

e.	
Signage for all produce stand activities on the premise shall be limited to 1 unlit announcement sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area and be no higher than 3½ feet above the ground elevation.

f.	
All activities shall be discontinued by 8:00 PM when located in a Residential District.

g.	
No code-required landscape planting areas shall be utilized in association with the produce stand activities and no unauthorized encroachments on public rights-of-way shall be permitted.

h.	
A plot plan that shows the location of all tents, produce stands, driveways, off-street parking, traffic circulation, signs, or other related structures shall be submitted to the City for their approval, and that a zoning permit be issued prior to any event taking place.




E.	
Residential Development Sales Office or Model Home
1.	
The use of the office shall be for the initial sale or lease of properties or buildings within the residential development. 

2.	
There shall be no signage for a residential development sales office or model home on the premises in a Residential District except for 1 unlit ground announcement sign not to exceed 6 square feet in area, and 3½ feet in height that is located on the sales office or model home lot. 

3.	
For a developing residential subdivision, any phase containing a residential development sales office or model home shall contain a minimum of 5 acres and be intended for a minimum of 10 residential properties. 

4.	
The building may be used for sales purposes for a period of 3 years, but the period can be extended by the Development Services Director  on a semi-annual basis, provided the owner can show reasonable cause for such extensions and the unit remains occupied and used. In no event will the sales office or model home be continued when all of the properties of the development phase or building are sold or leased, excluding the sales office lot or model home lot within a subdivision. 

5.	
No sales office or model home shall be used for any other retail purpose. 




6.	
For a developing residential subdivision, the building must be located on an approved lot intended to be occupied by a dwelling unit, except for facilities located in recreational buildings. For all residential developments, the building must be located to comply with applicable district dimensional standards. 

7.	
The building used for the sales office is either constructed and intended for ultimate residential use as part of the residential development or a temporary modular office unit. If a temporary modular office unit is constructed, the following additional conditions shall be met: 
a.	
The modular office unit must be placed on a proper foundation, as recommended by the manufacturer.

b.	
Skirting and natural planting shrubs shall be installed around all sides of the modular office unit in accordance with the following: 
i.	
Skirting shall consist of any weatherproof material providing a visual barrier between the underside of the modular office unit and the stand; and 

ii.	
All natural shrubs shall be evergreen, a minimum of 36 inches tall, and planted 5 foot on center, but no one side shall have less than 2 plants. 



c.	
At the end of the maximum time period allowed for this use, the property owner shall remove the temporary modular office unit, the foundation and all other physical structures such that natural plant materials shall solely occupy the lot until such time that a permanent use allowed within the district is established. 




F.	
Temporary Mobile Retail
1.	
Defined




Temporary mobile retail is the sale of certain goods or services on a developed property within a completely enclosed recreational vehicle that is a licensed motor vehicle or within a travel trailer that is transported by a licensed motor vehicle.
2.	
Use Standards
a.	
Temporary mobile retail shall be allowed in the following zoning districts: OX, OP, NX, CX, IX, DX.

b.	
Only uses in the Commercial Use category are allowed as temporary mobile retail uses. Only Permitted Uses in the underlying zoning district are allowed. Limited and Special Uses are not allowed as temporary mobile retail uses. Restaurant/Bar and Pawnshop are not permitted as temporary mobile retail uses.

c.	
No activity shall occur outside of the enclosed sales area.

d.	
One 6-square-foot A-Frame style sign may be allowed directly in front of the temporary mobile retail vehicle.

e.	
The temporary mobile retail vehicle must be located within a parking area. The vehicle must not occupy parking spaces required to fulfill the minimum requirements of the principal use, unless the principal use’s hours of operation do not coincide with those of the mobile retail vehicle.

f.	
Mobile retail vehicles must not occupy parking spaces that may be leased to other businesses and uses to fulfill their minimum parking requirements.

g.	
Mobile retail vehicles must not occupy any handicap accessible parking space as specified in N.C. Gen. Stat. 20-37.6.

h.	
A site may host a mobile retail event, which consists of hosting a mobile vehicle or vehicles. A mobile retail event may include two consecutive days, but no more than two. A site may host a mobile retail event for a maximum of ten total events within one calendar year.

i.	
Hours of operation are limited to the hours between 7:00 AM and 11:00 PM or the hours for a retail use in the zoning district, whichever is more restrictive. If the location on the lot accommodating the mobile retail vehicle is located within 150 feet of the property line of a dwelling unit, the hours of operation are limited to the hours between 9:00 AM and 9:00 PM.





Article 6.1. Allowed Uses	6 – 2Sec. 6.1.1. Classification of Uses.................................................................6 – 2
Sec. 6.1.2. Use Determination...................................................................6 – 2
Sec. 6.1.3. Key to Use Table........................................................................6 – 2
Sec. 6.1.4. Allowed Principal Use Table......................................................6 – 3
Sec. 6.1.5. Prohibited Uses.........................................................................6 – 7


Article 6.2. Residential Uses	6 – 8Sec. 6.2.1. Household Living......................................................................6 – 8
Sec. 6.2.2. Group Living...........................................................................6 – 10
Sec. 6.2.3. Social Service..........................................................................6 – 12


Article 6.3. Public & Institutional Uses	6 – 14Sec. 6.3.1. Civic........................................................................................6 – 14
Sec. 6.3.2. Parks, Open Space and Greenways.........................................6 – 15
Sec. 6.3.3. Utilities...................................................................................6 – 15


Article 6.4. Commercial Uses	6-20Sec. 6.4.1. Day Care...................................................................................6-20
Sec. 6.4.2. Indoor Recreation.....................................................................6-21
Sec. 6.4.3. Medical.....................................................................................6-22
Sec. 6.4.4. Office.......................................................................................6-22
Sec. 6.4.5. Outdoor Recreation .................................................................6-23
Sec. 6.4.6. Overnight Lodging...................................................................6-24
Sec. 6.4.7. Parking.....................................................................................6-26
Sec. 6.4.8. Passenger Terminal..................................................................6-27
Sec. 6.4.9. Personal Service.......................................................................6-28
Sec. 6.4.10. Restaurant/Bar........................................................................6-30
Sec. 6.4.11. Retail Sales.............................................................................6-32
Sec. 6.4.12. Vehicle Sales/Rental.................................................................6-33


Article 6.5. Industrial Uses	6-35Sec. 6.5.1. Heavy Industrial........................................................................6-35
Sec. 6.5.2. Light Industrial.........................................................................6-35
Sec. 6.5.3. Light Manufacturing.................................................................6-36
Sec. 6.5.4. Research & Development.........................................................6-36
Sec. 6.5.5. Self-Service Storage.................................................................6-36
Sec. 6.5.6. Vehicle Service...........................................................................6-37
Sec. 6.5.7. Warehouse & Distribution.......................................................6 – 39
Sec. 6.5.8. Waste-Related Service............................................................6 – 39
Sec. 6.5.9. Wholesale Trade.....................................................................6 – 39


Article 6.6. Open Uses	6 – 40Sec. 6.6.1. Agriculture..............................................................................6 – 40
Sec. 6.6.2. Resource Extraction................................................................6 – 41


Article 6.7. Accessory Uses & Structures	6 – 43Sec. 6.7.1. In General................................................................................6 – 43
Sec. 6.7.2. Accessory Structures...............................................................6 – 43
Sec. 6.7.3. Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses ...................6 – 44


Article 6.8. Temporary Uses	6 – 48Sec. 6.8.1. Applicability............................................................................6 – 48
Sec. 6.8.2. Temporary Use Permit Required.............................................6 – 48







CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
.

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.1. ..Parking
Sec. 7.1.2. Required Parking

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.1. ..Parking
Sec. 7.1.2. Required Parking

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.1. ..Parking
Sec. 7.1.4. Vehicle Parking Reductions

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.1. ..Parking
Sec. 7.1.6. Vehicle Parking Location and Layout

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.1. ..Parking
Sec. 7.1.8. Bicycle Parking Facilities

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.1. Intent

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.4. ..Protective Yards

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.5. ..Screening

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.6. ..Stormwater Retention Ponds & Detention Basins

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.7. ..Design and Installation

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.7. ..Design and Installation

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.4. Wall Signs

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.9. ..Medium Profile Ground Signs

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.11. ..Tract Idenification Signs

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.13. Special Sign Types

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.13. ..Special Sign Types

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.14. ..Off-Premise Signs

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.15. ..Prohibited Signs

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.16. ..General Sign Regulations

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.4. Site Lighting
Sec. 7.4.1. Applicability

.CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 .

Article 7.1. ..Parking   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.1.1. Applicability

Article 7.1. ..Parking   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.1.2. Required Parking

Article 7.1. ..Parking   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.1.3. Specialized Vehicle Parking Requirements

Article 7.1. ..Parking   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.1.5. Additional Vehicle Parking Provisions

Article 7.1. ..Parking   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.1.7. Vehicle Parking Lot Landscaping

Article 7.1. ..Parking   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.1.9. ..Vehicle Loading Areas

Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.2.4. ..Protective Yards

Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.2.4. ..Protective Yards

Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.2.6. ..Stormwater Retention Ponds & Detention Basins

Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.2.6. ..Stormwater Retention Ponds & Detention Basins

Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.2.7. ..Design and Installation

Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.2.8. Walls and Fences

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.5. Projecting Signs

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.8. Low Profile Ground Signs

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.9. High Profile Ground Signs

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.12. A-Frame Signs

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.13. ..Special Sign Types

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.13. ..Special Sign Types

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.15. Prohibited Signs

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.16. General Sign Regulations

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.17. Nonconforming Signs

Article 7.4. ..Site Lighting   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.4.6. Flood Lights and Flood Lamps

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.4. ..Site Lighting
Sec. 7.4.7. Vehicular Canopies

Article 7.4. ..Site Lighting   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.4.10. Building and Security Lighting

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.5. ..Outdoor Display and Storage
Sec. 7.5.1. Applicability

Article 7.5. ..Outdoor Display and Storage   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.5.3. ..Outdoor Storage

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.2. ..Landscaping and Screening
Sec. 7.2.9. Construction Safety Barrier Fences

Article 7.3. ..Signs   |   CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
 Sec. 7.3.1. Applicability

CHAPTER 7. ..GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   |   Article 7.3. ..Signs
Sec. 7.3.6. Awning, Gallery, Marquee Signs

Chapter 7. 
General Development Standards

Article 7.1. 
Parking

Sec. 7.1.1. 
Applicability

A.	
General


No permit for the construction, reconstruction, extension, repair or alteration of any building, structure or use of land and no building or land or any part of any building or land, may be occupied or used until parking has been provided in accordance with the requirements of this UDO.
B.	
Additions
1.	
A building or site may be renovated or repaired without providing additional parking, provided there is no increase in gross floor area or improved site area.

2.	
When a building, use or site is increased in gross floor area or improved site area by up to 25% cumulatively, any new parking that is required for the additional floor or site area shall comply with all of the related parking standards of this UDO.

3.	
When the gross floor area or improved site area is increased by more than 25% cumulatively, both the existing use and the additional floor or site area must conform to the parking requirements of Sec. 7.1.2.C.4.	When the gross floor area or improved site area is increased by more than 25% cumulatively, both the existing parking and the new parking required for the additional floor or site area must conform to all related parking standards of this UDO.C.	Change in Use1.	A change in use based on the parking table of Sec. 7.1.2.C. must comply with the parking requirements unless the use has the same or a lesser parking demand than the previous use.2.	Where the required number of parking spaces for a new use according to Sec. 7.1.2.C. is less than 125% of the parking spaces required for the existing use, no additional parking spaces shall be required.3.	Where required parking spaces for the new use exceed 125% of the required parking spaces for the existing use, additional parking shall only be required for the difference between the current parking spaces required and the parking spaces required for the new use. D.	Raleigh Street Design Manual Except as otherwise provided in this UDO, all parking spaces and areas must comply with the Raleigh Street Design Manual. Sec. 7.1.2. Required ParkingA.	Calculation of Required Parking1.	Parking shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 7.1.2.C. Where a use is not specifically listed or only a broad use category is shown, the Zoning Administrator is responsible for categorizing the use in accordance with Sec. 6.1.2.2.	When a lot is used for a combination of uses, the parking requirements are the sum of the requirements for each use and no parking space for one use can be included in the calculation of parking requirements for any other use, except as allowed as in Sec. 7.1.5.A.






3.	
In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces are rounded to the nearest whole number, with one-half or more counted as an additional space.



B.	
Parking Administrative Alternative


The parking ratios of this UDO apply unless an alternate parking ratio is approved by the Transportation Director in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. and the requirements below.1.	Alternate parking ratios may be approved where an applicant submits a parking study, prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of North Carolina. Such a study must illustrate that the required parking ratios of Sec. 7.1.2.C. do not accurately apply to a specific development proposal.2.	The data submitted must include, at minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the mix of uses, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads of all uses.3.	The data must be obtained either from relevant studies published in refereed journals or other secondary source of comparable authority; or from primary studies of no fewer than 3 comparable developments within the regional market. The regional market shall be the Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area.4.	The alternate shall not be subject to review by the Appearance Commission.C.	Parking Requirements by Use


Use Category 
     Specific Use
 Vehicle Parking (min)
 Short-Term 
Bicycle Parking (min)
 Long-Term 
Bicycle Parking (min)
 
RESIDENTIAL
 
Household Living, as listed below:
 
Single-unit living (all parking on lot)
 2 spaces per unit 
 None
 None
 
Two-unit living (all parking on lot)
 2 spaces per unit
 None
 None
 
Multi-unit living: 0 - 1 bedroom
Multi-unit living: 2 bedrooms
Multi-unit living: 3 bedrooms
Multi-unit living: 4 bedrooms
Multi-unit living: 5+ bedrooms
 1 space per unit + 1 space per 10 units for visitors
2 spaces per unit + 1 space per 10 units for visitors
3 spaces per unit + 1 space per 10 units for visitors
4 spaces per unit + 1 space per 10 units for visitors
4.5 spaces per unit + 1 space per 10 units for visitors
 1 space per 20 units, 
minimum 4
 None
 
Manufactured home development 
 2 spaces per unit
 None
 None
 
Multi-unit supportive housing residence
 1 space per 4 beds + 1 space, minimum 4 spaces
 None
 None
 
Supportive housing residence
 1 space per 4 beds + 1 space, minimum 4 spaces
 None
 None
 
Accessory apartment, backyard cottage 
 1 space per unit
 None
 None
 
Group Living, except as listed below: 
 1 space per 2 beds
 None
 None
 
Boardinghouse
 1.5 spaces per bedroom
 None
 None
 
Congregate care, nursing home
 1 space per 3 units + 1 per 400 SF administrative, employee, staff work area 
 None
 None
 
Dormitory, fraternity, sorority
 1.5 spaces per bedroom
 1 space per 20 bedrooms, 
minimum 6
 1 space per 5 bedrooms (developments with 10 or more bedrooms)
 
Continuing care retirement  community
 1 space per 3 units + 1 per 400 SF administrative, employee, staff work area - additional spaces required for nonresidential and residential uses at the ratio required by this table
 Required for nonresidential and residential uses at the ratio required by this table
 Required for nonresidential and residential uses at the ratio required by this table
 
Social Service, except as listed below:
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area
 None
 None
 
Emergency shelter type A, type B
 1 space per 8 persons of approved capacity
 None
 None
 
Special care facility
 1 space per 2 employees
 None
 None
 
PUBLIC & INSTITUTIONAL 
 
Civic, except as listed below:
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 None
 
Cemetery 
 3 spaces per acre of land utilized as grave space (may be located on internal street adjacent to grave sites)
 None
 None
 
College, community college, university with >10,000 students or >50% of all students housed on campus
 1 space per 600 SF of academic space plus 1 space per 5 seats in principal assembly room
 1 space per 10,000 SF of academic space
 1 space per 20,000 SF of academic space
 
College, community college, university with <10,000 students and <50% of all students housed on campus
 1 space per 900 SF of academic space 
 1 space per 10,000 SF of academic space
 1 space per 20,000 SF of academic space
 
Place of worship
 1 space per 4 seats in principal assembly room
 None
 None
 
School, public or private (K-8)
 1 space per 5 seats in the largest assembly room
 1 space per 2 classrooms
 3 spaces per classroom
 

Use Category 
     Specific Use
 Vehicle Parking (min)
 Short-Term 
Bicycle Parking (min)
 Long-Term 
Bicycle Parking (min)
 
School, public or private (9-12)
 1 space per 600 SF of academic space
 1 space per classroom
 2 spaces per classroom
 
Parks, Open Space and Greenways
 None - additional spaces required for structures at the ratio required by this table
 0.2 spaces per per acre of open space (excluding greenways), minimum 4 - additional spaces required for recreational uses at the ratio required by this table
 None
 
Minor Utilities
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area (office)
 None
 None 
 
Major Utilities
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area (office)
 None
 None
 
COMMERCIAL
 
Day care, except as listed below:
 1 space per 2 employees
 None
 1 space per 10,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Day care, home
 None
 None
 None
 
Indoor Recreation, except as listed below:
 1 space per 300 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 None
 
Bowling alley
 5 spaces per lane 
 1 space per 5 lanes
 None
 
Convention center, arena
 1 space per 5 seats
 None
 1 space per 50,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum of 4
 
Movie theater or other indoor theater
 1 space per 5 seats
 1 space per 500 seats, minimum 4
 None
 
Medical, except as listed below:
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area
 Minimum 4 spaces
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area
 
Hospital
  1 space per 2 beds
 1 space per 10,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 1 space per 70,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Medical, dental office
 1 space per 300 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 10,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 1 space per 10,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Office, except as listed below:
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 10,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Call Center
 1 space per 150 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 10,000 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 2,500 SF of gross floor area
 
Outdoor Recreation, except as listed below:
 1 space per 500 SF of gross floor area plus 1 space per
1,000 SF of outdoor use area
 1 space per 5,000 SF of site  area, minimum 4
 None
 
Golf course 
 4 spaces per hole plus 1 space per 500 SF of gross floor area
 None
 1 space per 6 holes, 
minimum 4
 
Golf driving range
 1 space per tee
 1 spaces per 5 tees, minimum 4
 None
 
Outdoor sports or entertainment 
facility, outdoor theater
 1 space per 5 seats
 1 space per 500 seats, minimum 4
 None
 

Use Category 
     Specific Use
 Vehicle Parking (min)
 Short-Term 
Bicycle Parking (min)
 Long-Term 
Bicycle Parking (min)
 
Overnight Lodging, except as listed below:
 1 space per room or bedroom
 None
 1 space per 20 rooms or bedrooms, minimum 4
 
Hostel
 1 space per 10 beds, minimum of 2 spaces
 1 space per 20 beds, 
minimum 4
 1 space per 10 beds
 
Parking
 None
 None
 None
 
Passenger Terminal
 1 space per 200 SF of waiting floor area plus 1 per 2
employees
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 2,500 SF of gross floor area
 
Personal service
 1 space per 400 SF of gross floor area
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 None
 
Restaurant/Bar
 1 space per 150 SF of gross floor area or 1 space per 5 seats, whichever is greater
 1 space per 50,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 1 space per 25,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Retail Sales, except as listed below:
 1 space per 300 SF of gross floor area plus 1 space for every 600 square feet of outdoor display area
 1 space per 5,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 None
 
Food truck
 None
 None
 None
 
Vehicle Sales/Rental
 1 space per 1,000 SF of gross floor area or 1 space for every 4,500 square feet of vehicle display area, whichever is greater
 None
 None
 
INDUSTRIAL
 
Heavy Industrial
 1 per 600 SF of office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Light Industrial
 1 per 600 SF of office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Light Manufacturing
 1 per 600 SF of office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Research & Development
 1 per 600 SF of office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Self-Service Storage
 1 space per 100 storage units
 None
 None
 
Vehicle Service
 1 space per 600 SF of gross floor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Warehouse & Distribution
 1 per 600 SF office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Waste-Related Service
 1 per 600 SF of office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
Wholesale Trade
 1 per 600 SF office space + 1 per 3,000 SF of additional indoor area
 None
 1 space per 40,000 SF of gross floor area, minimum 4
 
OPEN
 
Agriculture
 None
 None
 None
 
Resource Extraction
 1 per 2 employees, minimum 4
 None
 None
 



D.	
Maximum Surface Parking Provided


Except for single- and two-unit living or for uses providing 10 or fewer surface parking spaces, when the surface parking provided to serve a use exceeds 150% of the required parking ratios as specified in Sec. 7.1.2.C., one of the following measures to mitigate the additional impervious surface must be utilized.1.	Detain stormwater runoff to pre-development levels for the 2-, 10- and 30-year storm event for the parking area above the maximum.2.	Provide elevated solar powered arrays in lieu of required landscaping plantings for the parking area above the maximum. The solar arrays shall be installed above a minimum of 50% of the parking area above the maximum. 3.	All required interior landscaped islands as required in Sec. 7.1.7. must have an average width of 20 feet, with no dimension less than 8 feet in size. Required trees must be installed every 50 feet on center, with minimum of 300 square feet of landscaped area per tree.4.	An increase in tree conservation area of 5% of the property above the minimum requirement. Sec. 7.1.3. Specialized Vehicle Parking Requirements A.	Downtown District (DX-)1.	General Requirementsa.	One parking space is required per dwelling unit; however, no more than 

2 on-site parking spaces per dwelling unit are allowed. b.	No vehicle parking is required for the first 16 dwelling units.c.	One parking space per 500 square feet is required for all nonresidential gross floor area or the minimum number of parking spaces set forth in Sec. 7.1.2.C., whichever is less.d.	No vehicle parking is required for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area of any nonresidential use.e.	No vehicle parking is required for the following uses and use categories up to 30,000 square feet of gross floor area provided  when at least 25% of the ground floor of the building is devoted to such uses:i.	Indoor recreation; ii.	Personal service;iii.	Restaurant;iv.	Retail sales; andv.	Banks.f.	No combination of the reductions in paragraphs Sec. 7.1.3.A.1.d. and Sec. 7.1.3.A.1.e. shall exceed 30,000 exempted square feet of gross floor area.g.	No parking is required for an indoor movie theater. h.	Parking for overnight lodging requires only one-half of the amount specified in Sec. 7.1.2. Required Parking.





2.	
Parking Fee in Lieu
a.	
At the discretion of the Transportation Director, a fee may be paid in lieu of complying with the minimum parking requirements.

b.	
The amount of payment for each required parking space is fixed by resolution adopted by the City Council, but in no case does the cost exceed the estimated, normal, current cost to the City of providing required parking spaces to serve the contemplated use.

c.	
Payments collected by the City shall be kept separate from other revenue of the City. Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested as allowed in N.C. Gen. Stat. §159-30. Funds can only be used for the purchase of land or for the construction of new parking facilities within the DX- District. 

d.	
Any parking requirement satisfied in this manner shall run with the land and any subsequent change of use that requires more parking shall require subsequent action to satisfy the additional parking requirement.





B.	
TOD Overlay District (-TOD)
1.	
General Requirements
a.	
One parking space is required per dwelling unit; however, no more than two on-site parking spaces per dwelling unit are allowed. 

b.	
No vehicle parking is required for the first 16 dwelling units.

c.	
One parking space per 500 square feet is required for all nonresidential gross floor area or the minimum number of parking spaces set forth in Sec. 7.1.2.C., whichever is less.d.	No vehicle parking is required for the first 10,000 square feet of ground story gross floor area that meets the ground story height and ground story transparency requirements for a mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.).e.	Surface parking associated with a nonresidential use may not exceed 100% of the requirement enumerated in Sec. 7.1.2.C. Parking spaces provided in an underground or structured parking garage do not count toward the maximum number of spaces permitted.2.	Parking Fee in Lieua.	At the discretion of the Transportation Director, a fee may be paid in lieu of complying with the minimum parking requirements.b.	The amount of payment for each required parking space is fixed by resolution adopted by the City Council, but in no case does the cost exceed the estimated, normal, current cost to the City of providing required parking spaces to serve the contemplated use.c.	Payments collected by the City shall be kept separate from other revenue of the City. Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested as allowed in N.C. Gen. Stat. §159-30. Funds can only be used for the purchase of land or for the construction of new parking facilities within the same -TOD.d.	Any parking requirement satisfied in this manner shall run with the land and any subsequent change of use that requires more parking shall require subsequent action to satisfy the additional parking requirement.C.	Urban Frontage (-GR, -UL, -UG - SH)1.	One parking space is required per dwelling unit; however, no more than 2

on-site parking spaces per dwelling unit are allowed. 2.	No vehicle parking is required for the first 16 dwelling units.3.	One parking space per 500 square feet is required for all nonresidential gross floor area or the minimum number of parking spaces set forth in Sec. 7.1.2.C., whichever is less.4.	No vehicle parking is required for the first 10,000 square feet of ground story gross floor area that meets the ground story height and ground story transparency requirements for a mixed use building (see Sec. 3.2.6.).5.	Restaurants (regardless of size) within 100 feet of a Residential District, with hours of operation extending past 11 PM, must provide parking for the entire floor area devoted to the restaurant at a rate of 1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space per 5 seats, whichever is greater.

6.	Urban Frontages in a DX- District shall use the requirements of Sec. 7.1.3.A.7.	Urban Frontages in a -TOD shall use the requirements of Sec. 7.1.3.B.8.	An uncovered outdoor dining area of no more than 25% of the area of any indoor dining is exempt from the calculation of required parking spaces. Any additional area shall provide parking at the indoor dining rate.Sec. 7.1.4. Vehicle Parking ReductionsA.	Proximity to Transit 1.	A 10% reduction in the number of required parking spaces is allowed for uses with a main entrance within a walking distance of 1,320 feet of an operating transit stop or stops provided the stops are all within 1,320 feet walking distance of each other, with service from 6 AM to 8 PM where service intervals are no longer than 15 minutes during peak commute hours.2.	The transit reduction does not apply in a DX- District, -TOD or Urban Frontage.B.	Affordable Housing1.	Required parking for an affordable housing development may be reduced to a rate of 1 parking space for each unit. 2.	The affordable housing reduction applies only to required spaces for dwelling units. If required, visitor spaces must be provided at the standard rate. C.	Senior Housing 1.	Senior housing is only required to provide 1 space per dwelling or rooming unit. 2.	The senior housing reduction applies only to required spaces for dwelling or rooming units. If required, visitor spaces must be provided at the standard rate. 3.	The parking reduction for senior housing is only available for multi-unit living in an apartment building type.D.	Private Car Sharing Program1.	A reduction in the number of required parking spaces for residential units is allowed where an active on-site car-sharing program is made available for the exclusive use of residents.2.	The parking requirements for all dwelling units may be reduced by 5 spaces for each car-share vehicle provided. If required, visitor spaces cannot be substituted.E.	Tree Preservation1.	Minimum required parking may be reduced by one parking space for each tree 12 inches in diameter or larger that is preserved within the parking lot or elsewhere on the development site within 50 feet of the parking area. The preserved trees shall be specified on the recorded plat.Sec. 7.1.5. Additional Vehicle Parking ProvisionsA.	Shared Parking1.	An applicant may request shared parking to meet the minimum vehicle parking requirements for mixed use projects or for multiple uses that are located near one another and which have different peak parking demands or operating hours.2.	Applicants wishing to use shared parking as a means of reducing the total number of required spaces may submit a shared parking analysis using the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Model (latest edition). The analysis must be prepared and sealed by a registered engineer in the State of North Carolina with transportation expertise. 3.	The shared parking analysis must establish that the subject uses will use the shared parking spaces at different times of the day, week or month. A shared parking analysis shall at a minimum address:a.	The intensity and type of activities and the composition of uses;b.	Hours of operation of the uses;c.	The rate of turnover for proposed spaces;d.	Distances of shared parking spaces from the uses they serve; ande.	The anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for the site.4.	Reserved parking spaces for a specific tenant or dwelling unit may not be included in the shared parking calculation.B.	Remote Parking1.	Required parking spaces may be permitted on a separate site from the site on which the principal use is located if the remote parking complies with the following.


























District/Frontage
 Parking Lot 
must be within 
 
DX-
 2,640 feet 
 
Urban Frontage 
 1,320 feet
 
-TOD
 1,320 feet
 
RX-, OP-, OX-, NX-, CX-, IX-
 660 feet
 
IH, CMP
 660 feet
 
CP, AP, R-MP
 Not allowed
 
R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6, R-10
 By special use permit
 


2.	
Remote parking spaces are measured in walking distance from the nearest point of the remote parking area to the primary entrance of the use served.

3.	
Additional requirements for remote parking lots are provided under Sec. 6.4.7.C.C.	Valet ParkingValet parking may be permitted as a means of satisfying the parking requirements where all of the following standards have been met:1.	An attendant is provided to park vehicles during all business hours of the use utilizing the valet parking.2.	An equivalent number of valet spaces are available to replace the number required on-site parking spaces.3.	Valet spaces do not require individual striping and may take into account the mass parking of vehicles.D.	Tandem Parking1.	Tandem parking is allowed for single-unit, two-unit and multi-unit living.2.	Two parking spaces in tandem must have a combined minimum dimension of 8.5 feet in width by 36 feet in length.3.	Both parking spaces in tandem must be assigned to the same dwelling unit.4.	Tandem parking may not be used to provide guest parking.E.	Reserved ParkingParking spaces may be reserved for a specific tenant or unit, provided that the following standards are not exceeded.1.	Residentiala.	One space per efficiency or 1-bedroom multi-living dwelling unit.b.	Two spaces per two-bedroom or greater multi-living dwelling unit.2.	NonresidentialNo more than 1/3 of the total provided spaces may be reserved.F.	Queuing Areas1.	Adequate space must be made available on-site for the stacking, storage and queuing of vehicles.2.	Vehicles using drive-thru facilities may not encroach on or interfere with the public use of streets and sidewalks by vehicles or pedestrians. 3.	A restaurant with drive-thru facilities must provide at least 8 queuing spaces for vehicles when 1 drive-thru lane exists and 6 spaces at each drive-thru when more than 1 lane exists. 4.	A bank with drive-thru facilities must provide at least 3 queuing spaces per drive-thru lane.Sec. 7.1.6. Vehicle Parking Location and LayoutA.	Location1.	Required parking spaces must be located on the same lot they are intended to serve, except where specifically allowed under Sec. 7.1.5.B.2.	All on-site parking must be arranged so that no vehicle is forced onto any public street, not including an alley, to gain access from 1 parking aisle to another parking aisle.B.	Layout1.	Parking spaces and drive aisles must meet the required dimensional standards. Parking spaces and drive aisles using dimensions other than those specified may be approved if prepared and sealed by a registered engineer in the State of North Carolina with expertise in parking facility design, subject to a determination by the Development Services Director.2.	Within a structured parking facility, up to 30% of the total parking spaces provided may be compact spaces. No more than 2 compact parking spaces may abut each other. Compact spaces can be reduced to 7.5 feet in width and 15 feet in length. All compact parking spaces must be clearly and visibly striped and labeled for compact car use only. Other than the stall width and length reduction, compact parking spaces must comply with all other parking layout standards.Sec. 7.1.7. Vehicle Parking Lot LandscapingA.	.Intent1.	The intent of the vehicle parking lot landscaping requirements is to minimize the visual impacts of large areas of vehicular parking as viewed by the public right-of-way, minimize the impacts of stormwater runoff, and dissipate the effects of the urban heat island.2.	 A well designed parking lot utilizes landscaped islands and clear delineations to break the parking lot into smaller segments. 3.	Tree and shrub plantings should not interfere with the pedestrian circulation on the site. B.	Applicability1.	This section applies to all on-site surface parking areas with more than 10 spaces. For purposes of this section, multiple platted lots contained on a single site plan and any separate parking areas connected with drive aisles are considered a single parking area.2.	At least 1 shade tree must be planted in each surface parking area with 10 spaces or less.3.	In an Urban Frontage or -TOD, this section applies only to on-site surface parking areas with more than 40 parking spaces. At least 1 tree must be planted for every 10 spaces in each surface parking area with 40 spaces or less.4.	All surface parking areas of any size within any district with frontage on any portion of a street right-of-of way (not including an alley) must be screened along the street edge by a Type C3 street protective yard under Sec. 7.2.4.B.





















C.	
Perimeter Islands
1.	
A landscape perimeter island shall be provided along primary internal access drives. 

2.	
A landscaped perimeter island must be a minimum of 5 feet wide, landscaped with shrubs installed at a rate of 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet that under typical conditions can be expected to reach a height and spread of 3 feet within three years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches tall when planted. In lieu of planting a hedge, a wall at least three feet in height may be installed. GSI practices may be located in perimeter islands if part of an approved stormwater management plan for the site. The shrub requirements may be met within GSI practices.

3.	
A perimeter island may also serve as the location for a sidewalk connecting the use and the street. In such case, the sidewalk shall be a minimum of 6 feet wide and the remaining planting area shall be no less than five feet wide.



D.	
Interior Islands
1.	
A landscaped interior island must be provided every 10 parking spaces. Interior islands must be distributed evenly throughout the parking area.

2.	
An interior island must be a minimum of 8 feet in width and be a minimum of 300 square feet in area.

3.	
All rows of parking must terminate with a landscaped interior terminal island. No more than 30 parking spaces may be located between terminal islands.

4.	
Interior islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees.

5.	
GSI practices may be located in interior islands and terminal islands if part of an approved stormwater management plan for the site. Required shade trees may be placed within GSI practices. A maintenance plan must be approved for the GSI practices according to Sec. 9.2.2.D.



E.	
Median Islands
1.	
A landscape median island must be provided between every 6 single parking rows. 

2.	
A landscape median island must be a minimum of 6 feet wide.

3.	
A median island may also serve as the location for a sidewalk connecting the parking and the use served by the parking area. The sidewalk must be a minimum of 5 feet wide. If trees or shrubs are planted in the median, the median with must be expanded by at least five feet.

4.	
Median islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees.

5.	
GSI practices may be located in median islands if part of an approved stormwater management plan for the site. Required shade trees and required shrubs may be placed within GSI practices. A maintenance plan must be approved for the GSI practices according to Sec. 9.2.2.D.



F.	
Tree Coverage
1.	
Each interior island (and terminal interior island) must include at least 1 shade tree. 

2.	
In no case shall there be less than 1 shade tree for every 2,000 square feet of parking area, except in an Urban Frontage or -TOD, where there shall be no less than 1 shade tree for every 4,000 square feet of parking area. 



G.	
Parking Lot Lighting
1.	
Lighting fixtures must be located at least 20 feet from a tree, measured from the pole of the lighting fixture to the trunk of the tree.

2.	
Additional requirements for lighting fixtures in parking lots are listed in Article 7.4. Site LightingH.	Tractor Trailer Staging, Loading and Parking in IH DistrictsThe parking lot landscaping provisions do not apply to areas specifically designated for tractor trailer staging and loading areas and tractor trailer parking areas provided the staging, loading or parking area is screened along the street edge by a Type C1 or C2 street protective yard as set forth in Sec. 7.2.4.B.




I.	
Administrative Alternate Findings


The Planning Director in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. may approve an administrative alternate subject to all of the following findings:a.	The approved administrative alternate meets the intent of the vehicle parking lot regulations;b.	The approved administrative alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans; andc.	The approved administrative alternate is considered equal or better to the standard.Sec. 7.1.8. Bicycle Parking FacilitiesA.	ExemptionsIn no case is a single use or single lot required to provide more than 30 bicycle parking spaces. A mixed use facility shall not be required to provide more than 50 bicycle parking spaces.B.	Required Types of Bicycle Parking Facilities1.	General ProvisionsBicycle parking may be provided through various types of facilities, provided the facility meets the following:a.	Bicycle racks are securely anchored, are easily usable with both U-locks and cable locks and support a bicycle at 2 points of contact to prevent damage to the bicycle wheels and frame. b.	Spacing of the racks shall provide clear and maneuverable access.c.	Where a bike can be locked on both sides without conflict, each side can be counted as a required space.d.	Facilities may be placed on private property or within the public right-of-way. Short-term and long-term facilities must comply with the Raleigh Street Design Manual.2.	Short-Term Bicycle ParkingShort-term bicycle parking must be publicly accessible and convenient. Short-term bicycle parking must be located no more than 100 feet from the building entrance the bicycle rack is intended to serve.3.	Long-Term Bicycle ParkingLong-term bicycle parking provides employees, students, residents, commuters and others who generally stay at a site for several hours a protected and secure place to park. Required long-term bicycle parking must meet the following standards.a.	Long-term bicycle parking must be covered and weather resistant.b.		Long-term bicycle parking must be located no more than 300 feet from the building entrance or 660 feet from a parking structure.Sec. 7.1.9. Vehicle Loading AreasA.	Loading Not RequiredIf determined by the Development Services Director, adequate space must be made available on-site for the unloading and loading of goods, materials, items or stock for delivery and shipping.B.	LocationIf a loading area is provided, it must meet the following standards.1.	Loading areas must be located to the side or rear of buildings and be screened as set forth in Sec. 7.2.5.B.











2.	
Loading areas cannot be located in an A or B neighborhood transition zone.

3.	
With the exception of areas specifically designated by the City, loading and unloading activities are not permitted in the public right-of-way.

4.	
Loading and unloading activities may not encroach on or interfere with the use of sidewalks, drive aisles, queuing areas and parking areas by vehicles or pedestrians. 


Sec. 7.1.10. 
Parking for Single- and Two-Unit Living


All off street parking and driveway areas located in the front yard area that serve single- and two-unit living must meet the following standards.
1.	
Parking and driveway areas must be constructed of permanent non-erodible  surface treatment as follows:
a.	
porous or semi-porous monolythic or paver materials; 

b.	
masonry or concrete pavers; 

c.	
poured concrete or asphalt; or 

d.	
crushed stone or crush and run installed with a minimum depth of 4 inches.



2.	
Crushed stone or crush and run must be delineated with anchored man-made material or natural landscape edging materials that define and contain the stone or crush and run. 

3.	
These regulations shall apply to manufactured homes. 


Article 7.2. 
Landscaping and Screening

Sec. 7.2.1. 
Intent

A.	
The intent of the landscaping regulations is to provide meaningful and well designed screening and buffering. 

B.	
 Tree and shrub plantings should not interfere with the safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site.  

Sec. 7.2.2. 
Applicability

A.	
General


No permit for the construction, reconstruction, extension, repair or alteration of any building, structure or use of land and no building or land or any part of any building or land, may be occupied or used until landscaping has been provided in accordance with the requirements of this UDO.
B.	
Additions
1.	
A building or site may be renovated or repaired without providing additional landscaping, provided there is no increase in gross floor area or improved site area.

2.	
When a building or site is increased in gross floor area or improved site area by up to 25%, landscaping is required for the additional floor or site area only.

3.	
When the gross floor area or improved site area is increased by more than 25%, both the existing use and the additional floor or site area must conform to the landscaping requirements of this UDO.



C.	
Change in Use


A change in use does not trigger application of this section except when there is a specific use standard requiring landscaping for the new use.
D.	
Landscaping Limit
1.	
In no case shall required landscaping (parking lot landscaping, protective yards and tree conservation areas) exceed 30% of the total lot area, except in Watershed Protection Overlay Districts.

2.	
Where the required landscaping exceeds 30%, the individual requirements can be reduced on a pro rata basis to achieve the 30%.

3.	
The required tree conservation areas cannot be reduced by more than 50%. 



Sec. 7.2.3. 
Administrative Alternate Findings


The Planning Director in accordance with Sec. 10.2.17. may 

approve an administrative alternate subject to all of the following findings:A.	The approved administrative alternate meets the intent of the landscaping and screening regulations; B.	The approved administrative alternate conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans; and C.	The approved administrative alternate is considered equal to or better than the standard.Sec. 7.2.4. Protective Yards A.	Transitional Protective Yards1.	A transitional protective yard is required along perimeter lot lines:a.	For specific uses as set forth in Chapter 6. Use Regulations (type as specified); andb.	Where an IH District abuts any other district other than an IH District a Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard must be installed.2.	A transitional protective yard may be replaced with a tree conservation area that meets the requirements of Article 9.1. Tree Conservation.3.	GSI practices shall be allowed in Transitional Protective Yard Types A2, B1 and B2. In order to accommodate GSI practices the number of shrubs may be reduced in Protective Yards by 10%.B.	Street Protective Yard1.	A street protective yard is required along the edge of the street right-of-way:a.	For specific uses as set forth in Chapter 6. Use Regulations (type as specified); and b.	Where an IH District is across the street from any other district other than an IH District, a Type C1 or C2 street protective yard must be installed.2.	A required street protective yard may be replaced with a tree conservation area that meets the requirements of Article 9.1. Tree Conservation3.	The protective yards in Special Highway Overlay Districts 1 and 2 (Sec. 5.3.1.D.) take the place of any street protective yard required in Sec. 7.2.4.B. below.4.	GSI practices shall be allowed in Street Protective Yard Types C1, C2, and C3. In order to accommodate GSI practices the number of shrubs may be reduced in Protective Yards by ten (10) percent.C.	Location1.	Protective yards must be located within the outer perimeter of the lot, parallel to and extending to the property boundary line. A required protective yard must be provided along the entire frontage immediately abutting the property line.2.	The width of a protective yard is calculated on the average width per 100 feet or portion of protective yard. The minimum width of the protective yard at any one point shall not be less than one-half the required width of the protective yard.3.	A protective yard may not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated or reserved public right-of-way.4.	A protective yard is determined exclusive of any required setback; however, the required protective yard may be located wholly or partially within a required setback. D.	Encroachments 1.	Generala.	No building or structure on the subject site may be located closer than 10 feet to a protective yard.b.	Breaks for pedestrian and vehicle access are allowed in a protective yard.c.	The parking of vehicles and the placement of buildings or structures is prohibited in a protective yard. All parking and building setbacks apply.2.	WallsWalls in a protective yard must meet the following.a.	Walls must be closed and not exceed a maximum height of 8 feet.b.	Walls shall be compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.c.	Walls must be constructed of high quality materials including one or a combination of the following: decorative blocks; brick; stone; cast-stone; architectural block; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks; or glass block in a structurally safe and attractive condition.d.	No walls containing more than 50% exposed standard concrete masonry blocks are permitted, whether painted or not.e.	Alternative wall materials may be approved by the Development Services Director.f.	No wall can be located within any tree conservation area.g.	No wall can be located within any City of Raleigh utility easement without prior written approval of the Public Utilities Director.h.	No wall can be located within any required drainage easement without prior written approval of the Engineering Services Director.Cross reference: The Public Utilities Director may approve structures within City of Raleigh utility easements, Sec. 8-2012(d).3.	FencesFences in a protective yard must meet the following.a.	Fences must be closed and not exceed a maximum height of eight feet.b.	Fences must be constructed of wood, composite fencing or PVC vinyl with the finished face located towards the adjacent property.c.	Alternative fence materials may be approved by the Development Services Director.d.	No fence can be located within any tree conservation area.e.	No fence can be located within any City of Raleigh utility easement without prior written approval of the Public Utilities Director.f.	No fence can be located within any required drainage easement without prior written approval of the Engineering Services Director.Cross reference: The Public Utilities Director may approve structures within City of Raleigh utility easements, Sec. 8-2012(d).4.	BermsWhere allowed, a berm in a protective yard must meet the following.a.	A berm cannot be built in any protective yard whenever the protective yard is also a tree conservation area.b.	Berms shall have a minimum average height of 3 feet, measured perpendicular to the center of the crown.c.	The berm must contain a rounded crown suitable for planting and a stabilized side slope of no greater than three-to-one. A steeper side slope may be used in exceptional cases when all of the following are met: i.	This steeper slope is sufficiently stabilized; andii.	Physical constraints of the site prevent the use of a flatter slope.d.	The berm shall be planted with ¾ of the required number of shrubs.e.	In a C2 street protective yard, shrubs planted on a berm may have a lesser mature height; provided that the combined height of the berm and planting after 3 years is 5 feet.f.	Berms may be permitted to meander and may be permitted to be discontinuous when approved by the Development Services Director.5.	Grade Change a.	In lieu of a wall or fence, a natural or man-made grade separation of at least 6 feet in elevation may be provided.b.	The side slopes of the grade change cannot be greater than three feet of horizontal change for each foot of vertical rise.c.	The developing property must be located at an elevation lower than the property to be screened and the change in grade achieves a similar screening effect as the wall or fence.Sec. 7.2.5. ScreeningA.	Drive-Thru Facilities Where allowed, drive-thru windows and lanes must be designed to adhere to the following standards:1.	In the DX- District and on any Urban Frontage, drive-thru windows and lanes may not be placed between the right-of-way of the street and the associated building. Drive-thru windows and lanes associated with buildings must be placed to the side or rear of the building.2.	Where drive-thru windows and lanes are allowed to be placed between the right-of-way of the street and the associated building, the entire length of the drive-thru lane, located between the drive-thru lane and the adjacent right-of-way (not including an alley), must be screened.3.	Screening must be a continuous compact evergreen hedge. At the time of installation, such screening must be at least 36 inches in height and reach a height of 48 inches within 3 years of planting.4.	The following options may be used in lieu of compact evergreen hedge: (1) a combination of plants within GSI practices proposed to be part of an approved stormwater management plan and evergreen plants outside such GSI practices that together, at the time of planting, provide screening at least 36 inches above the level of the ground adjacent to the GSI practice, and reach a height at least 48 inches above adjacent ground level within 3 years of planting; or (2) a screening wall with a minimum height of 48 inches may be installed. The wall must be compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material, and color.5.	No drive-thru window is permitted on the side of a building facing any Residential District.B.	Loading Areas1.	Outdoor loading areas 50 square feet or larger not screened by an intervening building must be screened from view from adjacent property or public street right-of-way for their entire length.2.	Enclosed loading areas must be screened with a roll down door or other opaque screen.3.	Unenclosed loading areas must be screened by a wall totaling 8 feet in height. Walls shall be compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.4.	Planting material must be provided so that no more than two-thirds of the surface area of the screening wall is visible at the time of maturity of the plants. 5.	Screening may also be accomplished with evergreen plant material that can be expected to reach a height of 8 feet with a spread of 4 feet within three years of planting.C.	Service Areas1.	Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas shall be located to the side or rear of buildings and must be screened from view from adjacent property or public street right-of-way (not including an alley).2.	Service areas that are fully integrated into a building must be screened with a roll down door or other opaque screen.3.	Service areas that are not integrated into a building shall be screened from three sides by a wall at least 6 feet in height and on the fourth side by a solid gate at least 6 feet in height. The gate and wall shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when trash pick-ups occur. The wall and gate shall be compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.D.	Mechanical Equipment1.	ExemptionsFree-standing or roof-mounted sustainable energy systems are exempt from these screening requirements.2.	Roof-Mounted Equipmenta.	Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from ground level view from adjacent property or adjacent public street right-of-way (not including an alley).b.	New buildings shall provide a parapet wall or other architectural element that screens roof-mounted equipment from view.c.	For existing buildings with no or low parapet walls, roof-mounted equipment shall be screened on all sides by an opaque screen compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.3.	Wall-Mounted Equipmenta.	Wall-mounted equipment shall not be located on any surface that directly faces a public right-of-way (not including an alley).b.	Wall-mounted equipment located on any surface that is visible from a public right-of-way (not including an alley) must be fully screened by landscaping or an opaque screen compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.4.	Ground-Mounted Equipmenta.	Ground-mounted equipment screening shall be as high as the highest point of the equipment being screened. b.	Screening shall consist of landscaping or an opaque screen compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.E.	Utility Service Areas1.	Utility service areas located outside of the public right-of-way that exceed 42 inches in height and 42 inches in any other dimension must be screened from the public right-of-way. 2.	Screening shall consist of landscaping or a wall or fence compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.3.	Utility service areas must be located an adequate distance from the public right-of-way to allow for any required screening to be installed without encroaching into the public right-of-way. 4.	Screening is not required for utility service areas located more than 50 feet from the public right-of-way. Sec. 7.2.6. Stormwater Retention Ponds & Detention BasinsA.	ApplicabilityAll stormwater retention ponds and detention basins permitted, constructed or modified to a cumulative extent greater than 50% of their original size shall be screened for their entire length as set forth in Sec. 7.2.6.C.When amenity features are provided as set forth in Sec. 7.2.6.B., no screening of the stormwater control facility is required.B.	Amenity ProvisionsPermanent stormwater retention ponds and detention basins may be supplemented with certain features which enable the facility to function as an amenity in addition to its primary function as a stormwater device. In situations where amenity features are provided consistent with these provisions, no screening of the stormwater control facility from on-site or off-site views shall be required. In the event a permanent stormwater retention pond or detention basin loses a feature by which the facility qualifies as an amenity, the feature shall be restored within 30 days or the facility shall be subject to the screening provisions listed in Sec. 7.2.6.C.1.	Basic Amenity FeaturesTo qualify as an amenity, the following basic amenity features must be provided within any stormwater control facility.a.	Integration of the permanent stormwater retention pond or detention basin into the design of public areas within the site or development through the use of appropriate placement, common building materials, textures, features or other treatments intended to lend architectural significance to the stormwater control facility. For the purposes of this section, "integration" shall mean at least two of the following 3 elements:i.	Proximate placement of the stormwater facility to the principal structure;ii.	Provision of pedestrian access to the facility through installation of a delineated walk or trail from the principal structure; oriii.	Utilization of similar planting materials and building materials as used in the principal structure.b.	No fence may be installed around the permanent stormwater retention pond or detention basin that acts to prevent pedestrian access to the facility from the site or development where it is located; in cases where a fence is needed to restrict access, the fence shall be screened in accordance with the screening provisions described in Sec. 7.2.6.C.c.	Rock riprap or other "hard armoring" is limited to 10% or less of the entire surface area of the stormwater control facility above the low pool line.d.	Permanent stormwater retention ponds and detention basins must incorporate features designed to reduce mosquito populations through provision of non-chemical mosquito mitigation measures, including but not limited to: cyclical alteration of the pond level, installation of aeration/agitation features to disrupt larval growth, providing nesting boxes for mosquito-predacious birds or bats or stocking ponds with mosquito-predacious fish (e.g. Gambusia affinis holbrooki).2.	Supplemental Amenity FeaturesIn addition to the basic requirements described above, a permanent stormwater retention pond or detention basin must also provide supplemental features to be considered an amenity. The types of supplemental amenity features differ based upon the type of stormwater control facility.a.	Permanent Retention (Wet) PondsTo be considered as an amenity feature, permanent retention ponds must;i.	Retain water within a permanent pool;ii.	Maintain slopes of 4:1 or shallower to a distance of 10 feet below the median pool line (beyond which slopes may become steeper); alternatively, a retaining wall may be incorporated into a portion of the facility, provided the design of walls are compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color;iii.	Include horizontal curves or other sculptural elements within the shape of the facility so as to avoid a simple square or round shape; and

iv.	Provide at least two of the following 4 features:a)	Inclusion of an active water feature (i.e., aerator/fountain/waterfall) within or adjacent to a permanent pool;b)	Pedestrian access trails to and around the stormwater control facility from the existing proposed pedestrian network associated with the site or development. Trails are not required to meet the minimum specifications for sidewalks or multipurpose trails as described within the City's standard specifications and details and may be constructed of any discernible, leveled, and stable surface material, including but not limited to: brick or masonry, gravel, mulch, wood chips, mowed grass or low groundcover;c)	Provision of riparian plant materials throughout the stormwater control facility to prevent erosion and add visual interest and additional perimeter plantings consisting of at minimum 3  understory trees or 2 shade trees totaling 8 inches in caliper at time of planting, and four shrubs for every 100 linear feet equivalent to the pond's maximum pool circumference and located no more than 75 feet from the pond's maximum pool line; ord)	Inclusion of other permanent, pedestrian-oriented features, including but not limited to: seating, dining tables and mounted trash cans, in areas around or proximate to the stormwater control facility.b.	Detention (Dry) BasinsTo be considered as an amenity feature, detention ponds must:i.	Not contain water on a permanent basis;ii.	Provide a 100% vegetative cover capable of withstanding extended periods of inundation, except in spaces designed for specific recreational uses (e.g., baseball fields);iii.	Maintain slopes of 4:1 or shallower; alternatively, a retaining wall may be incorporated into a portion of the facility, provided the design of  provided the design of walls are compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color; and

iv.	Provide at least 2 of the following 3 features:a)	Pedestrian access trails to the stormwater control facility from the existing and/or proposed pedestrian network associated with the site or development. Trails are not required to meet the minimum specifications for sidewalks or multipurpose trails as described within the City's standard specifications and details and may be constructed of any discernible, leveled, and stable surface material, including but not limited to: brick or masonry, gravel, mulch, wood chips, mowed grass; b)	Inclusion of other permanent, pedestrian-oriented features, including but not limited to: seating, dining tables and mounted trash cans, in areas around or proximate to the stormwater control facility; orc)	Grading and slopes of 8:1 or shallower which will allow utilization of the facility as an area for recreation when not in use as a detention facility (except on the dam structure and as is necessary to tie the dam back to existing grades); alternatively, a retaining wall may be incorporated into a portion of the facility, provided the design of walls are compatible with the principal building in terms of texture, quality, material and color.3.	IncentivesWhen a permanent stormwater retention pond or detention basin provides amenity features in compliance with the minimum requirements of this UDO, then the following provisions may also apply:a.	The permanent stormwater retention pond and detention basin and related facilities, including amenity features, may be placed within required landscaping areas, including but not limited to: street protective yards, transitional protective yards and parking lot landscaping areas,  (except in tree conservation areas adjoining thoroughfares, within areas zoned for resource management, tree protection areas and in natural protective yards); andb.	When a permanent stormwater retention pond or detention basin is located within a required landscaping area, the portion of land associated with or adjacent to the stormwater control facility is only required to meet 80% of the minimum planting requirements of the required landscaping area.C.	Screening RequirementsWhen amenity features are not provided as set forth in Sec. 7.2.6.B., screening of the stormwater control facility is required as set forth below.1.	All vegetative screening shall be 75% locally-adapted evergreen species. 2.	All vegetative material shall be planted so as to attain a screen occupying at least 75% of a vertical plane around the perimeter of the facility to an average mature height of 6 feet above grade.  3.	Screening shall be required around the base of the dam structure (as applicable), but not on the dam structure, with those plant materials in immediate proximity to the dam characterized by shallow, non-invasive root systems. 4.	Screening shall not be required within required facility inlets or facility outlets or within a maintenance access path provided that such path does not exceed 12 feet in width; in all other instances, at an average mature height of planting, the maximum open horizontal space between vegetative screening materials shall not be more than 2 feet in width. 5.	Vegetative material composing the screen shall be selected and installed so as to exhibit variety in texture, color, spread and height by using ornamental or deciduous shade trees in combination with evergreen materials. 6.	In some cases, vegetative material may be placed in clusters or groups to add additional visual interest as well as to achieve intermittent levels of vertical height; and 7.	In situations where the stormwater control facility utilizes a fence, all vegetative material associated with screening the facility shall be located outside the fence. 8.	In situations where a fence and gate are proposed, the fence and gate shall be colored black, forest green, dark brown or similar dark color, unless the fence is constructed of masonry, wood or similar natural material, in which case it may be left to weather naturally. Sec. 7.2.7. Design and InstallationA.	Certificate of Compliance Required1.	The Development Services Director cannot issue a certificate of compliance until all landscaping has been installed in accordance with the requirements of this UDO.2.	A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued when the Development Services Director determines that due to the unavailability of plant material or weather concerns, planting landscaping would jeopardize the health of plant materials for a period of up to 1 year following the date of application for a certificate of compliance. The applicant shall make the following arrangements to secure a temporary certificate of compliance.a.	Produce a contract binding for 1 year from the date approved by the City, for the completion of the landscape work. Such contract shall specify that the work shall be completed before or during the year immediately following the date of application for a certificate of compliance. The City shall not be a party or a third party beneficiary to the contract.b.	The applicant shall also agree in writing that they, their successors or assigns, shall provide the required planting within the one-year period, as a condition for obtaining a certificate of compliance for the principal use so long as the principal use shall continue. The applicant shall also agree that the principal use shall be discontinued if the required planting is not provided. Violations of these provisions shall constitute an unauthorized illegal occupancy of the principal use.B.	Sight Triangle 1.	Landscaping shall not obstruct the views of motorists using any street, driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection. 2.	All landscaping installations must comply with the sight triangle requirements of the Raleigh Street Design Manual. C.	Plant Material1.	General Provisionsa.	Plant materials must be hardy to zone 7 in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Plant Hardiness Zone Map.b.	Plant materials must be able to survive on natural rainfall once established with no loss of health.c.	Tree height is measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the main stem.d.	Trees cannot be planted within a tree conservation area or the critical root zone of an existing tree.2.	Shade Treesa.	All shade trees planted to meet the landscaping requirements must be a locally adapted species with an expected mature height of 35 feet or greater and an expected mature crown spread of at least 30 feet or greater unless subject to an overhead power line in which case the mature height may be less. b.	All shade trees planted to meet the landscaping requirements must have a minimum caliper of 3 inches and be at least 10 feet tall at time of planting. 3.	Understory Treesa.	Understory trees planted to meet the landscaping requirements must be a locally-adapted species with an expected mature height of at least 15 feet and an expected mature crown spread of at least 15 feet.b.	Single-stem understory trees planted to meet the landscaping requirements must have a minimum caliper of 1½ inches and be at least 6 feet tall at time of planting. c.	Multi-stem understory trees planted to meet the landscaping requirements must be at least 6 feet tall at time of planting. 4.	Additional Requirements for Trees in a Protective Yard a.	In a protective yard, 50% of required trees shall be locally-adaptive evergreen species, except where an approved GSI practice is within a protective yard. b.	Trees shall be distributed so that there are no horizontal gaps between trees greater than 30 feet, measured along the property line.5.	Shrubs a.	Parking AreaIn a parking area, all shrubs planted to meet the landscaping requirements shall be of a species that under typical conditions can be expected to reach a height and spread of 3 feet within three years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches tall when planted.b.	Protective Yardi.	In a protective yard, all shrubs planted to meet the landscaping requirements shall be evergreen and be of a species that under typical conditions can be expected to reach a height and spread of three feet within 3 years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches tall when planted.ii.	Shrubs planted in a Type C2 street protective yard shall be of species that under typical conditions can be expected to reach a height and spread of 5 feet within three years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet tall when planted.iii.	In a street protective yard, shrub planting must form at least 1 continuous row of shrubs spaced five feet on center across the entire protective yard except for driveways. iv.	Shrubs cannot be planted within the critical root zone of any tree.v.	Where a protective yard is also a tree conservation area, shrubs must be planted adjacent to and outside the tree conservation area.vi.	To accommodate multi-functional GSI practices as part of an approved stormwater management plan, the number of shrubs may be reduced in Protective Yards by 10%, non-evergreen species may be used in lieu of up to 35% of evergreen shrubs, and all shrubs may be 24 inches when planted.6.	Planting in Easements No required landscaping or screening shall be planted inside utility and drainage easements, excluding overhead easements, without the consent of the City and the easement holder. D.	Maintenance of Landscaping 1.	ResponsibilityThe owner or tenant is responsible for maintaining all required landscaping in good health. Any dead, unhealthy or missing landscaping must be replaced with landscaping that conforms to this UDO within 30 days (or within 180 days where weather concerns would jeopardize the health of plant materials). In the event that required landscape is severely damaged due to an unusual weather occurrence or other act of nature, the owner or tenant may have 2 years to replace the required landscaping.2.	Soil ErosionAll planting areas must be stabilized from soil erosion immediately upon planting and must be maintained for the duration of the use. 3.	Pruning and Trimming a.	All required landscaping shall be allowed to reach its required size and shall be maintained at that required size.b.	 Except for trimming and pruning done in strict accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of a permit issued by the Parks and Cultural Resources Department or pruning and trimming done under an issued permit in strict accordance with the line clearance policies and standards governing such activities established pursuant to Part 9, chapter 8, required landscaping shall not be cut or excessively trimmed or otherwise damaged so that their natural form is impaired. c.	A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of a minimum of $1,000 for the first tree plus $100 per caliper inch of any other tree unlawfully pruned damaged or excessively trimmed. d.	This civil penalty shall be processed as set forth in Sec. 10.4.2. In addition to this civil penalty, if more than 50% of the crown of a tree is removed within a continuous five-year period or more than 40% of the critical root zone of the tree is subjected to tree disturbing activity or if more than one-third of the circumference of the tree is exposed by pruning cuts, the owner of real property, where a violation has occurred, shall replace each unlawfully pruned or other mechanically wounded, damaged, excessively trimmed or removed tree with a tree or trees of equal diameter. e.	Any replacement tree shall have a minimum caliper of three inches and be at least 10 feet tall at time of planting. Any replacement tree not planted in the original location shall be planted in a planting area of at least 200 square feet in area with minimum dimension of 10 feet. f.	If the property of which the violation has occurred fails to contain sufficient land area to replant the required replacement trees and replacement trees cannot be planted on adjoining street right-of-way, then in lieu of such replacement trees, a fee equal to $100 per caliper inch of replacement trees shall be paid to the City. g.	The Parks and Cultural Resources Director may require crown restoration and crown reduction for any unlawfully pruned damaged or excessively trimmed tree. All such corrective pruning shall be done under the supervision of a certified arborist.4.	Excessively TrimmedThe pruning, cutting or otherwise damaging of the natural form of a tree when it meets one or more of the following.a.	Removes more than 25% of the crown system of a tree within a continuous 5-year period.b.	Removes, cuts or covers more than 25% of the root system of a tree within a continuous five-year period.c.	Fails to conform to the pruning cuts methods set forth in the current edition of "Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices" of the American National Standards Institute.d.	Is made for a purpose other than "hazard pruning," or "utility pruning," or "maintenance pruning" as set forth in the current edition of "Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices" of the American National Standards Institute.e.	Is crown reduction, heading, vista pruning or pollarding as set forth in the current edition of "Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices" of the American National Standards Institute.E.	Credit for Existing Vegetation1.	Existing trees and shrubs that meet the requirements of this Article may be preserved to satisfy the landscaping requirements.2.	Credit toward the required number of trees or shrubs will be given on a tree-for-tree basis for each preserved tree or shrub. Where existing native vegetation does not meet the required landscaping standards, landscaping that meets the requirements of this Article must be installed.3.	No credit is allowed for any tree or shrub if the tree or shrub is unhealthy or dead or is hazardous. The death of or replacement of any preserved tree or shrub which was used for credit requires the owner to plant new trees equal to the number of credited trees; such plantings must meet the requirements of this Article. 4.	In the event that existing native habitat or vegetation has been credited and is subsequently removed or dies, it shall be replaced with landscaping that meets the requirements of this Article.5.	Supplemental landscaping may be required, if it can be reasonably inferred that after five years, the existing native habitat or vegetation will not continually provide a year-round foliage screen between properties.6.	The critical root zone of each preserved tree must be entirely protected with no tree disturbing activity within any critical root zone.7.	During construction, tree protection fences must be used.F.	Replacement by CondemnorWhenever any condemnor acquires property through eminent domain it shall be the responsibility of the condemnor to replace, in accordance with the provisions of this UDO, those complying elements which were removed unless a less stringent standard is required. Sec. 7.2.8. Walls and FencesA.	Applicability The following requirements apply to walls and fences located outside of a protective yard or required screening area.B.	General Standards 1.	Fences and walls must be constructed of high quality materials including 1 or a combination of the following: decorative blocks; brick; stone; cast-stone; architectural block; split-faced block; stucco over standard concrete masonry blocks; glass block; wood; wrought iron; composite fencing; wire; PVC vinyl; aluminum; metal or other material approved by the Development Services Director.2.	No wall or fence can be located within any tree conservation area.3.	No wall or fence can be located within any City of Raleigh utility easement without prior written approval of the Public Utilities Director.4.	No wall or fence can be located within any required drainage easement without prior written approval of the Engineering Services Director.5.	Barbed wire or concertina wire may be allowed in accordance with Sec. 13-3011.6.	Except in an IH district, chain-link fences are not allowed in any front or side street setback.7.	The maximum length of a continuous, unbroken and uninterrupted fence or wall plane shall be 100 feet. Breaks shall be provided through the use of columns, landscaped areas, transparent sections or a change in material.8.	Except in an IH district, a wall or fence not more than 6 and one half feet in height may be located in a front or side street setback, provided the opacity of the wall or fence above 4 feet in height does not exceed 50%.9.	A wall or fence may not exceed 8 feet in height in a side or rear setback unless it is located adjacent to a street, in which case it may be no more than 6 and one half feet in height, provided the opacity of the wall or fence above 4 feet in height does not exceed 50%.Cross reference: The Public Utilities Director may approve structures within City of Raleigh utility easements, Sec. 8-2012(d).C.	Fences and Walls Adjacent to Thoroughfares1.	A fence or wall located within 20 feet of a Thoroughfare right-of-way shall either be less than 42 inches in height or situated at least 15 feet from the edge of the right-of-way and be screened with evergreen planting materials, so that no more than one-fourth of the fence or wall surface area will be visible from the Thoroughfare within 3 years of erection of the fence or wall. 2.	All fences and walls that are more than 42 inches in height and are located between 20 and 40 feet from any Thoroughfare right-of-way shall be installed with planting materials, so that no more than one-third of the fence or wall surface area will be visible from the Thoroughfare within three years of erection of the fence or wall. 40% of this plant material may be deciduous. Decorative fences that are more then 50% open shall be exempt from these provisions.D.	Retaining WallsRetaining walls that are located within 30 feet of a public sidewalk shall be required to adhere to the following.1.	A freestanding retaining wall may not exceed a continuous, uninterrupted height of 10 feet. Additional height above 10 feet may be permitted, provided the wall contains a minimum 2-foot step back for each additional 10 feet of wall height. A type C2 Street Protective Yard shall be required for any freestanding retaining wall of at least 10 feet in height. Where the retaining wall gains additional height with a step back, the step back area shall provide the quantity of shrubs equal to a type C3 Street Protective Yard.2.	This regulation shall not apply to walls associated with culverts or stream crossings or to transportation improvements, such as bridge overpass structures for streets or railroads.3.	A building foundation wall that is integrated into an apartment, general, civic, or mixed use building type and facing any primary street must meet the following standards:a.	The transparency and blank wall standards enumerated for the building type shall apply to the building foundation wall.b.	When the building foundation wall is located within 30 feet of any primary street, it shall have a maximum height of 5 feet. Average grade shall not be applied in determining the maximum height in this instance.c.	The building foundation wall shall be constructed or finished with the same primary materials as the building.Sec. 7.2.9. Construction Safety Barrier FencesA.	IntentInfill construction can introduce potential negative effects on surrounding developed properties, especially when property lines are not clearly delineated. Where new construction has been permitted that involves trenching, excavation, or any other type of construction that disturbs land, a bright orange construction safety/barrier fence shall be installed to highlight the extent of construction activities of the affected area.B.	ApplicabilityConstruction Safety Barrier fencing shall be required when:1.	New construction activity adjacent to property zoned R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6 or R-10 disturbs more than 12,000 square feet of land area; or2.	New construction activity occurs within 10 feet of the property line of an adjoining developed property zoned R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6 or R-10. A construction safety barrier fence shall not be required on the developing property when the adjacent property is owned by the same entity or person.C.	General Standards1.	The construction safety barrier fencing shall be installed prior to the start of any land disturbing, demolition or construction activity on the property.2.	The construction safety barrier fence shall be orange in color and a minimum height of four feet.3.	The construction safety barrier fence shall be installed on the developing property and located one foot off the property line directly adjacent to the construction activity.4.	A sign shall be posted on the construction safety barrier fence stating "Adjacent Property/No Trespassing," in both Spanish and English.5.	The construction safety barrier fencing may be temporarily removed during the construction process provided it is replaced at the end of each day.6.	If a silt fence is required along the property line the construction safety barrier fencing is not required.7.	The construction safety barrier fencing shall be maintained in proper condition and remain in place until the construction is completed and a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.Article 7.3. SignsSec. 7.3.1. ApplicabilityNo sign may be altered, replaced, converted, changed or otherwise modified except in accordance with the requirements of this UDO.Sec. 7.3.2. Signs Allowed by DistrictSigns are allowed by district as set forth in the table below. 




















































































































RESIDENTIAL
 MIXED USE (NO FRONTAGE)
 SPECIAL 
 FRONTAGE
 Definition/ 
Standards
 
R-1
 R-2
 R-4
 R-6
 R-10
 RX-
 OP-
 OX-
 NX-
 CX-
 DX-
 IX-
 CM
 AP
 IH
 R-MP
 CMP
 -PW
 -DE
 -PL
 -GR
 -UL
 -UG
 -SH
 

Building Signs 
 
Wall Sign
 --
 --
 --
 --
 --
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 --
 --
 P
 --
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 P
 Sec. 7.3.4.Projecting Sign----------PPPPPPP--------PPPPPPPPSec. 7.3.5.Awning, Gallery, Marquee Sign----------PPPPPPP--------PPPPPPPPSec. 7.3.6.Window Sign----------PPPPPPP----P--PPPPPPPPSec. 7.3.7.Ground SignsLow Profile ------------PPPP--P----P--PPPPP------Sec. 7.3.8.Medium Profile ----------------PP--P----P--PP------------Sec. 7.3.9.High Profile ----------------PP--P----P--PP------------Sec. 7.3.10.Tract Identification SignPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP--P--------Sec. 7.3.11.A-Frame Sign----------PPPPPPP--------P--PPPPPPSec. 7.3.12.Advertising SignsOff-Premise Sign----------------------P----P------------------Sec. 7.3.14.Vehicular Sign------------PPPPPPP--P------------------Key:  P  =  Sign Permitted     --  =  Sign Not PermittedSec. 7.3.3. Additional Sign TypesAdditional sign types may be allowed, requirements for additional sign types are located in Sec. 7.3.13.Sec. 7.3.4. Wall Signs
 
                          
                          
                          
 
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
 
                          
                         
 




A.	
Description


 
An on-premise sign attached flat to or mounted away from but parallel to the building wall, typically extending no more than 12 inches from the building wall. A sign permit is required for a wall sign.
 

B.	
Sign Area Allocation


 
Two square feet per lineal foot of each building wall facing a public street or a private drive if lot has no frontage on a public street. 
 

C.	
Height


 
1.	
No portion of a wall sign may extend above the roof line of a building without a parapet wall. 

2.	
No portion of a wall sign may extend 2 feet above the roof line of a building with a parapet wall, provided no portion of the sign extends above the parapet.

3.	
No wall sign may extend above the lower eave line of a building with a pitched roof.


 


D.	
Retaining Wall Signage in DX-


 
A sign may be mounted to a functional retaining wall in the DX- District, typically extending no more than 12 inches from the face of the retaining wall. Wall signage may not extend above the top of the retaining wall. Allow­able wall signage allocated to the retaining wall in lieu of the building wall shall be in accordance with Sec. 7.3.4.B.
 




Sec. 7.3.5. Projecting Signs

E.	
Description


 
An on-premise sign attached directly to a supporting building wall and intersecting the building wall at a right angle. A projecting sign typically extends more than 12 inches from the building wall and may be 2 or 3-dimensional. A sign permit is required for a projecting sign. 
 

F.	
Size


 
A projecting sign may not exceed 40 square feet in area. A projecting sign which is not internally illuminated and is suspended to allow the sign to swing due to wind action is not allowed to exceed 16 square feet in area.
 

G.	
Location


 
C1
 Signs per business (max per street frontage)
 1
 
C2
 Clear height (min)
 9'
 
C3
 Projection from wall (max)
 6'
 
C4
 Distance from curb (min)
 18"
 
C5
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with Council approval
 

-DE
 -PL
 -GR
 -UL
 -UG
 -SH
 

H.	
Frontage Standards


 
D1
 Ground story: Sign area per sign face (max)
 25 sf
 40 sf
 40 sf
 40 sf
 40 sf
 40 sf
 
D2
 Ground story: Height (max)
 5'
 8'
 8'
 8'
 8'
 8'
 
D1
 Upper story: Sign area per sign face (max)
 25 sf
 72 sf
 72 sf
 72 sf
 72 sf
 72 sf
 
D2
 Upper story: Height (max)
 5'
 12'
 12'
 12'
 12'
 12'
 

I.	
Miscellaneous 


 
1.	
Projecting signs erected at the intersection of building corners when the building corner adjoins the intersection of 2 streets may intersect at a 45 degree angle to the corner of the building, in which case only 1 projecting sign is allowed.

2.	
No projecting sign is allowed to extend above the roof line or the parapet wall.

3.	
Buildings with 2 or more stories may not have a projecting sign located higher than the second story or 24 feet, whichever is less.


 


Sec. 7.3.6. 
Awning, Gallery, Marquee Signs



A.	
Description


 
An on-premise sign attached flat to (or extending vertically upward or downward) from an awning, gallery or marquee. A sign permit is not required.
 

B.	
Location


 
B1
 Clear height (min)
 8'
 
B2
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with Council approval
 

C.	
Size


 
C1
 Area (max) 2 square feet per linear foot of each building wall facing a public street or facing a private access way if the subject property has no frontage on a public street.
 
C2
 No portion of the sign shall exceed a height of 36 inches above the height of the awning, gallery, marquee/canopy.
 
C3
 Height of letters (max) 
 18"
 

D.	
Miscellaneous 


 
Signs shall not extend outside the overall length or width of an awning, gallery or marquee or extend above the height of the building wall that the awning, gallery 
or marquee is attached. 
 


Sec. 7.3.7. 
Window Signs



A.	
Description


 
A window sign is an on-premise sign attached flat but parallel to the inside of a window or is within 12 inches of the inside of the window. A sign permit is not required.
 

B.	
Size


 
B1
 Area per business (max combination of all windows covered by window signs): 50% per side of the building facing along any street per floor and not less than 32 square feet per side of the building facing along any street  per floor.
 


Sec. 7.3.8. 
Low Profile Ground Signs


A.	
Description


 
A freestanding sign no more than 3½ feet in height on a supporting structure, post, mast or pole and not attached, supported or suspended to or from any building or structure. A sign permit is required for a ground sign.
 

B.	
Size 


 
B1
 Area (max)
 70 sf 
 
B2
 Height (max
 3.5'
 
B3
 Size of copy (min)
 4"
 
B4
 Lines of copy (max) 
 5
 
B5
 Length in an OP or OX- district (max)
 20'
 

C.	
Location 


 
C1
 Signs per site (max per street frontage)
 1
 
C2
 Additional signs for double frontage lots
 Allowed by Special Use Permit
 
C3
 Street frontage required (min)
 n/a
 
C4
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with Council approval
 



D.	
Miscellaneous 


 
All ground sign braces or uprights shall be self-supporting structures permanently attached to concrete foundations in or upon the ground. 
 




Sec. 7.3.9. Medium Profile Ground Signs

A.	
Description


 
A freestanding sign no more than 70 square feet in area erected on a supporting structure, mast, post or pole no more than 15 feet in height; or a freestanding sign no more than 100 square feet in area erected on a supporting structure, mast, post or pole no more than 10 feet in height. A ground sign is not attached, supported or suspended to or from any building or structure. A sign permit is required for a medium profile ground sign.
 

B.	
Size 


 
B1
 Option 1: Area (max)
 70 sf 
 
B2
 Option 1: Height (max)
 15'
 
B3
 Option 2: Area (max)
 100 sf 
 
B4
 Option 2: Height (max)
 10'
 
B5
 Size of copy (min)
 4"
 
B6
 Lines of copy (max) 
 5
 



C.	
Location 


 
C1
 Number of signs per site (max)
 1
 
C2
 Additional signs for double frontage lots
 Allowed by Special Use Permit
 
C3
 Street frontage required (min)
 100'
 
C4
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with Council approval
 

D.	
Miscellaneous 


 
All ground sign braces or uprights shall be self-supporting structures permanently attached to concrete foundations in or upon the ground. 
 




Sec. 7.3.10. High Profile Ground Signs

A.	
Description


 
A freestanding sign no more than 100 square feet in area erected on a supporting structure, mast, post or pole no more than 15 feet in height not attached, supported or suspended to or from any building or structure. A sign permit is required for a high profile ground sign.
 

B.	
Size 


 
B1
 Area (max)
 100 sf 
 
B2
 Height (max)
 15'
 
B3
 Size of copy (min)
 4"
 
B4
 Lines of copy (max) 
 5
 

C.	
Location 


 
C1
 Number of signs per site (max)
 1
 
C2
 Additional signs for double frontage lots
 Allowed by Special Use Permit
 
C3
 Street frontage required (min)
 200'
 
C4
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with Council approval
 



D.	
Miscellaneous 


 
All ground sign braces or uprights shall be self-supporting structures permanently attached to concrete foundations in or upon the ground. 
 




Sec. 7.3.11. Tract Identification Signs

A.	
Description


 
A freestanding ground sign identifying entry to a residential, commercial or mixed development or a nonresidential establishment in a residential district. A sign permit is required for a tract identification sign.
 

B.	
Size 


 
B1
 Copy area (max)
 16 sf 
 
B2
 Copy height (max)
 3.5'
 
B3
 Sign area (max)
 160 sf
 
B4
 Sign height (max) 
 6'
 

C.	
Location 


 
C1
 Number of signs per street frontage (max)
 1
 
C2
 Site with more than 400 feet in street frontage
 1 additional sign per frontage
 
C3
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with Council approval
 



D.	
Additional Rules in Mixed Use, IH, CMP District 


 
D1
 Size of development (min)
 2.5 acres
 
D2
 Lot width (min)
 60'
 
D3
 Number of establishments (min)
 3
 

E.	
Miscellaneous 


 
Identifying signs may be placed on a subdivision wall or fence provided that no part of the wall or fence exceeds 6 feet in height or may be placed on a retaining wall greater than 6 feet in height provided that no part of the sign exceeds a height of 5 feet. 
 




Sec. 7.3.12. A-Frame Signs

A.	
Description


 
A small unlit freestanding on-site portable ground sign that is displayed during business hours and removed when the business is closed. A sign permit is not required.
 

B.	
Size 


 
B1
 Area (max)
 6 sf 
 
B2
 Height (max)
 5'
 

C.	
Location 


 
C1
 Distance from main pedestrian entrance (max)
 5'
 
C2
 Clear pedestrian space 
 5'
 
C3
 ROW Encroachment 
 Allowed with minor encroachment
 
C4
 Number size per establishment (max)
 1
 



D.	
Miscellaneous 


 
1.	
Sidewalk signs must not interfere with pedestrian travel or encroach upon the required accessible path.

2.	
Sidewalk signs may only be displayed during business hours and must be removed when the business is closed.


 




Sec. 7.3.13. Special Sign Types
A.	
Announcement Signs


An announcement sign is a small on-premise ground sign permitted as use regulation for specific nonresidential uses in a Residential District as set forth in Chapter 6. Use RegulationsB.	Crown SignsAn on-premise wall sign located on buildings a least 200 feet in height.1.	In addition to a permitted wall sign, buildings greater than 200 feet in height may contain a crown sign. 2.	The amount of additional wall signage shall not exceed 4.70 square feet of signage per building side for each foot of building height over 200 feet tall up to a maximum of 750 square feet. 3.	Additional wall signage shall not be transferred from 1 building side to another. 4.	No crown sign shall exceed 750 square feet per sign. 5.	Only 1 crown sign shall be located on any 1 side of a building. 6.	The sign must be located at the top crown of the building and it shall not extend below the top of the upper floor of the building. 7.	The same copy must appear on all additional crown signs. 8.	All sign illumination shall be internal. 9.	Changeable copy is prohibited.10.	A crown sign shall contain no more than 1 line of copy, excluding symbols. C.	Changeable Copy SignsA sign on which copy is changed manually or automatically and copy is shown on the same sign face such as reader boards with changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels but not limited to the above. Poster panels and painted boards are not changeable copy signs. 1.	For any permitted wall, projecting, ground or tract identification sign up to 50% of the sign area may be changeable copy (automatic or manual).2.	For  tract identification the total area of the changeable copy cannot exceed 8 square feet per sign. Only 1 changeable copy sign may be erected and it must be physically part of that tract identification sign. 3.	No changeable copy sign may contain more than 3 horizontal pieces of information. 4.	Except changeable copy time and temperature signs, no changeable copy sign may change more than 4 times in any 24-hour period.  D.	Directional SignsA sign that orients pedestrian and vehicular traffic to different areas within a development of over 100 acres.1.	Directional signs are only allowed in developments that contain at least 100 acres. 2.	No sign permit shall be issued for a directional sign until a common signage plan has been approved as set forth in Sec. 7.3.16.H.3.	All directional signs shall be under the maintenance responsibility of a single association or other legal entity. 4.	If any common signage plan amendment is approved, all existing signs that do not comply with the new sign criteria shall be removed within 30 days of approval of such amendment. 5.	There shall be no more than 1 directional sign for every 1,000 feet of frontage along any thoroughfare, commercial or collector street. 6.	No directional sign shall exceed 7 feet in height and 35 square feet of sign area. 7.	The sign may include the name of the overall development and the type of land use subareas that is identified in the approved Master Plan. 8.	Directional signs may be located on the same lot as a ground sign. E.	Directory SignsA on-premise sign that lists the name of activities, businesses, firms or tenants of a unified project or site.1.	The site shall contain no more than 1 directory sign. 2.	The maximum sign area shall not exceed 3 inches by 15 inches for each identified activity, business, firm or tenant on the site. 3.	The outdoor directory sign may either be a changeable copy sign or fixed professional nameplates; provided that the standards of each are met. 4.	The sign may take the form of any sign permitted in the district provided that the sign complies with the applicable sign requirements. If the directory sign is a ground sign, no other ground sign is allowed unless the directory sign is positioned so that is not visible from any right-of-way and contains no other message, announcement or decoration.F.	Landmark SignsA sign that exhibits unique characteristics that enhance the streetscape or identity of a neighborhood and as such contributes to the historical or cultural character of the area or the community at large. 1.	The sign is an on-premise sign that meets at least 1 of the following criteria: a.	It was expressly designed for the business, institution or other establishment at that location; b.	It bears a national emblem, logo or other graphic that is no longer used by the company; orc.	It is a remnant of an advertising program that is no longer used by the parent company.2.	The sign complies with Sec. 7.3.16.B.












 and if any portion is permitted to remain on or over a public right-of-way, a City or State approved encroachment agreement is executed. 

3.	
The sign complies with the lighting standards of Sec. 7.3.16.G and the prohibited sign requirements of Sec. 7.3.15.4.	The sign exists or will within 6 months of its designation as a landmark sign be restored and continuously maintained, in its full original condition except for minor changes required for structural enhancements, changes required to comply with paragraphs Sec. 7.3.13.F.1. through Sec. 7.3.13.F.3. above and Federal or State regulations. Where original materials are unavailable, substitute materials, which are as near as possible substitutes for the original material may be used. 5.	The sign was erected prior to January 1, 1973 and has existed continuously in place on the site. 6.	The application requesting landmark designation was completed and submitted within 6 months following an extension of areas in which this UDO is applicable.  7.	The sign is approved by the City Council as a landmark sign. 8.	Other signs that are of the same sign type as a landmark sign are permitted on the site so long as: the maximum area, including the area of landmark signs, of such type of signage, is not exceeded, all other applicable requirements for that type of sign are met and the maximum signage allowed for the site, as determined by Sec. 7.3.16.B., is not exceeded. G.	Miscellaneous (Omnibus) SignsEach site that is not allowed a wall sign or an on-premise sign or off-premises ground sign is allowed to contain a maximum amount of signage of 60 square feet, provided that, no sign is more than 15 square feet in area and 3½ feet in height. H.	Private Street SignsA sign placed on private property that identifies name of a private street. 1.	Sign Legenda.	Name and Blocki.	The approved street name and block number must be shown on each sign face. ii.	The street name must be shown in a clear, readable style of print. Cursive letters cannot be used. iii.	Block numbers must be shown in Arabic numerals. iv.	At the point of intersection with public streets, private street signs shall immediately above the name and block contain the word "private." b.	AbbreviationsThe street name shall not be abbreviated but standard abbreviations may be used for the prefix (north, south, east and west) and for the suffix portion of the legend.c.	Minimum Letter SizeStreet names shall not be less than 4-inch uppercase, 3-inch lowercase. Block number or building references shall not be less than 2 inches. 2.	Visibility and Reflectivitya.	Legend and background color selection shall effect clear contrast and visibility for both day and night identification so that the name is easily identifiable for up to 175 feet from the sign. b.	All legends and backgrounds shall be reflectorized to ensure visibility at night. 3.	Location, Number and Placementa.	Locationi.	At intersecting private streets, the sign shall be placed as near as possible to the intersection of a line parallel to and 6 feet from each private street. ii.	The private street name marker assembly shall not be placed on the public right-of-way and shall not be closer than 6 feet to the edge of pavement of the private street. b.	NumberA sign face for intersecting private street or private street and public streets, shall be required so that the respective street name and block number is displayed to the appropriate direction of travel. c.	Vertical PositionThe bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of 6 feet above the elevation of the adjacent street. I.	Product and Information Signs1.	A product sign is a sign attached to outdoor vending machines, stands, gasoline pumps and display racks that direct attention to dispensed products.2.	An information sign is an on-premise sign containing no other commercial message, copy, announcement or decoration other than instruction or direction to the public. Such signs include but are not limited to the following: identifying restrooms, public telephones, automated teller machines, for lease, for sale, walkways, entrance and exit drives, freight entrances and traffic direction.3.	A product sign or information sign may not exceed 6 square feet in area, except in the case of an information sign for a multi-establishment campus. 4.	Individual information signs for a multi-establishment campus may be a maximum of 14 square feet in area with a maximum height of 3½ feet and a maximum width of 4 feet. One primary information sign may be located at each major entrance; provided that, no such sign shall be closer than 100 feet to the public right-of-way, and not exceed a maximum of 35 square feet in area, a maximum height of 7 feet and a maximum width of 5 feet. 5.	The total sign area for all product and information signs located on any site cannot exceed 32 square feet; provided that the total allowable sign area for information signs which are part of a multi-establishment campus may be increased in accordance with the following: a.	32 square feet per major entrance drive for any multi-establishment campus with three or more major entrances from a commercial street or a thoroughfare; and b.	10 square feet for each acre in excess of 10 acres of the multi-establishment campus. 6.	No commercial message, copy, announcement or decoration can be located on the information sign other than instruction or direction to the public. 7.	A product sign must be attached directly to either the dispensary structure or the product and cannot be located in any Residential District. J.	Temporary SignsAfter the issuance of a temporary sign permit the following temporary signs may be erected: 1.	Unlit on-premise portable signs, 3-dimensional banners, moored blimps, gas balloons and windblown signs such as pennants, spinners, flags and streamers for special events for a total period not to exceed 30 days. 2.	Construction signs are permitted on a construction site that meet all of the following standards: a.	The sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet in sign area in CM, AP or a Residential District and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area in all other districts. b.	No construction sign shall be erected prior to issuance of a grading or building permit and the sign shall be removed within 15 days after issuance of a certificate of compliance. 3.	Temporary signs shall not be permitted within the right-of-way.K.	Unit Numbering Identification Sign1.	All unit numbers shall be uniformly located on the side of the building facing the street within 18 inches of the building entrance or if not possible for architectural or building arrangement reasons prominently displayed on the building wall, easily visible from a public street.2.	However, unit number signs for detached and attached houses and manufactured homes only may, in lieu of being located on the building wall, be located on the mail box or similar sized surfaces attached to mail boxes. 3.	Units that do not abut and gain access on a public street must locate identification signs containing the name of the court, street or way and the unit numbers on each main entrance to the building. 4.	All unit number signs shall be a minimum of 3 inches in size.5.	Any unit number identification over 10 inches in height shall comply with all applicable sign regulations of this UDO.L.	Vehicle Sign1.		Vehicle signs shall not be located within 40 feet of the right-of-way of any street.  Vehicle signs on trailer or box truck type vehicles shall not be located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of any street.2.	Vehicle signs permitted as part of an approved temporary event or vehicles used in direct connection with the business other than as signage, are not subject to these provisions during the course of their normal business usage.M.	Windblown SignsA banner, flag, pennant, spinner or streamer.1.	No site shall contain more than 3 windblown signs. Each windblown device erected to a tether, pole, mast, building or any structure shall be deemed to be a separate distinct windblown sign. 2.	The total sign area of all windblown signs on a site located in a mixed or special district shall not exceed 40% of the maximum allowable signage as set forth in Sec. 7.3.16.B.3.	The total sign area of all windblown signs on a site located in a residential district shall not exceed 35 square feet. 4.	The maximum height of a windblown sign shall not exceed 20 feet or the tallest principal building located on the site, whichever is greater. 5.	The windblown sign limitations do not apply to temporary windblown signs erected pursuant to Sec. 7.3.13.J. Sec. 7.3.14. Off-Premise SignsA.	Purpose1.	For the purpose of regulating excess signage, encouraging the positive economic development of the City, promoting the safety of the traveling public, protecting existing property values in both residential and nonresidential areas, preventing the overcrowding of land, promoting a positive community appearance as part of a concerted City-wide effort to protect and enhance the aesthetics of the Capital City for the enjoyment of all citizens of North Carolina, outdoor advertising signs is controlled and regulated. 2.	The regulations are designed to prevent their overconcentration, improper placement and excessive height, bulk, number and area. It is recognized that, unlike on-premise identification signs which are actually a part of a business, outdoor advertising is a separate and distinct use of the public thoroughfare. With a view to this distinction, outdoor advertising signs are regulated differently from on-premise signs. It is intended that outdoor advertising signs be located away from residential areas and that such signs be regulated to protect the character of the area wherein outdoor advertising signs are located, and to conserve property values in these areas. B.	General Regulations1.	All outdoor advertising signs shall be consistent with all definitions and shall comply with all standards and regulations of this UDO. 2.	Except for ordinary maintenance and repair, poster panel replacements, copy, changes or repair not involving structural, material or electrical changes, no outdoor advertising signs or part of an outdoor advertising signs, shall be erected, altered, constructed, changed, converted, re-erected, additionally illuminated, reduced in size, enlarged or moved unless the entire outdoor advertising sign and structure are brought into conformity with this UDO. C.	Area of Outdoor Advertising Signs1.	No outdoor advertising sign facing streets with 4 or more traffic lanes may exceed 150 square feet.2.	Outdoor advertising signs facing streets with fewer than 4 traffic lanes may not exceed 75 square feet. 3.	The sign area is measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle or square of vertical and horizontal lines which fully encloses all extremities of the sign, excluding supports, the base or apron unless the copy message, announcement or decoration appears on the base or apron. The allowable sign area of signs with equal size and shape for both double-faced (back-to-back) and V-type signs is measured by computing the area of only one side of the sign. Both sides of a double-faced or V-type sign shall be of equal size. 4.	The sign area of signs with 3 or more sides (multiple sided signs) containing a copy, message, decoration or announcement visible from a street, highway or expressway is measured as the sum of the area of any 2 adjacent sides. D.	HeightNo outdoor advertising sign, including base or apron, supports, supporting structures and trim, may exceed 30 feet in height. E.	Setback RequirementsDistrict setback requirements are not applicable to outdoor advertising signs. F.	Construction Standards1.	Compliance with Building CodesAll signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of the North Carolina and City Building Codes, the National Electric Code and other provisions of the Code of the City of Raleigh. 2.	Clearance from High-Voltage Power LinesOutdoor advertising signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with the National Electric Code; provided that, no outdoor advertising sign shall be erected closer than 10 feet in any direction from any conductor or public utility guy wire. G.	Location and Spacing1.	Corner LotsNo part of an outdoor advertising sign may be located within a triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points 50 feet from the right-of-way intersection. 2.	Spacing of Signsa.	No part of any outdoor advertising sign shall be located less than 1,000 feet from any part of another outdoor advertising sign when located within either of two 200-foot corridors along each side of a roadway. The 2 corridors shall be delineated by connecting perpendicular measurements from all points along the road rights-of-way. No part of any permitted outdoor advertising sign which is located outside of the 200-foot corridor areas may be located within a 1,000-foot radius of any other outdoor advertising sign. b.	No part of any outdoor advertising sign is permitted within 400 feet of a district that allows dwellings.  Sec. 7.3.15. Prohibited Signs The following signs are prohibited within all districts.A.	Any sign which the Transportation Director determines obstructs the view of bicyclists or motorists using any street, private driveway, approach to any street intersection or which interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures any traffic sign, device or signal. B.	Illuminated, highly reflective signs or spotlights which the Transportation Director determines hampers the vision of motorists or bicyclists. C.	Signs, lights, rotating disks, words and other devices which resemble traffic signals, traffic signs or emergency vehicle lights. D.	Signs, lights, rotating disks, words and other devices not erected by public authority which may be erroneously construed as governmental signs or emergency warning signs. E.	Any sign which interferes with free passage from or obstructs any fire escape, downspout, window, door, stairways, ladder or opening intended as a means of ingress or egress or providing light or air. F.	Any sign placed on any curb, sidewalk, post pole, hydrant, bridge, tree or other surface located on, over or across any public street, right-of-way, property or thoroughfare, unless authorized by the City Council. G.	Flashing signs, travelling lights or signs animated by lights or changing degrees of intensity, except signs in public rights-of-way. H.	Signs that mechanically move, except signs on public rights-of-way. I.	Roof signs. J.	The tacking, posting or otherwise affixing of signs of a miscellaneous character visible from a public right-of-way located on the outside walls of buildings, barns, sheds, trees, poles, fences or other structures provided unit numbers, mailbox and paper tube identification signs that do not exceed 1 square foot in area and signs which warn the public against danger shall be allowed. K.	Any message, copy or announcement, which uses a series of 2 or more signs placed in a line parallel to a street, highway or expressway carrying a single message or copy.L.	Any sign which pertains to a business, profession, commodity or service which is vacant, unoccupied or discontinued for a period of 1 year or more; any part of a sign which is unused for a period of 1 year or more; or any sign which pertains to an event or purpose which no longer applies shall be deemed abandoned. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner or tenant of the premise. M.	Signs attached to, painted on, or otherwise positioned (whether exterior or interior) in or on an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle (motorized or non-motorized) located in view of the right-of-way.N.	Signs attached to, painted on, or otherwise positioned in or on a licensed vehicle that is located in view of the street right-of-way when in a location or for a period of time that indicates that the use of the vehicle is for displaying the sign to passing motorists or pedestrians, except that such signs are allowed on a temporary basis in association with a temporary event permit.O.	Any sign unlawfully erected or maintained. Sec. 7.3.16. General Sign RegulationsA.	Area Computation of Copy and Signs1.	Individual Lettersa.	The area of copy or the area of a sign which consists of individual letters that are erected directly onto a surface exclusive of any sign face, is measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangles or squares of vertical and horizontal lines, which fully encloses all sign words, copy or message. b.	All or a portion of at least 1 side of each rectangle and square must be coterminous with the side of another rectangle or square. At least 75% of the sign area must be enclosed by 1 rectangle or square. c.	Rectangles and squares cannot be configured to indent within a letter. 2.	Multi-Sided SignsThe sign area of a sign with three or more sides (multi-sided signs) containing a copy, message, decoration or announcement visible from a street, highway or expressway is equal to the sum of the areas of any 2 adjacent sides. 3.	All Other Signsa.	The sign area is measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangles or squares of vertical and horizontal lines which fully enclose all extremities of the sign, exclusive of its supports. b.	All or a portion of at least 1 side of each rectangle or square must be coterminous with the side of another rectangle or square. c.	At least 75% of the sign area must be enclosed by 1 rectangle or square. d.	Rectangles and squares cannot be configured to indent within a letter. B.	Maximum Signage1.	The total maximum signage allowed for any single establishment located in a Mixed Use, IH or CMP district, not including an area with an adopted Streetscape Plan or properties with frontage on Fayetteville Street, is 2 square feet per linear foot of side of the building facing along any street up to a maximum of 300 square feet. 2.	If a ground sign or tract identification sign is located on the site, the maximum sign area per establishment is limited 200 square feet. 3.	No premise, including those in a Residential District, is prevented from having at least 32 square feet of on-premise signage, except for properties with frontage on Fayetteville Street as described below. Allowable signage may be allocated among the permitted signs in the district.4.	The maximum allowable signage limitation does not apply to Landmark signs, product and information signs, unit numbering identification signs under 10 inches, temporary signs and window signs permitted pursuant to Sec. 7.3.7.



























































5.	
No sign or combination of signs shall exceed a total of 3 square feet per linear foot of building frontage for properties with frontage on Fayetteville Street, applies south of Morgan Street and north of South Street.



C.	
Adopted Streetscape Plans


Within areas where an adopted Streetscape Plan applies, conformance to the adopted Streetscape Plan is required. In the event of a conflict with the general sign requirements of this Article and an adopted Streetscape Plan, the Streetscape Plan standards shall apply.
D.	
Noncommercial Copy Permitted


Any sign authorized in this UDO is allowed to contain noncommercial message in lieu of any commercial message. 
E.	
Construction Standards
1.	
Compliance with Building Code 




All signs shall comply with the appropriate provisions of the North Carolina State and City Building Codes, the National Electric Code and other provisions of the City Code. 
2.	
Clearance from High Voltage Power Lines


Signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with National Electric Code specifications, provided that no sign, except government traffic signs, shall be installed closer than 10 feet in any direction from any conductor or public utility guy wire. 
F.	
Sight Triangle
1.	
Signs shall not obstruct the views of motorists using any street, driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection. 

2.	
All signs must comply with the sight triangle requirements of the Raleigh Street Design Manual. 



G.	
Illumination of Signs 


Any conforming sign, unless otherwise specifically regulated, may be illuminated provided the following standards are met: 
1.	
Any light source from any illuminated sign or flood light used to illuminate a sign  must not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive illumination onto streets or sidewalks in a manner that may distract or interfere with the vision of drivers, cyclists or pedestrians, as determined by the Development Services Director.  

2.	
No illuminated sign shall cast light to exceed 0.5 footcandles measured at the property line of any Residential District and 2.0 footcandles measured at the right-of-way line of a street.

3.	
Internal illumination cannot exceed 10 footcandles measured at a distance of 10 feet from the sign. 

4.	
All electrically illuminated signs shall have a disconnecting switch located in accordance with the provisions of the National Electric Code. 

5.	
Applications for both a sign permit and an electrical permit shall be submitted and approved by the City prior to the installation. 

6.	
In any -AOD, all illuminated signs shall be shielded in such a manner that no direct glare can be seen from above. 


H.	
Common Signage Plan
1.	
To achieve congruity, unity of development and to avoid conflicts within any site with more than 1 principal building, no sign permit shall be issued to any development containing more than 1 establishment until a common signage plan has been approved in accordance with Sec. 10.2.12.

2.	
No permit will be issued in violation of the common signage plan. Such criteria shall be as follows: 
a.	
Specified allowed type script that shall be observed. 

b.	
Maximum and minimum letter height that shall be observed. 

c.	
Specified allowed sign types, all other signs shall be prohibited. 

d.	
Sign placement by specifying sign panel location or elevations. 

e.	
Specified maximum of 7 colors to be applied to the sign and its background that shall be observed. Colors shall be in addition to black and white.

f.	
In addition to the 7 color limit, the colors of black and white or a color that matches the building material color of the wall on which it is attached or the dominant exterior building material such as, but not limited to, brick or marble shall be allowed. 

g.	
Federal and State registered trademarks or service marks may employ additional colors; provided, they do not exceed the following:  
i.	
12¼ square feet for all establishments less than 10,000 square feet;

ii.	
18 square feet for establishments greater then 10,000 to 30,000 square feet;

iii.	
25 square feet for establishments greater than 30,000 to 100,000 square feet; and 

iv.	
36 square feet for establishments greater than 100,000 square feet.



h.	
The sign includes its casings, supports and backings. Only those signs which are erected or altered after the common sign plan is established shall be affected by the common sign plan





Sec. 7.3.17. 
Nonconforming Signs 

A.	
Within 90 days after the effective date of this provision or within 90 days following an extension of areas in which this section is applicable any portable ground sign, temporary sign, vehicle sign or windblown sign not authorized by Sec. 7.3.13.L. shall be removed. All other signs which are made nonconforming by an amendment to this UDO or an amendment to the Official Zoning Map or extension of areas in which this UDO is applicable shall be discontinued and removed or made conforming within 5½ years after the date of the amendment or extension, unless explicitly prohibited by state statute.

B.	
Nothing in this UDO shall prohibit the ordinary maintenance repair of a nonconforming sign or replacement of a broken part of a nonconforming sign. Whenever any nonconforming sign or part of a nonconforming sign is altered, replaced, converted or changed, the entire sign must immediately comply with the provisions of this UDO. 

C.	
Nonconforming signs that are destroyed or damaged by 50% or more of their value shall not be rebuilt or repaired except in conformance with this UDO. 

D.	
Nothing in this UDO shall prevent a City Council-designated landmark sign from indefinitely remaining on-premise so long as the landmark sign complies with all the standards of Sec. 7.3.15.E.	Within 90 days after the effective date of this provision or within 90 days following an extension of areas in which this section is applicable:1.	Any paper, poster board or similar sign or display shall be removed or otherwise made conforming.Article 7.4. Site LightingSec. 7.4.1. ApplicabilityA.	General1.	This Article does not apply to lighting installed in the public right-of-way or along any greenway.2.	The installation of site lighting, replacement of site lighting and changes to existing light fixture wattage, type of fixture, mounting or fixture location shall be made in strict compliance with this UDO. 3.	Routine maintenance, including changing the lamp, ballast, starter, photo control, fixture housing, lens and other required components, is permitted for all existing fixtures.B.	Change in UseA change in use does not trigger application of this Article except when there is a specific use standard requiring site lighting for a new use.C.	Permit RequiredA  permit is required for work involving site lighting. Documentation must be submitted that states the proposed site lighting complies with the provisions of this UDO. At a minimum, the documentation submitted must contain the following: 1.	A point-by-point footcandle array in a printout format indicating the location and aiming of illuminating devices. The printout must indicate compliance with required footcandle limitations. 2.	Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, poles, raised foundations and other devices, including but not limited to manufacturers or electric utility catalog specification sheets and photometric report indicating fixture classification. 3.	The Development Services Director may waive any or all of the above permit requirements, provided the applicant can otherwise demonstrate compliance with this UDO. Sec. 7.4.2. Light Level MeasuringA.	Light levels are specified, calculated and measured in footcandles. All footcandles values are maintained footcandles. B.	Measurements are to be made at ground level, with the light-registering portion of the meter held parallel to the ground pointing up. Sec. 7.4.3. Prohibited SourcesThe following light fixtures and sources cannot be used:A.	Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors which contain sources that are not incandescent; B.	Temporary searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures; andC.	Light sources that lack color correction or do not allow for uniform site lighting.   Sec. 7.4.4. Design and Installation RequirementsAll light fixtures shall meet the following requirements:A.	The maximum light level of any light fixture cannot exceed 0.5 footcandles measured at the property line of any Residential District and 2.0 footcandles measured at the right-of-way line of a street.B.	Lighting must not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive illumination onto adjacent properties, streets or sidewalks.C.	Service connections for all freestanding lighting fixtures must be installed underground.Sec. 7.4.5. Parking and Pedestrian AreasA.	Light fixtures within parking and vehicular display areas may be no higher than 30 feet. B.	Light fixtures within pedestrian areas may be no higher than 15 feet.C.	Light fixtures located within 50 feet of the property line of a Residential District may be no higher than 15 feet.D.	Light fixtures within 25 feet of a street right-of-way must be forward throw fixtures.E.	Light fixtures in parking and vehicular display areas must be full cutoff. In all other areas, light fixtures with more than 2,000 lumens must be full cutoff unless they meet the following:1.	Non-cutoff fixtures can be used when the maximum initial lumens generated by each fixture does not exceed 9,500 lumens; 2.	If the unshielded fixture has all metal halide, fluorescent, induction, white high pressure sodium and color-corrected high pressure sodium lamps, the outer lamp envelope must be coated with an internal white frosting to diffuse light;3.	All metal halide fixtures equipped with a medium base socket must use either an internal refractive lens or a wide-body refractive globe; or4.	All non-cutoff fixture open-bottom lights must equipped with full cutoff fixture shields.F.	To the extent possible, as determined by the Development Services Director, internal light sources within structured parking shall not be visible from the adjacent public right-of-way. Rooftop lighting for parking structures shall be mounted a minimum of 15 feet in from the edge of the structure.Sec. 7.4.6. Flood Lights and Flood LampsA.	Flood light fixtures must either be aimed down at least 45 degrees from vertical or the front of the fixture shielded so that no portion of the light bulb extends below the bottom edge of the shield.B.	Any flood light fixture located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way must be mounted and aimed perpendicular to the right-of-way, with a side-to-side horizontal aiming tolerance not to exceed 15 degrees. C.	All flood lamps emitting 1,000 or more lumens must be aimed at least 60 degrees down from horizontal or shielded so that the main beam is not visible from adjacent properties or the street right-of-way. Sec. 7.4.7. Vehicular CanopiesLighting under vehicular canopies must be less than 24 maintained footcandles and be designed to prevent glare off-site. Acceptable lighting designs include the follow­
ing: A.	Recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is either recessed or flush with the bottom surface of the canopy;B.	Light fixture incorporating shields or is shielded by the edge of the canopy itself, so that light is restrained to 5 degrees or more below the horizontal plane;C.	Surface mounted fixture incorporating a flat glass that provides a cutoff design or shielded light distribution;D.	Surface mounted fixture measuring no more than 2 feet by 2 feet, with a lens cover that contains at least 2% white fill diffusion material; orE.	Indirect lighting where light is beamed upward and then reflected down from the underside of the canopy, provided the fixture is shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy.Sec. 7.4.8. Outdoor Recreation Fields and Performance AreasA.	The mounting height of lighting fixtures cannot exceed 80 feet from finished grade unless approved as a special use permit in accordance with Sec. 10.2.9.B.	All fixtures must be equipped with a glare control package, including  louvers, shields or similar devices. The fixtures must be aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area. C.	No illumination, when measured at the property line, shall exceed o.4 maintained footcandle of lighting.D.	Lights within 100 feet of a Residential District cannot be illuminated after 10 PM Sunday through Thursday and 11 PM Friday and Saturday.E.	In all other districts, the hours of operation for the lighting system must not exceed 1 hour after the end of the game or event.Sec. 7.4.9. SignsLighting fixtures illuminating signs must meet the standards of Sec. 7.3.16.G.Sec. 7.4.10. Building and Security LightingA.	Lighting fixtures shall be selected, located, aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the building facade, plantings and other intended site features and away from adjoining properties and the street right-of-way. B.	All wall pack fixtures must be full cutoff fixtures. C.	Only lighting used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art may be directed upward, provided that the fixture is located, aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the night sky.Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and StorageSec. 7.5.1. ApplicabilityA.	The requirements of this Article apply to any site where merchandise, material or equipment is stored outside of a completely enclosed building.B.	Where merchandise, material or equipment is stored outside of a completely enclosed building in an AP District and the storage area lies more than 100 feet from any street right-of-way or property line, the provisions of this Article do not apply. C.	Where allowed, the outdoor sale, lease or rental of motor vehicles and heavy equipment as part of a properly permitted use are not subject to the provisions of this Article, but must be screened along the street edge by a Type C3 street protective yard as set forth in Sec. 7.2.4.B.



























Sec. 7.5.2. 
Outdoor Display

A.	
Defined
1.	
Outdoor display is the outdoor display of products actively available for sale. The outdoor placement of propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, soft drink or similar vending machines is considered outdoor display.  

2.	
Outdoor display does not include merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers (see outdoor storage).



B.	
Standards


Outdoor display is permitted with any nonresidential use in a RX-, OP-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX- and CMP district following approval of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permitted area for outdoor display. The area for outdoor display must meet the standards below.
1.	
Outdoor display must be removed and placed inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of each business day, except propane gas storage racks, ice storage bins, soft drink or similar vending machines may remain outside overnight. 

2.	
Outdoor display is permitted adjacent to the primary facade with the principal customer entrance, but cannot extend more than 8 feet from the facade and occupy no more than 30% of the horizontal length of the facade.

3.	
Outdoor display may not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk or parking areas.


Sec. 7.5.3. 
Outdoor Storage

A.	
Limited Outdoor Storage
1.	
Defined




Limited outdoor storage includes, but is not limited to: 
a.	
Overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair;

b.	
Outdoor storage of merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers;

c.	
Outdoor sales area for building supplies, garden supplies or plants;

d.	
Outdoor storage of fleet vehicles; and

e.	
Outdoor storage of vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles or other similar vehicles at a storage facility.


2.	
Standards


Limited outdoor storage is permitted in the OP-, OX-, NX-, CX-, DX-, IX-, AP, IH and CMP districts following approval of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permitted area for limited outdoor storage and provided it meets the standards below.
a.	
Limited outdoor storage may not be more than 12 feet in height and must be fully screened from view from the public right-of-way, public parking areas and abutting properties by an evergreen living fence that covers a least two-thirds of the surface area of the fence at the time of maturity or by a Type C1 or C2 street protective yard as set forth in Sec. 7.2.4.B.

b.	
Limited outdoor storage cannot be located in an A or B neighborhood transition zone.

c.	
Vehicles awaiting repair may be stored up to 14 days within the screened storage area.


B.	
General Outdoor Storage
1.	
Defined




General outdoor storage includes, but is not limited to, the outdoor storage of contractors equipment, lumber, pipe, steel, salvage or recycled materials and other similar merchandise, material or equipment. 
2.	
Standards


General outdoor storage is permitted in the -IH District following review of a site plan illustrating the extent of the permitted area for general outdoor storage and provided it meets the standards below.
a.	
All general outdoor storage must be located at least 15 feet from the public right-of-way and must be screened by a Type C1 street protective yard as set forth in Sec. 7.2.4.B.

b.	
General outdoor storage may be located in the side or rear setback and must be screened by a Type B1 or B2 transitional protective yard as set forth in Sec. 7.2.4.A. when abutting a Residential, Mixed Use or Special District.

c.	
General outdoor storage cannot be located in an A or B neighborhood transition zone.



Article 7.1. Parking	7 – 3Sec. 7.1.1. Applicability..............................................................................7 – 3
Sec. 7.1.2. Required Parking.......................................................................7 – 3
Sec. 7.1.3. Specialized Vehicle Parking Requirements .................................7 – 7
Sec. 7.1.4. Vehicle Parking Reductions.......................................................7 – 8
Sec. 7.1.5. Additional Vehicle Parking Provisions........................................7 – 9
Sec. 7.1.6. Vehicle Parking Location and Layout........................................7 – 10
Sec. 7.1.7. Vehicle Parking Lot Landscaping..............................................7 – 11
Sec. 7.1.8. Bicycle Parking Facilities..........................................................7 – 12
Sec. 7.1.9. Vehicle Loading Areas..............................................................7 – 13
Sec. 7.1.10. Parking for Single- and Two-Unit Living..................................7 – 13


Article 7.2. Landscaping and Screening	7 – 14Sec. 7.2.1. Intent.......................................................................................7 – 14
Sec. 7.2.2. Applicability.............................................................................7 – 14
Sec. 7.2.3. Administrative Alternate Findings............................................7 – 14
Sec. 7.2.4. Protective Yards ......................................................................7 – 15
Sec. 7.2.5. Screening.................................................................................7 – 18
Sec. 7.2.6. Stormwater Retention Ponds & Detention Basins....................7 – 19
Sec. 7.2.7. Design and Installation.............................................................7 – 22
Sec. 7.2.8. Walls and Fences......................................................................7 – 25
Sec. 7.2.9. Construction Safety Barrier Fences.........................................7 – 26


Article 7.3. Signs	7 – 27Sec. 7.3.1. Applicability.............................................................................7 – 27
Sec. 7.3.2. Signs Allowed by District..........................................................7 – 27
Sec. 7.3.3. Additional Sign Types...............................................................7 – 27
Sec. 7.3.4. Wall Signs...............................................................................7 – 28
Sec. 7.3.5. Projecting Signs......................................................................7 – 29
Sec. 7.3.6. Awning, Gallery, Marquee Signs...............................................7 – 30
Sec. 7.3.7. Window Signs...........................................................................7 – 30
Sec. 7.3.8. Low Profile Ground Signs.........................................................7 – 31
Sec. 7.3.9. Medium Profile Ground Signs...................................................7 – 32
Sec. 7.3.10. High Profile Ground Signs.......................................................7 – 33
Sec. 7.3.11. Tract Identification Signs.........................................................7 – 34
Sec. 7.3.12. A-Frame Signs........................................................................7 – 35
Sec. 7.3.13. Special Sign Types...................................................................7 – 36
Sec. 7.3.14. Off-Premise Signs..................................................................7 – 40
Sec. 7.3.15. Prohibited Signs ....................................................................7 – 41
Sec. 7.3.16. General Sign Regulations........................................................7 – 43
Sec. 7.3.17. Nonconforming Signs ...........................................................7 – 45


Article 7.4. Site Lighting	7 – 46Sec. 7.4.1. Applicability............................................................................7 – 46
Sec. 7.4.2. Light Level Measuring.............................................................7 – 46
Sec. 7.4.3. Prohibited Sources..................................................................7 – 46
Sec. 7.4.4. Design and Installation Requirements.....................................7 – 46
Sec. 7.4.5. Parking and Pedestrian Areas..................................................7 – 46
Sec. 7.4.6. Flood Lights and Flood Lamps.................................................7 – 47
Sec. 7.4.7. Vehicular Canopies..................................................................7 – 48
Sec. 7.4.8. Outdoor Recreation Fields and Performance Areas.................7 – 48
Sec. 7.4.9. Signs.......................................................................................7 – 48
Sec. 7.4.10. Building and Security Lighting...............................................7 – 49


Article 7.5. Outdoor Display and Storage	7 – 50Sec. 7.5.1. Applicability.............................................................................7 – 50
Sec. 7.5.2. Outdoor Display.......................................................................7 – 50
Sec. 7.5.3. Outdoor Storage......................................................................7 – 50





Parking space and drive aisle dimensional requirements 



Type A1 
 Type A2 
 Type B1 
 Type B2
 Type B3
 
Width (avg. min)
 6'
 10'
 20'
 35'
 35'
 
Fence Height (min)
 Not allowed
 6.5'
 Not allowed
 6.5'
 Not required
 
Wall Height (min)
 6.5'
 6.5'
 6.5'
 6.5'
 Not required
 
Shade Trees (min per 100')
 Not required
 4
 4 
 6
 Not required
 
Understory Trees (min per 100')
 4
 4
 4
 6
 Not required
 
Shrubs (min per 100')
 Not required
 Not required
 40
 60
 Not required
 
Shrub Height (min)
 n/a
 n/a
 3'
 3'
 Not required
 
Berm
 Not allowed
 Not allowed 
 A berm in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.D.4. may be installed, unless otherwise required. The installation shall not alter the yard width, fence, wall, shade and understory tree requirementsA berm in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.D.4.  may be installed, unless otherwise required. The installation shall not alter the yard width, fence, wall, shade and understory tree requirementsA berm shall be installed in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.D.4. except the minimum height of the berm shall be 10’ measured perpendicular to the crown10’6.5’Type C1100’15’Type C2100’10’100’5’Type C33.5’Type C435’100’
   



Type C1 
 Type C2
 Type C3
 Type C4
 
Width (avg. min)
 10'
 15'
 10'
 35'
 
Fence Height (min)
 6.5'
 Not required
 Not required
 Not required
 
Wall Height (min)
 6.5'
 Not required
 In lieu of planting shrubs, a 3.5' wall may be installed 
 Not required
 
Shade Trees (min per 100')
 Not required
 4
 Not required
 Not required
 
Understory Trees (min per 100')
 Not required
 Not required
 Not required
 Not required
 
Shrubs (min per 100')
 30 
 15
 30
 Not required
 
Shrub Height (min)
 3'
 5'
 3.5'
 Not required
 
Berm
 Not allowed 
 A berm in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.D.4. may be installed, unless otherwise required. The installation shall not alter the yard width and shade tree requirementsNot allowedA berm shall be installed in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.D.4. except the minimum height of the berm shall be 10’ measured perpendicular to the crownPage Intentionally Left BlankACEBDFAFCDBGEBACArea of copy = (A×B) + (C×E) + (D×E) + (F×G)(A×B) = 75% of sign area Individual Letters:Multi-Sided Signs:All Other Signs:Area of sign = (A×B) + (D×C) + (F×E)(A×B) = 75% of sign area Area of sign = (A×B) + (A×C)2”min.3”min.4”min.high contrastre.ectorizedbackground6’min.6’min.6’min.1000’1000’1000’1000’1000’1000’200’200’200’200’50’50’15’ max30’ max>45o<15o<15oOverhead View>60o˜°>5o˜°
   







CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS.
.

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.1. General Provisions
Sec. 8.1.6. Reservation of Public Land

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.2. ..Infrastructure Sufficiency
Sec. 8.2.1. In General

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access
Sec. 8.3.1. Intent

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access
Sec. 8.3.3. ..Lots

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access
Sec. 8.3.5. Site Access

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access
Sec. 8.3.6. ..Administrative Design Adjustment Findings

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.4. Local Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.5. Mixed Use Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.6. Major Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.6. Major Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.7. Industrial and Service Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.8. Private Accessways

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.5. ..Existing Streets
Sec. 8.5.1. General Provisions

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.5. ..Existing Streets
Sec. 8.5.2. ..Streetscape Types

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.5. ..Existing Streets
Sec. 8.5.3. ..Nonconforming Streetscapes

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.6. ..Reimbursements
Sec. 8.6.5. Stormwater Infrastructure

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.7. Utilities
Sec. 8.7.3. Public Water and Sewer Stubs

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.9. Facility Fees
Sec. 8.9.1. Facility Fees Imposed on New Construction

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.9. ..Facility Fees
Sec. 8.9.5. Penalties

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.10. Enforcement
Sec. 8.10.1. Violations and Violators

.CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 .

Article 8.1. General Provisions   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.1.1. Applicability

Article 8.1. General Provisions   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.1.10. Fee in Lieu

Article 8.2. ..Infrastructure Sufficiency   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.2.3. Water Supply

Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.3.2. ..Blocks

Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.3.5. Site Access

Article 8.3. ..Blocks, Lots, Access   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.3.5. Site Access

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.1. General Provisions

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.4. Local Streets

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.5. Mixed Use Streets

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.5. Mixed Use Streets

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.6. Major Streets

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.6. Major Streets

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.7. ..Industrial and Service Streets

Article 8.5. Existing Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.5.1. General Provisions

Article 8.5. ..Existing Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.5.2. Streetscape Types

Article 8.5. ..Existing Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.5.2. ..Streetscape Types

Article 8.7. Utilities   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.7.1. Water Supply

Article 8.7. Utilities   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.7.4. Underground Utilities

Article 8.8. Surface Water Drainage   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.8.1. Connection to Sanitary Sewer Prohibited

Article 8.9. ..Facility Fees   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.9.4. Funds Collected

Article 8.10. Enforcement   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.10.2. Remedies and Penalties

Article 8.11. Transit Infrastructure|   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.11.1. General Provisions

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. New Streets
Sec. 8.4.2. Street Types

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.4. ..New Streets
Sec. 8.4.3. SEnsitive Area Streets

Article 8.4. ..New Streets   |   CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS  
 Sec. 8.4.3. Sensitive Area Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.11. Transit Infrastructure
Sec. 8.11.4. Determining the Location of the Required Transit Stop

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.6. ..Reimbursements
Sec. 8.6.1. Greenways

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.6. ..Reimbursements
Sec. 8.6.3. Streets

CHAPTER 8. ..SUBDIVISION & SITE PLAN STANDARDS   |   Article 8.5. ..Existing Streets
Sec. 8.5.4. Existing Private Streets

Chapter 8. 
Subdivision & Site Plan Standards

Article 8.1. 
General Provisions

Sec. 8.1.1. 
Applicability

A.	
This Chapter applies to all development within the City or within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction as set forth in Sec. 10.2.5.and Sec. 10.2.8.B.	No construction shall commence until all required plans, profiles and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City or other governmental approving agency.C.	No City services or utilities shall be extended or furnished to any development until the applicant has installed the improvements specified in this UDO or guaranteed their installation as provided for in this UDO.D.	Variances to this Chapter are heard by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Sec. 10.2.10. The Board of Adjustment where specifically authorized may approve design adjustments pursuant to Sec. 10.2.18

. 

E.	
All improvements must conform with all adopted City plans.

Sec. 8.1.2. 
Phasing

A.	
If not otherwise set out as part of the preliminary subdivision plan, lots may be recorded and public improvements may be constructed in phases.

B.	
A phasing plan shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.5.E.7.Sec. 8.1.3. Construction SuretyA.	If all development-related improvements and installations are not completed and accepted by the City prior to a request to record all or a part of any subdivision or issuance of a building permit for any site plan, whichever first occurs, a security instrument shall be posted, in lieu of completion of the work, in an amount of 125% of the estimated construction cost of the development-related improvements which remain incomplete and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the City, providing for and securing to the City the actual construction and installation of improvements.B.	All development-related improvements that are secured by a surety shall be installed prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the subdivision phase or prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the site plan, whichever event first occurs on the property. Except the final coat of asphalt for street improvements and the installation of sidewalks, street trees, street lights and permitted street furniture may at the option of the applicant be installed within 36 months following the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy provided surety in the amount of 125% of these improvements are first provided to the City. Where improvements are required on a State-maintained road, a 100% construction surety is required. In this instance, proof of bond or surety with the State must be supplied to the City.C.	Where the Development Services Director determines that circumstances out of the control of the applicant have prohibited substantial progression of construction, an extension of not more than 2 years on the completion of the final coat of asphalt and installation of sidewalks, street trees, street lights and permitted street furniture may be granted. A surety in the amount of 125% of these improvements shall remain in place during the extension and the warranty period shall not commence until the outstanding items have been installed and inspected.D.	Where the Development Services Director determines that landscaping in the public right-of-way cannot be installed due to inclement weather conditions, a surety in the amount of 125% of the value of the landscaping shall be provided to the City, in accordance with Sec. 8.5.1.B

.The landscaping improvements shall be installed within 30 days of the start of the next October 1 to April 30 planting period.

Sec. 8.1.4. 
Warranty

A.	
All development-related improvements must have a warranty guaranteeing the work against defects for a period of 1 year from the date of warranty period commencement for the respective infrastructure system. 

B.	
The warranty shall list the City as a beneficiary.

C.	
A warranty surety shall be provided in an amount of 15% of the estimated value of the warranted development-related improvements. The surety shall expire 6 months after the expiration of the warranty period.

Sec. 8.1.5. 
Acceptance


Any development-related improvements shall not be officially accepted until the improvements have been inspected by the City, corrections are made in the field and on the approved infrastructure construction plans, a reproducible copy of the as-built drawings is provided to the Development Services Department and the warranty required in the previous section is completed. 
Sec. 8.1.6. 
Reservation of Public Land

A.	
Where a proposed park, greenway, open space, school, fire station or other public use shown in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a development, the City Council may require the reservation of the land for future use.

B.	
The reservation shall continue in effect for a period of not more than 1 year from the date of approval of the preliminary plan or site plan. This reservation period may be extended for an additional year upon submission of a letter to the City Council of intent to purchase by the appropriate governmental agency. Further extensions may be permitted upon mutual agreement between the land owner and the City Council, each of which shall not exceed 2 years.

Sec. 8.1.7. 
Easements 

A.	
Platted easements and deed of easements shall be provided in the locations and dimensions required by the City in order to: 
1.	
Allow for adequate storm drainage facilities;

2.	
Allow for proper installation of water and sewer lines, whether immediately proposed or necessary for adequate service in the future; 

3.	
Allow for cross-access between properties;

4.	
Allow for adequate transit facilities and access;

5.	
Allow for adequate pedestrian and bicycle access; 

6.	
Allow for adequate right-of way for street types;

7.	
	Allow for adequate public access; and

8.	
Allow for adequate slope for roadway construction.



B.	
Easement widths shall be specified by the City as necessary to accommodate existing and future needs as well as construction and repair of facilities. For drainage easements, the widths should be sufficient to accommodate areas anticipated to be inundated by stormwater.

Sec. 8.1.8. 
Names and Numbering

A.	
The proposed name of a subdivision, site plan and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision, site plan or street. 

B.	
Words that are part of a name and are generic in their meaning (e.g. “river,” “woods,” “hills”) shall not be considered as duplicates of other similar uses of words. 

C.	
House or building numbers shall conform to the system established for the City. 

Sec. 8.1.9. 
Subdivision Monuments

A.	
Permanent Markers
1.	
Permanent markers shall be placed at locations of the subdivision in accordance with Sec. 8.1.9.B.

2.	
Permanent markers must be made of concrete at least 3 feet long and 4 inches square or in diameter with appropriate markings on top. The location and coordinates of each of these markers shall be shown on the subdivision plat. 



B.	
Coordinate System
1.	
Permanent markers shall be placed at one or more corners of the subdivision that are coordinated with a horizontal control monument of some United States or State agency survey system, such as the North Carolina Geodetic Survey System, where such monument is within 2,000 feet of a corner. 

2.	
Where the North Carolina Grid System coordinates of the monument are on file with the state, the coordinates of both the referenced corner and the monuments used shall be computed and shown in X (easting) and Y (northing) coordinates on the map. 

3.	
The coordinates shall be identified as based on “NAD 83” indicating North American datum of 1983, or as “NAD 27,” indicating North American datum of 1927. Where such a monument is not available, the tie shall be made to some pertinent and permanent recognizable landmark or identifiable reference point. 



C.	
Corner Markers


Corner markers shall be set at the corners of all lots and shall consist of metal pipes not less than ¾ of inch in diameter and 2 feet long. 
D.	
Reference Mark
1.	
Whenever any portion of any lot in the subdivision lies within a floodprone area, a reference mark in the form of an “X” indicating the elevation in relation to mean sea level to the nearest 1/10 of 1 foot shall be located on a permanent marker or structure such as a culvert, bridge, head wall or wing wall or as otherwise approved by the Engineering Services Director.

2.	
The elevation and a description of the location of the reference mark shall be indicated on the subdivision plats, which contain lots in floodprone areas.



Sec. 8.1.10. 
Fee in Lieu


Where the Development Services Director determines that construction of public improvements would not be feasible, a fee in lieu may be permitted. In this instance, right-of-way dedication and all necessary easements shall be dedicated to the City. Infrastructure construction plans may be required to determine the extent of public improvements and easements.
Article 8.2. 
Infrastructure Sufficiency 

Sec. 8.2.1. 
In General

A.	
To lessen congestion in the streets and to facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of  transportation, water and sewage and to secure safety from fire, every subdivision plan and site plan shall be subject to a determination of the sufficiency of infrastructure, as defined below according to the established levels of service in this Article.

B.	
Infrastructure shall be considered sufficient where it is demonstrated to have available capacity to accommodate the demand generated by the proposed development as well as other approved developments and PD Master Plans.

C.	
In order to avoid undue hardship, the applicant may propose to construct or secure sufficient funding for the facilities necessary to provide capacity to accommodate the proposed development at the adopted level of service. The commitment for construction or advancement of necessary facilities shall be included as a condition of development.

Sec. 8.2.2. 
Streets

A.	
Required street capacity shall be measured based on the methodology of the Highway Capacity Manual.

B.	
The impact of proposed development shall be measured by AM and PM peak trips based on the methodology of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). 

C.	
Adequate streets shall be provided consistent with the requirements of this Chapter provided a level of service E or better is maintained.

D.	
There are 3 required traffic impact assessment thresholds:
1.	
Trip Generation Report (a test of AM/PM peak hour traffic); 

2.	
Traffic Assessment (where the AM/PM peak hour traffic fails to meet adequate levels of service, this study reviews queueing and delays); and

3.	
Traffic Impact Analysis (where queueing and delays are unacceptable, this full analysis includes calculation of trips, delay, queueing and capacity at intersections). 



E.	
Where a trip generation report or traffic impact analysis demonstrates a degradation of overall intersection level of service below level of service E or impacts to an existing intersection operating at level of service F, the proposed site plan may be approved provided that:
1.	
The residential density does not exceed 50 units per acre; or

2.	
The office floor area ratio does not exceed 0.5; or

3.	
The floor area ratio for commercial uses does not exceed 0. 25; or

4.	
The peak hour delay at the intersection does not exceed what would be produced by development consistent with paragraphs 1., 2. or 3. above as shown by a Traffic Impact Analysis.

5.	
Where paragraphs Sec. 8.2.2.E.1., Sec. 8.2.2.E.2., Sec. 8.2.2.E.3. or Sec. 8.2.2.E.4. are selected, the applicant shall prepare and submit a traffic mitigation plan to the Transportation Director. The mitigation plan shall identify capital projects and phasing strategies that would bring the development impact to within the acceptable threshold specified in paragrpah E.4 above. This plan may identify improvements undertaken by the private sector, the public sector or both. Site plan approval shall not be granted until the Transportation Director determines that the plan provides reasonable and adequate mitigation. Factors to be considered by the Transportation Director include whether: the cost of the mitigation measures exceeds the value of the proposed development; transportation demand management strategies including multi-modal improvements are included; alternative access strategies are considered; and new street connections are evaluated.



F.	
An exception to Sec. 8.2.2.E. shall be granted for one or more of the following situations:
1.	
The City has a capital improvement project within the adopted 5-year Capital Improvement Program that would improve the level of service above level F; 

2.	
NCDOT has proposed a project within the first 4 years of the adopted 7-year Transportation Improvement Program that would improve the level of service above level F;

3.	
There is within ¼ mile of the site plan an existing or funded transit stop that is served by one of the following: fixed or dedicated-guideway transit, 5 vehicles an hour on a single route in 1 direction during peak commuting hours or 10 vehicles an hour in any direction during peak commuting hours;

4.	
The site is mapped with a conditional use district approved within the prior 20 years that includes a trip budget as a zoning condition; or 

5.	
If the property is zoned Downtown Mixed Use (DX-).



Sec. 8.2.3. 
Water Supply

A.	
Water supply shall be determined based on system capacity and average and peak flows.

B.	
The minimum size of any water line shall meet current Public Utilities Handbook requirements and may require off-site improvements.

Sec. 8.2.4. 
Wastewater Disposal

A.	
Wastewater disposal shall be determined based on system capacity and average and peak flows.

B.	
The minimum size of any wastewater line shall meet current Public Utilities Handbook requirements and may require off-site improvements.

Sec. 8.2.5. 
Fire Suppression

A.	
Required fire flow shall be determined using the methodology of the Insurance Services Office (ISO). 

B.	
In determining the impact of the proposed development on fire suppression, the City shall consider water pressure available to the development.

Sec. 8.2.6. 
Stormwater

A.	
The minimum configuration of any stormwater facility shall meet current Stormwater Manual requirements and may require off-site improvements.

B.	
When development of an area changes the flow regime from sheet flow to concentrated flow, the drainage system shall be designed to minimize impacts of the flow on adjoining properties.

Sec. 8.2.7. 
Transit Infrastructure

A.	
Transit infrastructure shall be provided in accordance with Article 8.11.

B.	
The size and type of the infrastructure required shall be in accordance with Sec. 8.11.3.


Article 8.3. 
Blocks, Lots, Access

Sec. 8.3.1. 
Intent

A.	
The intent of the maximum block perimeter and connectivity regulations is to provide a well-connected street network.

B.	
Large blocks with limited connectivity discourage walking, contribute to street congestion and add driving distance that can negatively impact emergency services. New streets should be designed to consider future development.

C.	
The access regulations are intended to provide a means for safe, efficient and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access within developments and between adjacent developments and to lessen traffic congestion. Pedestrian, bike and vehicular access should be safe, direct and convenient.

D.	
A conditional use zoning applicant may in accordance with Sec 10.2.4 E.2 offer zoning conditions and supporting documents sufficient to demonstrate to the City Council that development plans submitted to the City will provide for safe, efficient and convenient vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation.

Sec. 8.3.2. 
Blocks

A.	
Block Perimeters
1.	
Applicability




The block perimeter standards apply to preliminary subdvision plans, final plats and site plans submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.5. and Sec. 10.2.8 unless modified by a zoning condition contained in an adopted conditional use zoning ordinance.2.	Block Standardsa.	Residential blocks must have sufficient width to provide for 2 tiers of residential lots, except where single tier lots are required to accommodate single-loaded streets where across from a public park or open space, to allow for unusual topographical conditions or when adjacent to the outer perimeter of a subdivision.b.	The following table establishes the maximum block perimeter and maximum length for a dead-end street by zoning district. In the event that a single block contains more than 1 zoning district, the most restrictive requirement applies.



Block Perimeter
(max)
 Dead-End Street (max)
 

R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6: By Average Lot Size on Block
 
40,000+ sf
 8,000'
 1,000'
 
20,000 - 39,999 sf
 6,000'
 750'
 
10,000 - 19,999 sf 
 5,000'
 600'
 
6,000 - 9,999 sf
 4,500'
 550'
 
up to 5,999 sf
 3,000'
 400'
 

R-10: By District 
 
R-10
 2,500'
 300'
 

Mixed Use Districts
 
DX-, -TOD
 2,000'
 Not allowed
 
RX-, NX-, CX-, OX-: up to 4 stories
 3,000'
 400'
 
RX-, NX-, CX-, OX-: 5+ stories
 2,500'
 300'
 
OP-, IX-
 4,000'
 500'
 

Special Districts
 
CM, AP
 n/a
 n/a
 
IH
 6,000'
 400'
 
MH
 3,000'
 400'
 
CMP, PD
 4,000' or based on master plan
 400' or based on master plan
 


B.	
Block Measurement
1.	
A block is bounded by a public right-of-way (not including an alley). All public rights-of-way proposed as part of a development must be improved with a street.

2.	
Block perimeter is measured along the edge of the property adjoining the public right-of-way, except for the measurement of dead-end streets, which are measured from intersecting centerlines.

3.	
The maximum block perimeter may be extended by 50% where the block includes a pedestrian passage (see Sec. 8.4.8.) or an alley (Sec. 8.4.7.) that connects the 2 streets on opposing block faces. Pedestrian passages and alleys may connect dead-end streets.4.	A block may be broken by a civic building or open lot, provided the lot is at least 50 feet wide and deep and provides a pedestrian passage meeting the requirements of Sec. 8.4.8. that directly connects the 2 streets on each block face.5.	Within a single phase of any subdivision or development, individual block perimeters may exceed the maximum by 25% provided that the average of all block perimeters in the phase does not exceed the maximum.6.	Where the block pattern is interrupted by public parkland, including greenways, that is open and accessible to the public, pedestrian access points shall be provided with a minimum spacing equal to ½ of the maximum block perimeter.Sec. 8.3.3. LotsA.	Lot FrontageEvery lot shall have frontage on a public street, except those developments which were approved for private streets prior to the effective date of this UDO. Except as otherwise stated in this UDO, all lots must front on a street that has a pavement width of at least 20 feet.B.	Lot Arrangement1.	Lots shall be subdivided to permit conformance with all laws and ordinances and to ensure for orderly urban growth, proper building arrangement and to provide City services and facilities. 2.	Lot dimensions shall provide for the potential development of all lots and future compliance with the development standards of this UDO. C.	Principal Structures Per LotIn the R-1, R-2, R-4 and R-6 districts, only 1 principal structure is permitted per lot. This does not include cottage courts, townhomes and apartments, condominiums or specifically allowed nonresidential uses as set forth in Sec. 6.1.4.D.	Lot DimensionsLots that are occupied or are intended to be occupied shall conform with the minimum lot size, lot width and lot depth requirements provided under Chapter 2. Residential Districts, Chapter 3. Mixed Use Districts and Chapter 5. Overlay Districts.E.	Recombination of LotsThe recombination of lots shall be done in accordance with Sec. 10.2.6.Sec. 8.3.4. Subdivision AccessA.	Open AccessSubdivisions must provide roadways that remain permanently open to the public and provide community-wide access as part of an overall connected street network.B.	Connectivity RequiredProposed streets must be interconnected and must connect with adjacent streets external to the subdivision in order to provide multiple routes for pedestrian and vehicle trips from, to and within the subdivision.C.	Stub StreetsUnless modified by a zoning condition contained in an adopted conditional use zoning ordinance the regulations in subsection C shall apply.1.	Where a development adjoins unsubdivided land, stub streets within the new subdivision shall be extended to the meet maximum block perimeter standards of Sec. 8.3.2.2.	The stub street must be extended to the boundary of the abutting property to the point where the connection to the anticipated street is expected.3.	Stub streets must be located so that the portion of the block perimeter located on the subject property does not exceed 50% of the applicable block perimeter maximum.4.	If a stub street exists on an abutting property, the street system of any new subdivision must connect to the stub street to form a through street.5.		When the entirety of a creek crossing is in the subdivision, the crossing must be in a single phase in its entirety.6.		When stubbing to the edge of the site, the stub street will be built to the furthest point possible without NCDWQ approval and a fee in lieu of construction is paid for the remainder. Any right-of-way and slope easements needed to build the connection shall be dedicated.7.	Where a stub street is provided, a barricade using a design approved by the Development Services Director must be constructed at the end of the stub street, pending the extension of the street into abutting property. A sign noting the future street extension shall be posted at the applicant’s expense.Sec. 8.3.5. Site AccessA.	General Access Requirements 1.	All existing and proposed development must provide a satisfactory means of vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle ingress and egress to and from a street or an abutting site. 2.	All on-site parking areas must have vehicular access from a street, an alley, a drive aisle or a cross-access easement.3.	All on-site parking areas must be designed to allow vehicles to enter and exit the parking area in a forward motion, unless otherwise approved by the Development Services Director. An improved alley may be used as maneuvering space for access to on-site parking areas.B.	Pedestrian Access1.	All existing and proposed development must provide safe, direct and convenient pedestrian access connecting main entrances of buildings, establishments or uses on a site that allows for public access, with all other such entrances and with available access points including parking, streets, sidewalks and transit stops with the exception of the following uses which are exempt:a.	Single- or two-unit living;b.	Multi-unit living with 6 or fewer dwelling units; c.	Agricultural use;d.	Parks, open space and greenways;e.	Cemetery;f.	Telecommunication tower;g.	Off-premise sign;h.	Minor utilities; andi.	Other uses not containing a principal building on the premise (with the exception of a parking facility).2.	Pedestrian access shall consist of an accessible, easily-discernible and ADA-compliant walkway or multi-use path with a minimum width of 5 feet.3.	The pedestrian access surface located on private property shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or other fixed, firm and nonslip material as approved by the Development Services Director.4.	Pedestrian access routes between buildings and public rights-of-way shall be physically separated from vehicular surface areas, except where required to cross a drive aisle; such crossings shall be perpendicular wherever practicable. 5.	Site plans containing multiple principal buildings shall submit a phasing plan. The phasing plan shall include all necessary elements to address phasing of walkway construction for the existing principal buildings and uses on the site as new buildings and building expansion occurs in the future.C.	Driveways1.	All Drivewaysa.	All driveway design and construction must comply with the Raleigh Street Design Manual, or the Fire Code when conflict exists.b.	Driveway dimensions measured at the street right-of-way shall be in accordance with the following table: 




























Width 
(min)
 Width 
(max)
 Radius 
(max)
 
Residential on a local street, up to 6 off-street parking spaces
 10'
 18'
 10'
 
Residential 7+ off-street parking spaces (one way)
 12'
 16'
 10'
 
Residential 7+ off-street parking spaces (two-way)
 20'
 24'
 10'
 
Mixed Use/Commercial (one-way)
 12'
 18'
 10'
 
Mixed Use/Commercial (two-way)
 20'
 32'
 15'
 
Industrial/Service 
 30'
 40'
 30'
 


c.	
The Development Services Director may require wider driveways where unusual traffic, grade or site conditions exist.


2.	
Driveways for Residential Uses 


Unless modified by a zoning condition contained in an adopted conditional use zoning ordinance the regulations in subsection C.2 shall apply.
a.	
When an improved alley with a width of at least 20 feet is provided, all vehicular access shall take place from the alley. Access may be taken from the side street on corner lots.

b.	
Except for townhouse lots, all lots 40 feet or less in width platted after the effective date of this UDO are required to take vehicular access from an alley. 

c.	
No residential lot may have more than 2 driveways on the same street. Multiple driveways that service 1 lot may be no closer than 40 feet to each other.

d.	
Non-alley loaded driveways may intersect a street no closer than 20 feet from the intersection of 2 street rights-of-way.

e.	
Parking and driveway areas shall not constitute more than 40% of the area between the front building line and the front property line.


3.	
Driveways for Mixed Use and Nonresidential Uses


Unless modified by a zoning condition contained in an adopted conditional use zoning ordinance the regulations in subsection C.3 shall apply.
a.	
If on-site parking areas can be accessed from an improved alley with a right-of-way of at least 24 feet in width, access from the alley is required and new curb cuts along the public right-of-way are not allowed.

b.	
Driveways are allowed based on the property frontage of any street. Additional driveways require approval from the Development Services Director. 

c.	
Driveways accessing up to 80-foot wide street rights-of-way must be spaced 200 feet apart centerline to centerline and driveways accessing more than an 80-foot wide street right-of-way must be spaced 300 feet apart centerline to centerline.  

d.	
A driveway serving any non-residential use or multi-unit living shall not be permitted to access neighborhood yield or neighborhood local streets unless the proposed access point is the lesser of 300’ from an avenue, boulevard or parkway, or the intersection of another public street.  

e.	
Offers of cross-access shall be prohibited where a proposed non-residential use or multi-unit living may potentially obtain access from a neighborhood or residential street, unless the resulting access meets the provisions of subsection d above.

f.	
Driveways may intersect a street no closer than 50 feet from the intersection of 2 street rights-of-way, not including an alley.

g.	
Nothing in this section shall prevent all site access to any property.


D.	
Cross-Access


All lots abutting a street other than a local street shall comply with the following standards:
1.	
Internal vehicular circulation areas shall be designed and installed to allow for cross-access between abutting lots.

2.	
When an abutting owner refuses in writing to allow construction of the internal vehicular circulation on their property, a stub for future cross-access shall be provided as close as possible to the common property line. 

3.	
Rights of vehicular and pedestrian access shall be granted to all abutting properties contemporaneously with the recording of the final subdivision plat or prior to issuance of a building permit for an approved site plan, whichever event first occurs on the property after September 1, 2013.  This right of cross-access shall be recorded by plat in the register of deeds office in the county where the property is located. By the end of the next business day following the recordation, the applicant shall provide to Development Services evidence of recordation of the cross-access agreement. No building permit will be issued until evidence of recordation of the cross-access agreement is provided to the City. 

4.	
The content of the cross-access agreement required by the City shall be as follows:
a.	
Pedestrian and vehicular access is granted to all properties on the same block face as the property owner establishing the cross-access. The owner may make the pedestrian and vehicular access contingent upon the granting of reciprocal vehicular and pedestrian access right to the granting property.

b.	
The location of the pedestrian and vehicular access is described as over all sidewalks, vehicular drives and driveways located on the property or by specific metes and bounds.

c.	
The beneficiaries granted access rights include the lot owners, their successors, heirs and assigns, tenants and subtenants, lenders, employees, customers and guests.  

d.	
Each lot owner is required to maintain the vehicular and pedestrian access areas on their lot. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to repair, fixing potholes and repaving. 

e.	
All lot owners and tenants granted vehicular and pedestrian access rights shall have the right together with their contractors, but not obligation, to maintain all portions of pedestrian vehicular and access ways. If such owners, tenants and their contractors engage in any maintenance activities off their lot, they shall have the right of contribution to be reimbursed for their actual expenses from the defaulting lot owner, provided at least 30 days prior written notice is first provided to the defaulting lot owner. 

f.	
A temporary construction easement is granted to the abutting lot owner and tenants and their contractors to enter the adjoining property to install connecting internal drives not previously extended to the property line. 

g.	
A notice provision explaining how and where to send written notice.

h.	
A provision prohibiting the erection of fences walls and other obstructions that prevent the use of vehicular and pedestrian access ways.

i.	
A statement that the cross access agreement runs with the land and it is binding on all successors, heirs and assigns and that the easement rights are perpetual. 

j.	
A statement that the cross access agreement is a requirement of the Raleigh City Code and that it may not be terminated or amended without the written consent of the Development Services Director and such amendments and terminations that are in violation of the Raleigh City Code are void ab initio.

k.	
The cross access agreement shall be signed by all of owners of the granting property.

l.	
All lenders and their trustees with interests in the granting property shall subordinate their security interests to the cross access agreement.

m.	
The cross access agreement must be certified by an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of North Carolina, confirming compliance with all of all provisions of Sec 8.3.5.D.




Sec. 8.3.6. 
Administrative Design Adjustment Findings

A.	
The Board of Adjustment shall, in accordance with Sec. 10.2.18, approve a design adjustment from the provisions of Article 8.3 relating to blocks, lots and access, upon a showing of all of the findings set forth below.
1.	
The approved design adjustment meets the intent of this Article;

2.	
The approved design adjustment conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans;

3.	
The approved design adjustment does not increase congestion or compromise safety;

4.	
The approved adjustment does not create any lots without direct street frontage;

5.	
The approved design adjustment does not conflict with an approved or built roadway construction project adjacent to or in the vicinity of the site (no design adjustment shall be approved when the City Council has authorized a roadway project in the vicinity, where the roadway design has not yet been finalized); and

6.	
The design adjustment is deemed reasonable due to one or more of the following:
a.	
Topographic changes are too steep;

b.	
The presence of existing buildings, stream and other natural features;

c.	
Site layout of developed properties;

d.	
Adjoining uses or their vehicles are incompatible;

e.	
Existing buildings, streams or other natural or man-made obstructions or site layout of developed properties prevent cross access;

f.	
There are steep slopes in excess of 25%;

g.	
Freeways, waterways, railroad lines, pre-existing development, tree conservation areas, stream buffers, cemeteries, open space or easements would make the provisions of a complete block or a stub street infeasible; or

h.	
With respect to the requirement for a stub street, a high intensity non-residential use is located adjacent to a proposed residential subdivision.





B.	
 If a design adjustment is granted from the requirement to provide cross-access, then bicycle and pedestrian connections shall be provided between abutting properties, except where there is a perennial wet stream crossing of greater than 15 feet in width that interferes with such access.

Article 8.4. 
New Streets

Sec. 8.4.1. 
General Provisions


This Article describes guidelines for the construction of new streets throughout the City and is intended to provide a catalog of pre-approved street types that are appropriate to use. The City has approved a separate Street Design Manual which provides further details.
A.	
Intent
1.	
The intent of the new streets regulations is to provide a palette of street typologies and design elements that reflect the character of different areas within the City. 

2.	
The new street regulations provide adequate travel lanes for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians. 

3.	
Gated public streets shall not be permitted.



B.	
Applicability
1.	
When a preliminary plan, final plat or site plan proposes the construction of a new street the requirements of this Article apply. 

2.	
Sidewalks, streets and street trees must be installed and constructed in accordance with this Article.

3.	
Existing streets may remain serving existing development in their current configuration; however, they shall not be extended or substantially rebuilt except in conformance with this Article (see also Article 8.5. Existing Streets)C.	Letter of Acceptance Required1.	Sidewalks, streets and street trees must be installed prior to the issuance of a letter of final acceptance. 2.	A conditional letter of acceptance may be issued in accordance with Sec. 8.1.3. where the Development Services Director determines that landscaping in the public right-of-way cannot be installed due to inclement weather conditions, a surety in the amount of 125% of the value of the landscaping shall be provided to the City, in accordance with Sec. 8.5.1.B. The landscaping improvements shall be installed within 12 months of issuance of the conditional letter of acceptance.3.	Where determined appropriate by the Development Services Director, the sidewalk and street tree planting area may occur on private property subject to an easement for public access.D.	Tree Planting1.	Unless otherwise noted below, all trees planted in accordance with this Article must be shade trees. 2.	Where overhead utilities exist, 1 understory tree shall be planted every 20 feet on center, on average. Required understory trees may be installed within GSI practices. Up to 20% of required understory trees may be offset by installing vegetated GSI practices, such as stormwater planter boxes. A maintenance plan must be approved for the GSI practice according to Sec. 9.2.2.D.3.	All required street trees must meet the design and installation requirements of Sec. 7.2.7





. If a GSI practice is part of an approved stormwater management plan for the site, required street trees may be installed within the GSI practice. A maintenance plan must be approved for the GSI practice according to Sec. 9.2.2.D.

4.	
Where development abuts a street controlled by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, street trees may not be required in the right-of-way, at the discretion of the North Carolina Department of Transportation. In this instance, a Type C2 street protective yard is required in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.E.	Design Adjustments Relating to New Streets (Article 8.4).The Board of Adjustment shall, in accordance with Sec. 10.2.18., approve a design adjustment from the provisions of Article 8.4 relating to new streets, upon a showing of all of the findings set below.1.	The approved adjustment meets the intent of this Article;2.	The approved adjustment conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans;3.	The approved adjustment does not increase congestion or compromise safety;4.	The approved adjustment does not create additional maintenance responsibilities for the City;5.	The approved adjustment has been designed and certified by a Professional Engineer;6.	The approved adjustment addresses stormwater collection and conveyance and does not adversely impact stormwater collection; and7.	One or more of the following conditions are present:a.	an existing building would impede roadway expansion; orb.	transitioning from a different street section.Sec. 8.4.2. Street TypesA.	Sensitive Area Streets1.	Sensitive Area Parkway2.	Sensitive Area Avenue3.	Sensitive Area Residential Street B.	Local Streets1.	Neighborhood Yield2.	Neighborhood Local3.	Neighborhood Street4.	Multifamily StreetC.	Mixed Use Streets1.	Avenue 2-Lane, Undivided2.	Avenue 2-Lane, Divided3.	Avenue 3-Lane, Parallel Parking4.	Main Street, Parallel Parking5.	Main Street, Angle ParkingD.	Major Streets1.	Avenue 4-Lane, Parallel Parking2.	Avenue 4-Lane, Divided3.	Avenue 6-Lane, Divided4.	Multi-Way Boulevard, Parallel Parking5.	Multi-Way Boulevard, Angle ParkingE.	Industrial and Service Streets1.	Industrial Street2.	Alley, Residential3.	Alley, Mixed UseF.	Accesswaysa.	Primary Internal Access Driveb.	Pedestrian PassageSec. 8.4.3. Sensitive Area StreetsA.	Sensitive Area Parkway





















Width 
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 154' 
 
B
 Pavement width 
 32' 
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
D
 Multi-use trail (min)
 10'
 
E
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 
F
 Drainage (min)
 10'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Grassed shoulder
 2'
 
H
 Paved shoulder/bicycle lane
 8'
 
I
 Travel lane
 11' 
 
J
 Paved shoulder 
 2'
 
K
 Median (min)
 30'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Multi-use path
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 50' o.c. avg
 


B.	
Sensitive Area Avenue


Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width
 80'
 
B
 Pavement width
 30'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 5'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 
G
 Drainage (min)
 10'
 

Travelway
 
H
 Grassed Shoulder
 2'
 
I
 Paved Shoulder
 4'
 
J
 Travel lane
  11'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 50' o.c. avg
 



C.	
Sensitive Area Residential Street



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width
 70'
 
B
 Pavement width
 20'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 5'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 
G
 Drainage (min)
 10'
 

Travelway
 
H
 Grassed Shoulder
 2'
 
I
 Travel lane
  10'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 50' o.c. avg
 


Sec. 8.4.4. 
Local Streets

A.	
Neighborhood Yield



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 55'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 27'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Parallel parking/travel lane 
 13.5'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


B.	
Neighborhood Local



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 59'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 31'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Parallel parking/travel lane 
 15.5'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


C.	
Neighborhood Street



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 64'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 36'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Parallel parking lane
 8'
 
H
 Travel lane
 10'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


D.	
Multifamily Street



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 22'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 varies
 

Streetscape 
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip, easement (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk, easement (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Parking lane 
    Parallel (either side)
    Head-in (either side)
    60° angle (either side)
 8'
18'
19.8'
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel, 
head-in, angle
 


Sec. 8.4.5. 
Mixed Use Streets

A.	
Avenue 2-Lane, Undivided 



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 64'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 36'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Bike lane 
 7'
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


B.	
Avenue 2-Lane, Divided 



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
    With center turn lane
    With median
 75'
79'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
    With center turn lane
    With median
 48'
52'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Bike lane 
 7'
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 
I
 Center lane
    Striped turn lane
    Median
 11'
15'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


C.	
Avenue 3-Lane, Parallel Parking



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
    With center turn lane
    With median
 90'
94'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
    With center turn lane
    With median
 62'
66'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 8'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
E
 Parallel parking lane
 8.5'
 
F
 Bike lane 
 6'
 
G
 Travel lane
 11'
 
H
 Center lane
    Striped turn lane
    Median
 11'
15'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


D.	
Main Street, Parallel Parking



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 73'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 41'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
E
 Parallel parking lane 
 8.5'
 
F
 Travel lane
 12'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


E.	
Main Street, Angle Parking



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 96'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 64'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
E
 60° angle parking lane 
 20'
 
F
 Travel lane
 12'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 60° angle
 


Sec. 8.4.6. 
Major Streets

A.	
Avenue 4-Lane, Parallel Parking



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 122'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 90'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
E
 Parallel parking lane 
 8.5'
 
F
 Bike lane 
 6'
 
G
 Travel lane
 11'
 
H
 Median
 17'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


B.	
Avenue 4-Lane, Divided 



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 104'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 76'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Bike lane 
 7.5'
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 
I
 Median
 17'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


C.	
Avenue 6-Lane, Divided 



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 126'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 98'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Bike lane 
 7.5'
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 
I
 Median
 17'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


D.	
Multi-Way Boulevard, Parallel Parking



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 154'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 66'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Access Lane
 
E
 Parallel parking
 8.5'
 
F
 Access lane 
 11'
 
G
 Median
 11'
 

Travelway
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 
I
 Median
 17'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type 
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel in access lane
 


E.	
Multi-Way Boulevard, Angle Parking



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 177'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 66'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Access Lane
 
E
 60° angle parking
 20'
 
F
 Access lane 
 11'
 
G
 Median
 11'
 

Travelway
 
H
 Travel lane
 11'
 
I
 Median
 17'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type 
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 60°angle in access lane
 


Sec. 8.4.7. 
Industrial and Service Streets 

A.	
Industrial Street



Width
 
A
 Right-of-way width 
 69'
 
B
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 41'
 

Streetscape
 
C
 Utility placement, easement (min)
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
G
 Parallel parking lane
 8.5'
 
H
 Travel lane
 12'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
Parking type
 Parallel
 


B.	
Alley, Residential



Width
 
A
 Easement width
 20'
 

Travelway
 
B
 Travel lane
 16'
 
B
 Travel lane, fire service route
 20'
 



C.	
Alley, Mixed Use



Width
 
A
 Easement width 
 24'
 

Travelway
 
B
 Travel lane
 20'
 



Sec. 8.4.8. 
Private Accessways

A.	
 Primary Internal Access Drive



Width
 
A
 Back-of-curb to back-of-curb
 36'
 

Streetscape
 
B
 Planting strip (min)
 5'
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 

Travelway
 
D
 Parallel parking lane
 8'
 
E
 Travel lane
 10'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Parking type
 Parallel 
 


B.	
Pedestrian Passage



Width
 
A
 Public access easement (min)
 20'
 

Travelway
 
B
 Paved area (min)
 10'
 

General 
 
Walkway type 
 Sidewalk
 


Article 8.5. 
Existing Streets

Sec. 8.5.1. 
General Provisions


This Article describes guidelines for the construction of street improvements and streetscapes for existing streets throughout the City.  It is intended to address when street and streetscape improvements are appropriate through the application of the pre-approved street types in this chapter.  The City has an approved Street Design Manual which provides further details.  
A.	
Intent
1.	
The intent of the existing streets regulations is to provide the application of the street typology map and the streetscapes to existing streets to reflect the character and context of areas in the City. 

2.	
The existing street regulations provide adequate travel lanes for vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians. 



B.	
Applicability
1.	
General
a.	
Any new development activity and any addition or repair subject to the requirements of Sec. 10.2.5.and Sec. 10.2.8. must meet street type and streetscape standards of this Article for existing streets abutting the subject property.b.	The streetscape types of Sec. 8.5.2. shall be applied based on the zoning and frontage type applied to the subject property.c.	Unless otherwise specifically provided, no permit for the construction, reconstruction, extension, repair or alteration of any building, structure or use of land and no building or land or any part of any building or land, may be occupied or used until the streetcape requirements of this Article have been met.d.	Gated public streets shall not be permitted.e.	Administrative design adjustments approved by the Development Services Director pursuant to Sec. 10.2.18. may be appropriate when an existing building would impede roadway expansion; when transitioning from a different street section; or where strict compliance with this UDO and the Raleigh Street Design Manual would pose a safety hazard.2.	Additions and Repairsa.	A building or site may be renovated or repaired without meeting the streetscape standards, provided there is no increase in gross floor area or improved site area.b.	When a building or site is increased in gross floor area or improved site area cumulatively by more than 10%, the streetscape provisions of this Article must be met.3.	Change in Use ExemptA change in use does not trigger application of the streetscape requirements of this Article.C.	Letter of Acceptance1.	Sidewalks, streets and street trees must be installed prior to the issuance of a letter of final acceptance. 2.	A conditional letter of acceptance may be issued in accordance with Sec. 8.1.3. where the Development Services Director determines that landscaping in the public right-of-way cannot be installed due to inclement weather conditions, a surety in the amount of 125% of the value of the landscaping shall be provided to the City, in accordance with Sec. 8.5.1.B. The landscaping improvements shall be installed within 12 months of issuance of the conditional letter of acceptance.3.	Where determined appropriate by the Development Services Director, the sidewalk and street tree planting area may occur on private property subject to an easement for public access.D.	Tree Planting1.	Unless otherwise noted below, all trees planted in accordance with this Article must be shade trees. 2.	Where overhead utilities exist, 1 understory tree shall be planted every 20 feet on center, on average. Required understory trees may be installed within GSI practices. Up to 20% of required understory trees may be offset by installing vegetated GSI practices, such as stormwater planter boxes. A maintenance plan must be approved for the GSI practice according to Sec. 9.2.2.D










.

3.	
All a required street trees must meet the design and installation requirements of Sec. 7.2.7. If a GSI practice is part of an approved stormwater management plan for the site, required street trees may be installed within the GSI practice. A maintenance plan must be approved for the GSI practice according to Sec. 9.2.2.D.

4.	
Where development abuts a street controlled by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, street trees may not be required in the right-of-way, at the discretion of the North Carolina Department of Transportation. In this instance, a Type C2 street protective yard is required in accordance with Sec. 7.2.4.E.	Fee-in-LieuWhere the Development Services Director determines that construction of improvements would result in the improvement of less than ½ of a linear block face; an equivalent payment in lieu of construction may be required. F.	Adopted Streetscape Plans1.	In the event an adopted streetscape plan regulates streetscape improvements, the adopted Plan shall control. The adopted streetscape plans are contained within the Raleigh Street Design Manual.2.	The requirements of this Article are intended to serve as minimum standards. Where a streetscape plan adopted before the effective date of this UDO sets a lower standard, the standard in this Article shall prevail.3.	The City Council may modify an adopted Streetscape Plan following written notice to property owners along the street.G.	Design Adjustments Relating to Existing Streets (Article 8.5).The Board of Adjustment shall, in accordance with Sec. 10.2.18., approve a design adjustment from the provisions of Article 8.5 relating to existing streets, upon a showing of all of the findings set below.1.	The approved adjustment meets the intent of this Article;2.	The approved adjustment conforms with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted City plans;3.	The approved adjustment does not increase congestion or compromise safety;4.	The approved adjustment does not create additional maintenance responsibilities for the City;5.	The approved adjustment has been designed and certified by a Professional Engineer; and6.	One or more of the following conditions are present:a.	an existing building would impede expansion; orb.	transitioning from a different street section impedes compliance.Sec. 8.5.2. Streetscape TypesThe required streetscape type is determined by the zoning district or by the designated frontage. Where there is conflict between a designated frontage and the zoning district, the designated frontage standard applies. Dimensional standards for planting area, tree spacing, and utility placement and the planting type may be varied to accommodate GSI practices. The Planning Director and the Parks and Cultural Resources Director and the Urban Forester shall make the final determination. Design specifications for streetscape improvements can be found in the Raleigh Street Design Manual, the City Tree Manual, and the City Stormwater Design Manual.A.	Main Street














Frontages
 
Applicable frontages
  -SH, -UG, -UL, -GR, -PL 
 

Zoning Districts
 
Applicable zoning districts
 Mixed use districts
 

Width
 
A
 Streetscape width (max)
 35'
 

Streetscape
 
B
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
C
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


B.	
Mixed Use




Frontages
 
Applicable frontages
  -UG, -UL, -GR, -PL
 

Zoning Districts
 
Applicable zoning districts
 Mixed use districts
 

Width
 
A
 Streetscape width (max)
 35'
 

Streetscape
 
B
 Sidewalk (min)
 8'
 
C
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


C.	
Commercial




Frontages
 
Applicable frontages
 -GR, -PL
 

Zoning Districts
 
Applicable zoning districts
 Mixed use districts
 

Width
 
A
 Streetscape width (max)
 65'
 

Streetscape
 
B
 Building setback (min/max) 
 20' / 50'
 
C
 Utility placement 
 5'
 
D
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
E
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 6' 
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 
No on-site parking permitted between the building and the street
 


D.	
Residential 




Frontages
 
Applicable frontages
 -DE
 

Zoning Districts
 
Applicable building types
 All districts: detached & 
attached house
 
Applicable zoning districts 
 Residential Districts, MH
 

Streetscape
 
A
 Building setback (min)
 varies
 
B
 Utility placement 
 5'
 
C
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
D
 Sidewalk (min)
    Typical
    Sensitive area
 6'
5'
 
E
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 


E.	
Multi-Way



Frontages
 
Applicable frontages
 -PL
 

Zoning Districts
 
Applicable zoning districts
 Mixed Use Districts
 

Width
 
A
 Streetscape width (max)
 65'
 

Streetscape
 
B
 Sidewalk (min)
 10'
 
C
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 
D
 60° angle parking 
 20'
 
E
 Access lane 
 11'
 
F
 Median (min)
 11'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree grate / lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 




F.	
Parking




Frontages
 
Applicable frontages
 -PL
 

Zoning Districts
 
Applicable zoning districts
 Mixed Use Districts
 

Width
 
A
 Streetscape width (max)
 120'
 

Streetscape
 
B
 Sidewalk (min)
 8'
 
C
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 
D
 90° head-in parking (min)
 18'
 
E
 Access lane (min)
 22'
 
F
 Planting area (min)
 10'
 
G
 Utility placement 
 5'
 
H
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
I
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
J
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Area F planting type
 36" min hedge/wall 
(see Sec. 7.2.4.)Areas C & J planting typeTree grate / lawnTree spacing40' o.c. avgG.	Sidewalk and Tree Lawn
 
  
  




Zoning Districts
 
Required zoning districts
 All districts: Existing streets where no other streetscape applies
 

Streetscape
 
A
 Utility placement 
 5'
 
B
 Maintenance strip (min)
 2'
 
C
 Sidewalk (min)
 6'
 
D
 Planting area (min)
 6'
 

General 
 
Walkway type  
 Sidewalk 
 
Planting type
 Tree lawn
 
Tree spacing
 40' o.c. avg
 




Sec. 8.5.3. 
Nonconforming Streetscapes

A.	
Where a streetscape along an existing street is constrained by an existing building, the Planning Director may adjust the streetscape standards to the minimum extent necessary to accommodate the existing area between the face of the building and back of curb.

B.	
The standards shall be modified in the following order.
1.	
Reduce or eliminate the planting area.

2.	
If necessary, replace large canopy trees with small trees that are more appropriate for the reduced area. If the planting zone is eliminated, create a bumpout to provide for tree planting.

3.	
Reduce the sidewalk to the minimum width necessary to accommodate ADA accessibility.



Sec. 8.5.4. 
Existing Private Streets

A.	
General
1.	
No new private streets are allowed.

2.	
All existing private  streets must remain under maintenance of the homeowners' association and must be maintained to equivalent public street standards.

3.	
Private alleys must be constructed to the standards in Sec. 8.4.7. and the construction standards specified in the Raleigh Street Design Manual.4.	Private alleys are not dedicated to the public and shall not be publicly maintained. B.	Homeowners' Association1.	In no case shall the City be responsible for failing to provide any emergency or regular fire, police or other public service when such failure is due to lack of access to such areas due to inadequate design or construction, blocking of access routes, inadequate maintenance or any other factor within the control of the developer, homeowners' association or occupants.2.	In no case shall any approval, permit or certificate granted be valid unless the homeowners' association documents clearly indicate the limitations of governmental responsibility and unless all conveyances indicate those limitations provided, however, the provisions of this section and all other provisions of the homeowners' declaration are applicable to the portions of the development conveyed and the owners of the conveyed portion, whether or not any such provisions are incorporated into the conveying documents.C.	Locked Gate Access1.	Any private street in existence or approved prior to September 1, 2013 may be considered for gated access.2.	All private streets and drives with access limited by locked gates or similar devices must provide a pass-key and lock-box of a type, at a location and installed in a manner as may be required by the City Fire Department for the provision of emergency access. 3.	The owner, including any homeowners' association, shall maintain the lock-box, gate and gate lock in a working order so as to ensure accessibility by emergency personnel and vehicles. 4.	The City and other applicable governmental entities and their respective emergency personnel shall be granted in writing the right, without liability, to break the locked gate or such similar device when emergency personnel reasonably believe that doing so is necessary to save life, prevent serious bodily harm, put out a Fire, to prevent a crime or to apprehend an apparent lawbreaker or to avert or control a public catastrophe.D.	Traffic FlowIt shall be the responsibility of the homeowners' association to establish speed limits and to maintain uninterrupted traffic flow along all private streets. If it is necessary for "no parking" signs to be erected, for street lights to be installed, for repairs to be made or towing of vehicles to be undertaken, this is all to be done at the expense of the homeowners' association.E.	Street SignsAll streets must contain identification as required in Sec. 7.3.13.H. F.	Setbacks and Lot WidthsAll private streets shall be treated as public street rights-of-way for purposes of determining required setbacks and lot widths.G.	MaintenanceThe final plat shall be conditioned as follows:1.	Require perpetual maintenance of private streets by a homeowners' association to the same standards as connecting public streets for the safe use of persons using the streets; and2.	State that the City has absolutely no obligation or intention to ever accept such streets as public right-of-way.Article 8.6. Reimbursements Sec. 8.6.1. GreenwaysA.	Required Greenway DedicationSubject to the limitations of Sec. 8.6.1.C. below, whenever a tract of land included within any proposed residential subdivision or residential site plan includes any part of a greenway designated on the Comprehensive Plan, the greenway shall be platted and dedicated as a greenway easement. B.	Greenway Easement Width Subject to the limitations of Sec. 8.6.1.C. below, the greenway required to be platted shall at a minimum, be the product of the following dimensions: 1.	Minimum standard width multiplied by the length of the boundary along the banks of the adjoining watercourse;2.	Plus that portion of the watercourse contained within the development when property lines extend to the centerline of the watercourse: a.	Neuse River: 150 feet from each bank.b.	Crabtree & Walnut Creeks: 100 feet from each bank.c.	All other tributaries: As established by the current City Council-approved Raleigh Parks Plan. C.	Limitation on Dedication1.	No dedication shall be required for greenway lying outside of any floodplain, floodprone or flood hazard area, but such area shall be reserved in accordance with Sec. 8.1.6.

















 for possible City acquisition. 

2.	
The amount of greenway required to be dedicated shall not exceed the total obligation of the development to pay an open space facility fee, as determined by Article 8.9. Facility Fees, the number and type of dwelling units allowed by law for the development and the schedule of greenway land values listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule, kept on file by the City and is updated and adopted by the City Council. D.	Method and Conditions of Reimbursement 1.	The City Council may, in its discretion, change the general term of payment for individual projects and authorize payment in 1 sum immediately or in fixed payments. 2.	No payment will be allowed if the dedicated open space is being used to satisfy a requirement for open space based on the underlying zoning district. Reimbursements will be reduced by any open space facility fee credits. 3.	The dedicators shall waive their statutory right to withdraw the dedication prior to receiving any payment. 4.	Reimbursements shall be fixed at the rate in effect when the dedication occurs. Sec. 8.6.2. Minor Utility LinesReimbursement for utility lines shall be made in accordance with §8-2075, §8-2076, §8-2077, §8-2091, §8-2094 and §8-2095 of the Raleigh City Code.A.	Inside City Limits1.	For developments inside the corporate limits of the City or developments which have agreed to be annexed by the City, the City will reimburse the developer for costs incurred over and above those required to serve the immediate development. 2.	The reimbursement shall be made in 10 equal annual installments with interest at 4% per annum beginning January 1 following the time of final inspection and final acceptance of the improvement by the City, but the first installment payment shall not become payable until the second January 1 following final inspection and final acceptance or contract execution, whichever is later.3.	The City Council may in its discretion authorize reimbursement to be paid in one sum immediately or in installments over a period of less than 10 years. 4.	The following installations are subject to reimbursement:a.	Differential unit costs between a water main 6 inches in diameter and a water main 12 inches in diameter when required by the City and not necessary to serve the subject property. b.	Differential unit costs between a sewer main over 8 inches in diameter and sewer mains 12 inches in diameter, when required by the City and not necessary to serve the subject property.c.	Unit cost of off-site utility lines less than 12 inches in diameter constructed by the developer to reach the boundary of the development whether the lines are installed inside or outside the corporate limits of the City.B.	Outside City Limits1.	For developments outside the corporate limits of the City, the City will reimburse the developer for the unit cost of off-site utilities less than 12 inches in diameter constructed within the corporate limits of the City by the developer to reach the boundary of the development. 2.	The reimbursement shall be made in 10 annual equal installments, without interest. The first payment to become due and payable on the second January 1 following the date of final inspection and final acceptance of the improvement and approval of the cost by the City Council.3.	Current reimbursement fees are listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule, kept on file by the City and are updated and adopted by the City Council. C.	Procedural Conditions for Reimbursement1.	Following completion of the improvements acceptable to the City, the developer shall furnish the City an itemized list of costs identified in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule to be reimbursed by the City. The City Council shall approve a contract with the developer, setting forth the terms for reimbursement. 2.	The City shall pay such other costs incidental to the development of the general area which, in the opinion of the City Council, should properly be borne by the City. The City shall set forth the terms of such payment. Sec. 8.6.3. StreetsA.	Improvements Eligible for Reimbursement1.	The City will pay to the developer unit costs in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule for development-related improvements over and above the unit costs for applicable streets. 2.	The following installations are eligible for reimbursement:a.	Any street construction in excess of the minimum standard needed to serve the development; b.	Any right-of-way dedication in excess of the minimum standard needed to serve the development; andc.	Right-of-way for controlled-access freeways.3.	Reimbursements are subject to availability of funds and eligibility for reimbursement through the City’s facility fee program. B.	Method and Conditions of Reimbursement1.	All general and development-related improvement costs shall be based on the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule, provided that the City Council shall grant alternative mitigation when the total expenditures for both the thoroughfare facility fees and road improvement costs in excess of the applicable street improvements exceed the costs attributable to the development for Thoroughfare construction within the benefit area as indicated in Article 8.9. Facility Fees2.	Current reimbursement fees are listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule, kept on file by the City and are updated and adopted by the City Council. 3.	No monetary payments will be allowed if the developer utilizes the dedicated right-of-way for impervious surface coverage in the -FWPOD, -SWPOD or -UWPOD.4.	The dedicators shall waive their statutory right to withdraw dedications prior to receiving any payment.5.	Reimbursements shall be paid at the rate in effect when dedication occurs or construction costs are incurred.6.	The City shall pay such other costs incidental to the development of the general area which, in the opinion of the City Council, should properly be borne by the City. The City Council shall set forth the terms of such payment.Sec. 8.6.4. Expiration of ReimbursementAny request for reimbursement for street, greenway or utility installation must be submitted to the City within 2 years of completion and final acceptance by the City or State, whichever is applicable.Sec. 8.6.5. Stormwater InfrastructureA.	Improvements Eligible for ReimbursementThe City may reimburse a developer for stormwater infrastructure improvements that are over and above improvements needed for the development to comply with any ordinance or regulation.1.	The following improvements may be eligible for reimbursement:a.	Stormwater treatment practices, including GSI practices, for treating stormwater otherwise conveyed within street rights-of-way; andb.	Stormwater conveyances, including pipes, culverts, ditches, swales, and channels, associated with and needed for such stormwater treatment practices.2.	Eligibility for reimbursement shall be subject to availability of funds and to prior determination of eligibility for reimbursement by the Engineering Services Director or a designee in accordance with the requirements of G.S. 160A-309.B.	Method and Conditions of ReimbursementThe obligations of the parties and reimbursement schedule shall be established in a written agreement between the developer and the City.Article 8.7. Utilities Sec. 8.7.1. Water SupplyA.	All Public Water MainsAll public water mains shall be installed in all public road rights-of-way, except as allowed by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director to address existing water quality problems or severe topographic or subsurface constraints.B.	Within City Limits1.	When a development is located within the corporate limits of the City, the developer shall connect with the City water system and install all water lines, in accordance with this UDO, required to provide public water service to every lot within the development.2.	The developer shall extend water lines along the public road frontage of the tract to the periphery of the development unless otherwise approved by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director. C.	Outside City Limits1.	When a development is located outside the corporate limits of the City, but water facilities are available or are made available at the boundary of the development within 1 year after approval, the developer shall connect to the City water system and install all water lines required to provide water service to every lot within the development, as required in Raleigh City Code  §8-2063(b). 2.	If connection is made, the developer shall extend water lines along the public road frontage of the tract to the periphery of the development unless otherwise approved by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director.D.	Construction Inside a CM District or Protective Yard1.	Water lines that traverse a CM District or a protective yard for a distance of at least 50 feet or more shall be built with a bend to prevent direct sight view through the district or yard provided that such bend does not exceed a 90-degree angle. 2.	The requirement of a bend within a CM District or a protective yard may be waived or modified by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director where the CM District or a protective yard fails to contain a vegetative screen. E.	Community Water Systems1.	Developments located outside the corporate limits of the City but within the extra-territorial jurisdictional area of Raleigh and located within the utility service area as shown on Map PU-1 of the Raleigh 2030 Comprehensive Plan that install or propose to install community sanitary sewer systems must install the system in accordance with the City design, materials and construction standards and methods. 2.	The design, materials and construction standards and methods are subject to the same regulations as if the community water system was connected to the City of Raleigh water system. 3.	If the conditions of N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-374 are met by the City, full dedication of a community water system, including all wells, pumps and utility lines, is required. Sec. 8.7.2. Sewage DisposalA.	Within City Limits1.	When a development is located within the corporate limits of the City, the developer shall connect to the City sewer system of the City in accordance with this UDO and install all sewer lines required to provide sewer service to every lot within the development. 2.	The developer shall extend sewer lines to the periphery of the development as required by the Public Utilities Director. B.	Outside City Limits1.	When a development is located outside the corporate limits of the City, but sewer facilities are available or are made available at the boundary of the development within 1 year after approval, the developer shall connect to the City sewer system and install all sewer lines required to provide sewer service to every lot within the development, unless: a.	Grades are such that the sewer facilities would not be of service to the development; orb.	There is insufficient off-site sewer capacity to serve the development.2.	If a connection is made, the developer shall extend sewer lines to the periphery of the development unless otherwise approved by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director.C.	Crossing a CM District or Protective Yard1.	Sewer lines that traverse a CM District or a protective yard for a distance of at least 50 feet or more shall be built with a bend to prevent direct sight view through the district or protective yard provided that such bend does not exceed a 90-degree angle. 2.	All sewer lines 12 inches or less within a CM District or a protective yard shall be constructed of ductile iron. 3.	The requirement of a bend within a CM District or a protective yard may be waived or modified by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director where the gradient will not permit gravity flow or where the CM District or a protective yard fails to contain a vegetative screen. D.	Community Sewer System1.	Development located outside the corporate limits of the City but within the extra-territorial jurisdictional area of Raleigh and located within the utility service area as shown on Map PU-1 of the Raleigh 2030 Comprehensive Plan, developers that install or propose to install community sanitary sewer system must install the system in accordance with the City design, materials and construction standards and methods. 2.	The design, materials and construction standards and methods are subject to the same regulations as if the community sewer system was connected to the system of the City of Raleigh. Sec. 8.7.3. Public Water and Sewer StubsA.	In a residential development or subdivision located in a Residential District, the developer shall extend water and sewer service stubs to the property line on each side of the development where the locations of the service stub connections are known before the streets are paved. B.	If curbs are installed, the location of service stubs shall be stamped on the curbs. C.	In all other developments, the responsibility for making and paying for water and sewer service stub extensions shall be borne by the owner of the property to be served by the extension. D.	Extensions shall be made according to City standards and specifications. Sec. 8.7.4. Underground UtilitiesA.	Extension of Utility Systems Electrical and telephone service shall be extended by the developer to each lot within a development. B.	Primary ServicesAll new primary electrical, telephone, fiber optic and cable distribution lines installed to serve a project shall be placed underground within the entire development to serve each parcel or building, without expense to the City. C.	Secondary Services1.	Within the development, all new secondary utilities installed to serve the project shall be placed underground without expense to the City. 2.	Secondary utilities shall be underground from the point they enter the site and shall include but not be limited to pad mounted or subterranean transformers, secondary electrical, telephone, fiber optic and cable distribution lines. 3.	Underground secondary electrical services shall originate from a ground mounted or subterranean electrical transformer. Ground mounted transformers shall not be located in the public right-of-way. D.	Street Lights1.	When installing underground electrical and telephone service, underground terminal facilities for street lighting shall be installed along public streets. All street light designs must follow the Standards for Roadway Illumination as established by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. 2.	The average maintained footcandle level for outlying and rural roads as defined by Illuminating Engineering Society of North America shall be no less than 3/10 and the uniformity ratio shall be no greater than 64. 3.	The City will not take responsibility for any street lighting system until it meets the above standards. E.	Inside a CM District or Protective Yard 1.	Underground utilities that traverse a CM District or a protective yard for a distance of at least 50 feet or more shall be built with a bend to prevent direct sight view through the district or yard provided that such a bend does not exceed a 90-degree angle.     2.	The requirement of a bend may be waived or modified by the Raleigh Public Utilities Director where the gradient will not permit gravity flow or where the CM District or protective yard fails to contain a vegetative screen. 3.	In tree conservation areas adjacent to the street that are zoned -MPOD, CM or -SHOD, or contain a Parkway Frontage, utilities serving the development shall be located within driveways and other authorized incursions of the tree protected area. Article 8.8. Surface Water DrainageSec. 8.8.1. Connection to Sanitary Sewer ProhibitedNo surface water drainage shall empty into a sanitary sewer. Sec. 8.8.2. Piping of Watercourses A.	This section applies to all storm drainage piping of watercourses except those crossing public or private streets. B.	The City encourages retaining stormwater onsite through rainwater harvesting, infiltration, and/or evaporation and through preserving natural drainage features. All natural watercourses shall remain open and unaltered unless piping, enclosing or altering is requested and justified by the developer or required by the Engineering Services Director, but then only when the following conditions are met: 1.	Where the Engineering Services Director has determined that an existing public or private storm drainage system is reasonably available, the developer must either connect the development pipe system to said storm drainage system or, during the administrative site review meeting for the development, propose options for using GSI practices as a part the site’s stormwater management plan;2.	The developer must do all grading and provide all structures necessary to properly connect to the existing storm drainage system; 3.	All design and construction must be to City standards; 4.	Pipes and open channels must be designed in accordance with the Stormwater Management Design Manual; 5.	Storm drains and culverts used in conjunction with streets must meet the standards of Sec. 9.3.6.and Sec. 9.3.7.;6.	To preserve the screening function of CM Districts and protective yards, pipes which traverse any CM District or protective yard for a distance of at least 50 feet or more shall be built with a bend to prevent direct sight view through the yard provided that the bend must not exceed a 90-degree angle. The requirement of a bend within a CM District or a protective yard may be waived or modified waived or modified by the City Council where the gradient will not permit gravity flow or where the CM District or a protective yard fails to contain a vegetative screen; 7.	Where natural drainage systems are used or where an approved pipe drainage system cannot be connected to an existing public pipe drainage system, a developer must grade to assure positive flow of runoff from design storms and provide drainage structures that are necessary to properly carry stormwater to locations which are acceptable to the Engineering Services Director. Such grading shall not preclude the use of practices that retain the stormwater onsite; 8.	The watercourse is located outside natural resource buffer yards of a -FWPOD, -SWPOD, UWPOD, -MPOD or CM District and outside riparian water surface buffers unless a variance is granted; and 9.	The watercourse buffer standards of Sec. 9.2.3., whenever applicable, are met.Sec. 8.8.3. Stormwater Control Plans A.	For all subdivisions subject to Article 9.2. Stormwater Management through Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas, a stormwater control plan must be submitted and approved as part of the preliminary plan. B.	This requirement may not apply to a subdivision where all proposed lots exceed 1 acre in size. C.	If all lots exceed 1 acre in size, a stormwater control plan must be submitted for the streets, utilities and storm drainage areas for the entire subdivision, but no stormwater control plan is required to be submitted for each lot within the subdivision. D.	A stormwater control plan must be approved for each individual lot within a subdivision at the time any permit is requested. Article 8.9. Facility FeesSec. 8.9.1. Facility Fees Imposed on New ConstructionA.	No person shall make any improvement until all applicable thoroughfare or open space facility fees have been paid in full. B.	No building permit or other City permit for those improvements not requiring a building permit, shall be issued for any activity requiring the payment of a facility fee until the required facility fees have been paid in full. C.	Current facility fees are listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule, kept on file by the City and are updated and adopted by the City Council. Sec. 8.9.2. Facility Fee ExceptionsFacility fees shall not be imposed in the following circumstances. A.	Governmental authorities that are exempted by law from paying the fees.B.	Alterations, repairs, renovations or expansion of a residential building where no additional residential units are created and use, as shown within the fee schedule, is not changed.C.	Replacement of a building or structure or manufactured home with a new building or structure or manufactured home of the same dwelling type or non-residential use. Nonresidential alterations, repairs, renovations or replacement buildings or structures must be of the same size and use as the original building or structure and must meet the same parking, acreage, bed or other fee basis requirements. If the alterations or replacement change of use or alteration or expansion payment rule in Sec. 8.9.3.A. or Sec. 8.9.3.B. shall apply. No facility fee credit will be given under this section or under Sec. 8.9.3.A. or Sec. 8.9.3.B. unless the structure for which the credit is sought was standing at some time in the 6 year period immediately preceding the date on which the facility fee for the new project is calculated. D.	The construction of walls, fences, monuments, billboards, poles, pipelines antennas, transmission lines, advertising signs, unmanned utility stations or substations, wells, water towers, off-street parking decks, parking garages or parking lots as the primary use on the lot or similar structures and improvements. E.	Accessory uses listed in Sec. 6.7.3.




























































F.	
Incidental water sports, play courts, play fields provided that there is no solicitation of off-site traffic or business, there is no separate charge or membership fee associated with the use of such facilities and no special use permit is required. 

G.	
Temporary structures or uses. 

H.	
Croplands or pasturelands and incidental sheds and barns. But processing facilities and residences shall pay their respective industrial and residential facility fees. 

Sec. 8.9.3. 
Computation of Fees


The Development Services Director shall compute and collect all facility fees. 
A.	
Alterations, Expansions or Redevelopment 


In the case of an alteration, expansion, renovation or redevelopment of an existing development, facility fees shall be levied based upon the net increase, if any, above that which the existing development would pay. 
B.	
Change of Use or the Addition of Other Uses 
1.	
In the case of a change of use, which increases the fee rate or total fee above that which the existing use would pay, facility fees shall be paid based upon the net increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 

2.	
There shall be no reimbursement of any facility fee due to a change of use which has a lower fee than the current use, nor shall there be any reimbursement if a use is terminated. 



C.	
Change of Use Status from Illegal to Legal 


In the case of a use that was previously illegal under the Raleigh City Code being made legal other than by terminating the use, the use shall be liable for the payment of a facility fee equal to the fee that would be paid if the use were a new use. 
D.	
Mixed Use


In the case of mixed use developments or multiple tenants or unit owners each separate occupancy of tenant space shall be charged a fee based on the prevailing use or function of that space. 
E.	
Shell/Foundation Permits
1.	
In the case of a “shell or foundation” permit, the facility fee amounts shall be based on the use or uses used to determine the amount of required off-street parking or as shown on the building permit when no off-street parking is required.

2.	
If it is found during review of the “fit-up” permit that the uses differ from these uses for the shell, a determination shall be made as to whether or not an additional fee or refund is due. If any additional fee is due, it shall be paid prior to the issuance of the fit-up permit. 



F.	
Size of Retail Establishments


In the case of retail uses which share common drives or parking areas and which are eligible shared parking requirements, all such retail uses, including those located on separate outparcels, shall pay a thoroughfare facility fee based on the appropriate square footage range of all the retail uses located within the development even if this is a greater fee than for any single retail use or other combinations of retail uses. 
G.	
Unscheduled Activity
1.	
If the type of new construction activity is not specified on the thoroughfare fee schedule, the Development Services Director shall use the thoroughfare fee applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land use on the thoroughfare fee schedule. 

2.	
If the applicant disagrees with the determination of the Development Services Director, then the applicant shall use the alternate thoroughfare facility fee calculation, except that the cost per trip end factor shall be the same referred to in the alternative thoroughfare fee calculation schedule. 



Sec. 8.9.4. 
Funds Collected

A.	
Creation of Trust Funds
1.	
The facility fees collected by the City shall be kept separate from other revenue of the City.

2.	
 There shall be 1 trust fund established for each of the benefit areas, shown on maps labeled “Thoroughfare and Collector Street Benefit Areas” and “Open Space Benefit Areas,” respectively; copies are on file with the City Clerk and are made a part of this UDO. 

3.	
All facility funds collected shall be properly identified by the appropriate benefit area and transferred for deposit in the appropriate trust account. 

4.	
A portion of these funds shall be allocated and assigned to a separate account for each benefit area for the purpose of providing funds for reimbursements required per Sec. 8.9.1. and Sec. 8.9.3.5.	These funds shall be allocated into the appropriate reimbursement accounts as follows: a.	Thoroughfare and collector street fees as defined in this UDO: i.	Benefit Zone 1: 50% of the funds collected.ii.	Benefit Zone 2: 27% of the funds collected. iii.	Benefit Zone 3: 27% of the funds collected b.	Open space fees: All Benefit Zones: 20% of the funds collected.6.	Funds may be transferred from reimbursement accounts to project accounts for each benefit area at the end of each fiscal year, to the extent that the account balance in each benefit area exceeds the contractual reimbursement obligations for the area. B.	Limitation on Expenditure of Funds Collected1.	Funds expended from facility fee trust accounts shall be made for no other purpose than for thoroughfare and collector street capital costs or open space capital costs associated with projects undertaken by the City or by the City in conjunction with other units of government. 2.	No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance or for administration of the facility fee program. 3.	Expenditures from the trust fund shall be matched by an equal sum of money approved from non-fee sources and shall be spent for projects located in the same zone in which the fees were collected. 4.	All funds shall be used exclusively for capital improvements within the benefit area from which the funds were collected. 5.	A report of the collection activity from application of facility fees shall be made to City Council and once every 2 years. 6.	The report shall show where fees have been collected and what projects have been constructed or reimbursed with fee monies. 7.	The City Council shall review this report and consider whether within each benefit area fees are being spent so that no area of new construction is not being benefited by the fees. 8.	If the City Council determines that areas of new construction within benefit areas are not being benefited, then it shall readjust capital improvements program to correct this condition. 9.	Funds shall be expended in the order in which they were collected. But in no event shall funds not be expended within 6 years after their collection except when the City, in conjunction with any other unit of government, provides the facility; in such cases, the funds must be expended within 10 years after their collection. C.	Disbursal of Funds Funds withdrawn from these trust accounts must be used solely in accordance with the provisions of this UDO. The disbursal of funds require the approval of the City Council upon recommendation of the City Manager. D.	Interest on Funds1.	Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested as allowed in N.C. Gen. Stat. §159-30 for other public monies. 2.	All income derived shall be deposited in the applicable trust account. E.	Return of Fees1.	If the development for which the fees were paid was never begun or if begun, the property is restored to an undeveloped state, a reimbursement will be allowed within 7 months following the issuance of a building permit provided such permit is surrendered to the City or within 7 months following the payment of the facility fee in the case when no building permit is required. 2.	Any funds not expended within the time limits established in Sec. 8.9.4.B.9. above shall be returned to the feepayor or the landowner if the address of the feepayor provided to the City is not current with interest at the rate of 6% per annum.  A refund of permit fees is allowed for shell permits if it is determined during review of the “fit-up” permits, the uses have changed to a use with a lower fee then a refund is owed. Sec. 8.9.5. PenaltiesA.	In addition to any other remedy allowed by N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-175, the failure to pay a facility fee is a civil penalty.B.	 The amount of the penalty shall equal the amount of the unpaid facility fee, plus an interest charge of ½.% per month compounded monthly and a service charge of $100. C.	The City may assess the penalty against the developer or the landowner where new construction has occurred without payment of a facility fee; but no service charge will be assessed when City staff has made an error in the fee calculations.D.	No penalty shall be assessed until the person or persons alleged to be in violation are served by registered mail, certified mail—return receipt requested or personal service with notice to pay. E.	The City Attorney is authorized to institute a civil action in the name of the City, in the appropriate division of the general court of justice in Wake County for recovery of the penalty. F.	All monies recovered shall be deposited in the appropriate trust fund. Article 8.10. EnforcementSec. 8.10.1. Violations and ViolatorsEach of the following are declared to be violations of the Raleigh City Code.A.	It shall be unlawful for any person to design, construct or open, any street, drainage structure or utility line unless and until such street, drainage structure or utility line shall be platted, laid out, graded and improved in accordance with the provisions of this UDO, plans approved under this UDO and conditions of approval. B.	Any owner, tenant, architect, attorney, contractor, designer, engineer, lender, real estate broker, surveyor, agent or any other person who acts in concert, participates, directs or assists in the creation or continuation of a violation of this Chapter, any regulation, rule, order or condition of approval adopted pursuant to this Chapter, or contrary to any plan approved under this UDO are each declared to be violators of the Raleigh City Code.C.	It shall be unlawful for any person to record a plat without the approval of the City, to make any change to an approved plat or to record a document beyond its expiration date for recording without the specific written consent of the City. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Wake County shall not order or direct the recording of a plat where such recording would be in conflict with this Chapter.D.	It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide real property by deed, will, security instrument, partition or by map, contrary to this Chapter, any rule, regulation, order, condition of approval adopted pursuant to this Chapter, or any plan approved under this UDO.E.	It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to make any dedication as required by this UDO, any rule, regulation, order or condition of approval adopted pursuant to this UDO or any plan approved under this UDO.F.	It shall be unlawful for any person to own, manage, lease or occupy real property, the subdividing of which is an unlawful subdivision by virtue of this UDO, when such person knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the property was subdivided contrary to this UDO, any regulation, rule, order or condition of adopted approval or contrary to any plan approved under this UDO. The enumeration of these declared violations shall not be deemed exclusive or all-inclusive. All persons who shall commit violations shall be held responsible and shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided in Sec. 1.1.10. and Sec. 8.10.2. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct violation or offense.Sec. 8.10.2. Remedies and PenaltiesEnforcement may be by any one  or more of the following provisions and the institution of any action under any of these provisions shall not relieve any person from any other civil or criminal proceeding prescribed for violations and prohibitions.A.	Unauthorized Streets ClosedThe Transportation Director is authorized and directed to take necessary action to cause to be closed any street opened and constructed in violation of this Chapter.B.	Water and Sewer Service Not Provided to Violating PropertyNo water or sewer service shall be furnished by the City to any lot, owner or occupant of any land abutting upon any street or connected to a City public utility which is opened, not opened, laid out or constructed contrary to any plan approved under this UDO or in violation of this Chapter.C.	Construction Permits Withheld1.	Development Services shall not issue any construction permit for any proposed structure upon any land abutting upon any street which is opened, not opened, laid out or constructed contrary to any plan approved under this UDO or in violation of this Chapter and written policies which are approved by the City Council and filed with the City Clerk.2.	The filing or recording of a deed, a will, a security interest, a plat of a subdivision, other division or land or recombination contrary to this Chapter shall not be recognized by the City. All administrative actions relating to such land, including the issuance of any grading, construction, building or occupancy permit will be suspended. To properly enforce the provisions of this Chapter, prior to the beginning of any construction, grading, reconstruction, use or alteration of any land, building or structure, Development Services shall first determine that the requirements of this Chapter are met.D.	Assessment of 100% Cost of Incomplete Improvements1.	In the event the developer either fails to install any improvement required under this UDO or under a plan approved under this UDO or makes an installation contrary to this UDO or plan approved under this UDO, the City may assess 100% of the costs of the incomplete improvements required to some or all of the owners of the property within the subdivision or development and make the required installations. 2.	Assessments must follow the procedures of N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 160A, Article 10 or other statutory authorization where the City may do the work and assess the costs to the landowners inside and outside the corporate limits of the City. 3.	When deciding which lots to assess, the City Council shall consider, among other things, the extent to which the lots are benefitted by the assessment project, the extent to which the lots may have paid for the improvement and the extent the improvements were installed by the developer.E.	Forfeiture of ReimbursementsFailure by the developer to comply with all requirements of the regulations in this Chapter shall result in forfeiture of any and all reimbursements of Article 8.6. ReimbursementsF.	Civil Penalty1.	Generala.	Any act constituting a violation of this Chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the City in a civil action in the nature of a debt. b.	All violations shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 per day of continuous violation. In addition, the City Manager may authorize a civil penalty of up to $250 per day if it is determined that this larger penalty will contribute toward correction of the violation.2.	Citation Contentsa.	No civil penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served by either registered mail, certified mail-return receipt requested, personal service notice or other means reasonably calculated to give actual notice. b.	The notice shall set forth in detail a description of the violation for which the penalty has been invoked. c.	The notice shall also set forth the measures needed to come in compliance and shall state the time within such measures must be completed.d.	 The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time will result in the assessment of a civil penalty and other enforcement action. e.	If, after the allotted time period has expired, corrective action has not been completed, the penalty shall be assessed from the date of receipt of notice of violation and each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation against those persons who have the ability to correct this violation and fail to do so.3.	Collectiona.	The City Manager is authorized to accept payment in full and final settlement of the claim or claims right or rights of action which the City may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations, only if the activities or non-activities which gave rise to the violations are abated or otherwise made lawful.b.	If the payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City in the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice in Wake County for recovery of the penaltyArticle 8.11. Transit InfrastructureSec. 8.11.1. General ProvisionsA.	IntentIn order to maintain and improve access to the local and regional transit systems, development subject to site plan review per Sec. 10.2.8. and located along existing or planned transit routes is required to provide for new transit amenity infrastructure. The required improvements may include a transit easement, shelter, bench or other amenities as described in Sec. 8.11.3.B.	Applicability1.	 Where a site plan is proposed on lots with frontage on an existing near-term planned or long-term planned transit route the requirements of this Article shall apply.2.	 The type, quantity and location of transit infrastructure to be provided are based upon trip generation rate of the proposed development. When a suitable location for the transit stop cannot be provided on-site due to physical constraints, a fee in lieu of construction shall be paid to the City for the design and construction of a comparable stop location nearby. Physical constraints are defined as:a.	 Steep slopes in excess of 15%;b.	 Potential intersection or driveway sight distance conflicts; or,c.	 The proposed location poses an unsafe condition for the transit system, motor vehicles, or pedestrians.C.	Land Use and Daily TripsAccepted trip generation standards will be analyzed to determine whether or not dedication or installation of a transit stop and associated infrastructure shall be required. These standards are a function of land use, size of building or use and total daily site trips. This determination will be made pursuant to Sec. 8.11.3.D.	Operational ConsiderationsA transit stop will be constructed on-site when it facilitates the efficient and safe operation of the transit service and allows for safe vehicular and pedestrian movements.Sec. 8.11.2. Requirement ThresholdsA.	Transit infrastructure, in accordance with Sec. 8.11.3., is required when all of the following conditions are present:1.	The site has frontage along an existing public transit route operated either by a public transit agency, or the site has frontage along a planned transit route as illustrated in the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan; and2.	The site will generate a minimum of 500 daily vehicular trips as calculated per the current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Handbook.3.	If site development generates a minimum of 2,500 daily vehicular trips as calculated per the current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip General Handbook, and the site has frontage on more than one public street and is served by more than one public transit, two transit stops with infrastructure will be required.B.	A new transit stop shall not be required if an existing transit stop is within a walking distance of 1,320 feet and located on the same side of the street with the same facilities that a new transit stop would be required to provide. This exemption shall not be allowed for site plans that serve a hospital, senior housing, life care community or congregate care facility.Sec. 8.11.3. Determining the Required Transit InfrastructureWhen the provisions of Sec. 8.11.1.B. are met, the following transit infrastructure will be required. The infrastructure elements shall meet the typical specifications as shown in the Raleigh Street Design Manual.A.	Transit Easement When the transit stop is located outside of the right-of-way, a permanent 15' x 20' transit easement dedicated to the City of Raleigh shall be required on the development site.B.	Landing PadA concrete pad is required in all cases between the public sidewalk and the back of curb. The minimum width of the landing pad requirement for a transit stop (the area from which passengers board the bus and onto which passengers alight from the bus) is 30 feet. Landing pads shall fill the entire depth between the back of the curb and the public sidewalk. In cases where the depth of this area exceeds 10 feet, or in cases where curb does not exist, special accommodations may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Where placement of the landing pad conflicts with an existing or proposed street tree, the installation of a landing pad shall take precedence.C.	Transit Stop PadA concrete pad measuring 15' x 20' behind the public sidewalk, upon which all transit infrastructure is permanently installed.D.	Sidewalk ConnectivitySidewalks should be constructed to connect the transit stop to the nearest existing sidewalk or public street intersection.E.	Trash ReceptacleTrash receptacles shall be provided at the transit stop in all cases.F.	SeatingSeating shall be provided in all cases where a transit stop is required.G.	Transit ShelterA transit shelter shall be provided at the required transit stop.Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Transportation Director may approve an equivalent alternate design.Sec. 8.11.4. Determining the Location of the Required Transit StopA.	 The Transportation Director shall make a final determination of stop location suitability in accordance with this section and in consideration of the following:1.	A suitable transit stop shall allow for safe connectivity with the pedestrian network including access to sidewalks, the presence of crosswalks within 1,320 feet from the stop, and suitable visibility.2.	 A suitable transit stop shall be designed to accommodate efficient bus operations including bus stop spacing, curb clearance, placement in relation to the roadway, abutting property owner/tenant parking restrictions and regulations at and near the stop, vehicle turning radii, roadway lane width and surfaces, intersection design topography and other physical constraints as specified in Sec. 8.11.1.B.2.B.	 When required, a transit stop and required infrastructure shall be provided and installed on the development site by the developer in all cases except for the following:1.	When the site is located in a DX use district, or2.	The site is zoned with an Urban Limited, Urban General or Shopfront frontage.In these instances, the transit stop and infrastructure shall still be required, but may be installed within the public right-of-way. If a suitable location cannot be identified by the Transportation Director in accordance with the Raleigh Street Design Manual either on the development site or in the adjacent right-of-way, a fee in lieu of construction of the subject transit amenities shall be required in accordance with Sec. 8.11.5.Sec. 8.11.5. Fees In Lieu of ConstructionA.	Where the Transportation Director determines that construction of a transit stop and infrastructure would not be feasible, a fee in lieu of construction may be permitted in accordance with Sec. 8.1.10.B.	If the development site is within 1,320 feet of an existing and accessible bus stop on the same side of the street, the Transportation Director shall determine if the developer shall pay a fee in lieu towards the upgrading of the existing stop, or if the existing stop shall be relocated onto or adjacent to the development site. This determination shall be made based on which site has the best balance of the following criteria:1.	Pedestrian and vehicular safety.2.	 Operational safety and efficiency.3.	Proximity to the transit trip generators.Article 8.1. General Provisions	8 – 3



























































Sec. 8.1.1. Applicability..............................................................................8 – 3
Sec. 8.1.2. Phasing.....................................................................................8 – 3
Sec. 8.1.3. Construction Surety..................................................................8 – 3
Sec. 8.1.4. Warranty...................................................................................8 – 3
Sec. 8.1.5. Acceptance...............................................................................8 – 3
Sec. 8.1.6. Reservation of Public Land........................................................8 – 4
Sec. 8.1.7. Easements ...............................................................................8 – 4
Sec. 8.1.8. Names and Numbering.............................................................8 – 4
Sec. 8.1.9. Subdivision Monuments...........................................................8 – 4
Sec. 8.1.10. Fee in Lieu...............................................................................8 – 5


Article 8.2. Infrastructure Sufficiency 	8 – 6Sec. 8.2.1. In General.................................................................................8 – 6
Sec. 8.2.2. Streets......................................................................................8 – 6
Sec. 8.2.3. Water Supply............................................................................8 – 7
Sec. 8.2.4. Wastewater Disposal................................................................8 – 7
Sec. 8.2.5. Fire Suppression.......................................................................8 – 7
Sec. 8.2.6. Stormwater..............................................................................8 – 7
Sec. 8.2.7. Transit Infrastructure.................................................................8 – 7


Article 8.3. Blocks, Lots, Access	8 – 8Sec. 8.3.1. Intent........................................................................................8 – 8
Sec. 8.3.2. Blocks.......................................................................................8 – 8
Sec. 8.3.3. Lots........................................................................................8 – 10
Sec. 8.3.4. Subdivision Access..................................................................8 – 10
Sec. 8.3.5. Site Access..............................................................................8 – 11
Sec. 8.3.6. Administrative Design Adjustment Findings...........................8 – 14


Article 8.4. New Streets	8 – 15Sec. 8.4.1. General Provisions..................................................................8 – 15
Sec. 8.4.2. Street Types............................................................................8 – 16
Sec. 8.4.3. Sensitive Area Streets..............................................................8 – 17
Sec. 8.4.4. Local Streets..........................................................................8 – 19
Sec. 8.4.5. Mixed Use Streets...................................................................8 – 21
Sec. 8.4.6. Major Streets..........................................................................8 – 24
Sec. 8.4.7. Industrial and Service Streets .................................................8 – 28
Sec. 8.4.8. Private Accessways.................................................................8 – 30


Article 8.5. Existing Streets	8 – 31Sec. 8.5.1. General Provisions..................................................................8 – 31
Sec. 8.5.2. Streetscape Types...................................................................8 – 33
Sec. 8.5.3. Nonconforming Streetscapes.................................................8 – 36
Sec. 8.5.4. Existing Private Streets...........................................................8 – 36


Article 8.6. Reimbursements 	8 – 38Sec. 8.6.1. Greenways..............................................................................8 – 38
Sec. 8.6.2. Minor Utility Lines..................................................................8 – 38
Sec. 8.6.3. Streets....................................................................................8 – 39
Sec. 8.6.4. Expiration of Reimbursement.................................................8 – 39
Sec. 8.6.5. Stormwater Infrastructure......................................................8 – 40


Article 8.7. Utilities 	8 – 41Sec. 8.7.1. Water Supply...........................................................................8 – 41
Sec. 8.7.2. Sewage Disposal.....................................................................8 – 41
Sec. 8.7.3. Public Water and Sewer Stubs.................................................8 – 42
Sec. 8.7.4. Underground Utilities..............................................................8 – 42


Article 8.8. Surface Water Drainage	8 – 44Sec. 8.8.1. Connection to Sanitary Sewer Prohibited................................8 – 44
Sec. 8.8.2. Piping of Watercourses ..........................................................8 – 44
Sec. 8.8.3. Stormwater Control Plans ......................................................8 – 44


Article 8.9. Facility Fees	8 – 45Sec. 8.9.1. Facility Fees Imposed on New Construction............................8 – 45
Sec. 8.9.2. Facility Fee Exceptions...........................................................8 – 45
Sec. 8.9.3. Computation of Fees..............................................................8 – 45
Sec. 8.9.4. Funds Collected......................................................................8 – 46
Sec. 8.9.5. Penalties.................................................................................8 – 47


Article 8.10. Enforcement	8 – 48Sec. 8.10.1. Violations and Violators.........................................................8 – 48
Sec. 8.10.2. Remedies and Penalties........................................................8 – 48


Article 8.11. Transit Infrastructure	8 – 50Sec. 8.11.1. General Provisions.................................................................8 – 50
Sec. 8.11.2. Requirement Thresholds.......................................................8 – 50
Sec. 8.11.3. Determining the Required Transit Infrastructure....................8 – 50
Sec. 8.11.4. Determining the Location of the Required Transit Stop.........8 – 51
Sec. 8.11.5. Fees In Lieu of Construction..................................................8 – 51



































Page Intentionally Left Blank




CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation
Sec. 9.1.4. ..Tree Conservation Area Allocation

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation
Sec. 9.1.6. ..Permitted Tree Disturbing Activities

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation
Sec. 9.1.9. ..Watershed Protection Overlay Districts

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

.CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 .

Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.1.4. ..Tree Conservation Area Allocation

Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.1.5. Documentation of Tree Conservation Areas

Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.1.7. ..Penalties

Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.1.10. ..Lots Without Recorded Tree Conservation Areas

Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.3. Watercourse Buffers

Article 9.2. Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.3. Watercourse Buffers

Article 9.3. ..Floodprone Area Regulations   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.3.4. Floodway and Non-Encroachment Areas

Article 9.3. ..Floodprone Area Regulations   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.3.5. Floodway Fringe and Future Hazard Areas

Article 9.3. ..Floodprone Area Regulations   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.3.8. Warning & Disclaimer of Liablity

Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.4.8. Appeals

Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.4.11. Enforcement

Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.4.13. Variances and Appeals

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.2. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay DIistrict (-FWPOD)

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.2. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay DIistrict (-FWPOD)

Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.5.3. Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)

Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.5.2. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-FWPOD)

Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.5.5. Enforcement

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.5. Enforcement

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.5. Enforcement

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations
Sec. 9.3.3. Rules for Interpretation of Boundaries

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.3. ..Floodprone Area Regulations
Sec. 9.3.5. Floodway Fringe and Future Hazard Areas

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.3. ..Floodprone Area Regulations
Sec. 9.3.7. Streets in Floodprone Areas

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.3. ..Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.4. Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.11. Enforcement

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.12. Revisions

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.1. Urban Watershed Protection Overlay DIistrict (-UWPOD)

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.2. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay DIistrict (-FWPOD)

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.2. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD)

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
 Sec. 9.5.3. Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.6. Variances and Appeals

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.1. General Provisions

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

Article 9.2. Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.5. Enforcement

Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations|   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.3.1. Floodprone Areas

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas
Sec. 9.5.5. Enforcement

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.3. Watercourse Buffers

Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management   |   CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION  
 Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.1. ..Tree Conservation
Sec. 9.1.1. ..Intent

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.2. ..Stormwater Management
Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.1. Applicability

  CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.4. Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity

CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.4. Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity

  CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.4. Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity

  CHAPTER 9. ..NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION   |   Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control
Sec. 9.4.5. Maintenance

Chapter 9. 
Natural Resource Protection

Article 9.1. 
Tree Conservation

Sec. 9.1.1. 
Intent


The intent of the tree conservation regulations is to preserve tree coverage, mature trees and natural resource buffers, and lessen the impact of development on the surrounding properties. The most significant trees, greater basal area tree stands and healthy trees in the most appropriate locations, should be considered when granting an alternate.
Sec. 9.1.2. 
Applicability


Prior to approval of any subdivision of any tract 2 acres or greater in size or site plan for a parcel 2 acres or greater, tree conservation areas must be provided in accor­dance with the requirements of this UDO, provided that delineation of tree conser­vation areas for a site subject to either condemnation or the threat of condemnation shall be delayed until a site plan or further subdivision of the parcel first occurs.
Sec. 9.1.3. 
Tree Conservation Required

A.	
Tree Conservation
1.	
Tree conservation area requirements by district are set forth below. The eligibility for tree conservation is based on the gross site area. The amount of conservation area required is calculated as a percentage of the net site area. 

District
 Conservation Area Required (min)
 
R-1, R-2
 15% 
 
All other districts 
 10%
 



2.	
Any eligible tree conservation priority in conflict with a build-to requirement established by a zoning frontage is not required to be protected. Unless a zoning frontage exists, there is no maximum setback for the Townhouse and Apartment building types when a tree conservation area occupies the build-to area.



Sec. 9.1.4. 
Tree Conservation Area Allocation

A.	
Primary Tree Conservation Areas


The following are primary tree conservation areas and must be the first areas saved to meet the tree conservation requirement. All primary tree conservation areas on the site must be established even if doing so exceeds the minimum required percentage.
1.	
-SHOD-1 and -SHOD-2 protective yards (see Sec. 5.3.1.).

2.	
Parkway Frontage protective yards (see Sec. 3.4.3.)

3.	
CM primary tree conservation areas (see Article 4.2. Conservation Management (CM)).

4.	
-MPOD protective yards (see Sec. 5.2.2.).

5.	
A healthy, champion tree and its critical root zone.

6.	
Zone 2 of Neuse River Riparian Buffers, as established in title 15A of the North Carolina Administrative Code Subarticle 2B Section .0233. 

7.	
Areas with a gradient of 45% or greater that are adjacent to or within floodways.

8.	
An undisturbed area adjoining a Thoroughfare varying in width between 0 and 100 feet; provided that the total undisturbed area is equal to an area measured 50 feet perpendicular to the Thoroughfare.


B.	
Secondary Tree Conservation Areas 
1.	
The following secondary tree conservation areas, listed in priority order from highest to lowest, must be included once the primary tree conservation areas are exhausted.
a.	
A minimum 65-foot wide perimeter buffer when the adjoining or adjacent property is not a Thoroughfare or is not vacant.

b.	
A minimum 32-foot wide perimeter buffer when the adjoining or adjacent property is vacant.

c.	
The critical root zone of any tree 10 inches or greater in DBH that is located within 50 feet of a Thoroughfare or within 65 feet of any non-vacant property boundary or roadway that is not a Thoroughfare. 

d.	
The critical root zone of any tree 10 inches or greater in DBH that is located within 32 feet of a vacant property boundary. 



2.	
Secondary tree conservation areas described in Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.a and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.b. above and their alternates must be at least 32 feet in all directions and be a minimum of 4,000 square feet in area, excluding external boundaries.

3.	
The critical root zone of a saved tree in Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.c.  or Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.d. above must be preserved in entirety even if it extends beyond 65 feet or 32 feet. When a landscape easement is obtained from the adjoining land that prohibits all tree disturbing activity, off-site areas for protected critical root zones may be included as tree conservation areas provided that such areas are not under any circumstances to be counted as tree conservation area on both properties.

4.	
As an alternative to Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.a. and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.b.  above, secondary tree conservation areas of undisturbed areas are allowed elsewhere on the site provided that the square footage of the substituted areas is at least 4,000 square feet. No portion of Zone 1 of Neuse River Riparian Buffers as established in Title 15A of the North Carolina Administrative Code, Subarticle 2B Section .0233, shall be designated an alternate undisturbed area.

5.	
As an alternate means of compliance with Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.c.  or Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.d.  above, secondary tree conservation areas of individual trees 10 inches or greater in DBH and their critical root zones are allowed anywhere on the site that is not otherwise tree conservation area provided that the critical root zone area in the alternate locations is not less than the critical root zone area that would have been required for priorities in Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.c.  or Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.d. above and that no alternate saved tree is less than 10 inches in DBH.



C.	
Excluded Areas


Tree conservation areas must exclude the following.
1.	
Sight triangles.

2.	
Slope easements.

3.	
Drainage easements.

4.	
Cross access easements.

5.	
Governmental and utility easements that prohibit trees.

6.	
Any easement that authorizes tree disturbing activities. 

7.	
Any area devoted or to be devoted to streets, future right-of-way reservations, sidewalks, driveways, walkways, transit easements and storm drainage facilities, including without limitation, pipes, energy dissipaters and stormwater control measures which require the removal of vegetation. 

8.	
Water-related activity areas located in, over, under or adjacent to a lake or natural watercourse shown on the site plan may not be included as Zone 2 areas of Neuse River Riparian Buffers.

9.	
Any tree 10 inches DBH and larger that has 30% or more of its critical root zone traversed in part or in entirety by any of the excluded areas in Sec. 9.1.4.C.1. through Sec. 9.1.4.C.7. above, by impervious surface or by any adjacent property.


D.	
General Conservation Area Requirements
1.	
Size




The minimum dimension of a primary tree conservation area is 20 feet, measured in all directions.
2.	
Greenways
a.	
City of Raleigh greenways may be included as tree conservation areas, provided that an area of 25 feet multiplied by the length of the greenway is excluded as tree conservation for trail construction.

b.	
Greenways can only be established as tree conservation areas after establishment of primary tree conservation areas.



3.	
Tree Quality


No tree may be used to meet the requirements of this Article if it is unhealthy or a hazardous tree.
4.	
Heritage Trees


A heritage tree and its critical root zone may be established as an optional tree conservation area after establishment of primary tree conservation areas. The area of critical root zone for a heritage tree conservation area shall be double credited toward the tree conservation requirement only when all of the following conditions are met.
a.	
The critical root zone shall be protected in entirety by, either being entirely on the developing property or the property owner shall obtain a landscape easement that prohibits all tree disturbing activity for the portion of the critical root zone on an adjacent property. The off-site area for protected critical root zone may be included as tree conservation area provided that such area shall not under any circumstances be counted as tree conservation area on both properties.

b.	
Any portion of the critical root zone within another tree conservation area shall not be eligible for double credit.

c.	
The condition of the heritage tree shall be a rating of “Good” or higher as determined by an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture using the Guide for Plant Appraisal, latest edition, published by the International Society of Arboriculture and verified by the Parks and Cultural Resources Director. 

d.	
A report of the tree condition shall be prepared on an evaluation form provided by the City and it shall be provided to the Parks and Cultural Resources Director.

e.	
An active tree preservation plan prepared by an arb0orist, certified by the International Society of Arboriculture, must be approved by the Parks and Cultural Resources Director and implemented by the developer under the supervision of the certified arborist.


E.	
Tree Cover Required 
1.	
Tree conservation areas proposed for -SHOD-1, -SHOD-2, Parkway Frontage, and undisturbed areas adjoining a Major or Minor Thoroughfare protective yard (Sec. 9.1.4.A.1., Sec. 9.1.4.A.2. and Sec. 9.1.4.A.8.) and secondary priority areas (Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.a. and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.b.) and their alternates, must contain a basal area of at least 30 square feet per acre as measured in increments of 50 lineal feet. 

2.	
Any required protective yard for a -SHOD 1, -SHOD-2 or Parkway Frontage that does not contain a basal area of at least 30 square feet shall be planted in accordance with the overlay district landscaping standards and portions of the protective yard cannot be established as a tree conservation area. 

3.	
For those developments that fulfill any of their tree conservation area requirement using a -SHOD-1, -SHOD-2, Parkway Frontage or undisturbed areas adjoining a Thoroughfare protective yard or with secondary tree conservation areas from Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.a. or Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.b.and their alternates, the following must be submitted:
a.	
Photo panoramic panels of the intended area to be conserved. The photo panel shall equal 50 feet of the length of the tree conservation area to be saved;

b.	
A tree cover report prepared by a North Carolina registered forester or North Carolina licensed landscape architect or certified arborist that, inventories each 50-foot length of proposed tree conservation area as shown in the photo panels, to identify all eligible trees 3 inches DBH and larger, by species, DBH, basal area calculations and a determination of the general health of the tree stand. The report and photo panels shall be correlated; and

c.	
The most recent aerial photograph of the subject tract.



4.	
A survey of all eligible trees and computation of basal area may be substituted in lieu of Sec. 9.1.4.E.3.a. and Sec. 9.1.4.E.3.c. above, provided that no dead, unhealthy or hazardous tree is included in the survey.

5.	
An optional method to determine basal area for tree conservation areas is allowed when a North Carolina registered forester certifies in writing that the basal area is 60 square feet per acre or greater, provided all the following conditions are met:
a.	
The contiguous tree conservation area that can consist of primary and secondary is at least 8,700 square feet in size, excluding easements and consists of undisturbed wooded areas with a basal area of 60 square feet per acre or greater comprised of trees 3 inches DBH and larger;

b.	
All dimensions of tree conservation areas are at least 65 feet in all directions;

c.	
Land area that does not contain trees must be excluded unless it contains critical root zones of trees being preserved;

d.	
Any area of tree disturbing activity is excluded as a tree conservation area; and

e.	
A legible copy of the latest Wake County/City of Raleigh aerial photograph must be included with the registered forester’s certification.



6.	
Within each 50-foot linear increment of Zone 2 of Neuse River Riparian Buffers, MPOD natural resource buffer yards or greenway tree conservation areas that do not contain trees, a minimum of 2 shade trees to enhance the riparian buffer must be planted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Planted shade trees must be at least 10 gallon container size and free of circling roots at time of planting. If the area without trees will be used as shown on the approved site plan for either a tree disturbing activity allowed by Sec. 9.1.6. or a water-related activity located in, over, under or adjacent a lake or natural watercourse, no planting of new trees shall be required.  

7.	
Within each 50 linear feet of watercourse buffer of the -MPOD that does not contain trees, a minimum of two 10 gallon container size shade trees, free of circling roots, must be planted to enhance the riparian buffer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

8.	
Alternatively, areas that do not contain trees in Neuse Zone 2, greenways or -MPOD watercourse buffers may be established as permanently undisturbed primary tree conservation areas to allow natural regeneration of trees, provided such areas are not located on individual lots developed for single-unit living. Permanently undisturbed primary tree conservation areas shall not be cleared of any vegetation or subjected to any tree disturbing activity and shall be delineated with signs as specified by the City. Required signs must remain in place for a period of 7 years. Unlawful disturbance of any permanently undisturbed primary tree conservation area shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of a minimum of $1,000 plus 35 cents for every square foot of disturbed area and unlawfully disturbed areas shall be planted with twice the number of 10 gallon container shade trees as described above. Unlawful removal of any required signs shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of $100 for each removed sign and each removed sign shall be replaced. Civil penalties shall be processed as set forth in Sec. 10.4.2.



Sec. 9.1.5. 
Documentation of Tree Conservation Areas

A.	
Tree Conservation Permit Required
1.	
After the tree conservation areas have been determined and prior to any tree disturbing activity, a map with metes and bounds descriptions of all tree conservation areas must be given to Parks and Cultural Resources Department and a tree conservation permit must be obtained from the City and tree protective fencing placed on the site.

2.	
After the tree conservation areas have been determined and a tree conservation permit has been obtained and prior to or concurrent to any subdividing of the property and prior to issuance of a building permit, the landowners shall record with the local County Register of Deeds the following: 
a.	
A plat with metes and bounds descriptions of all tree conservation areas;

b.	
An easement that allows current and future lot owners access to otherwise inaccessible tree conservation areas to perform tree maintenance activities including required replacement plantings; 

c.	
A homeowners' association declaration prepared in conformity with N.C. Gen. Stat., Chapter 47F for the maintenance and protection of the trees within recorded tree conservation areas; and 

d.	
One or more deeds conveying all tree conservation areas in fee or in easement to the homeowners' association.





B.	
Neuse River Riparian
1.	
Metes and bounds descriptions of Neuse River Riparian Zone 2 shall include only the outer boundary of Zone 2 with a notation that the inner boundary is 20 feet parallel to the outer boundary. 

2.	
The outer boundary of Zone 2 may optionally be surveyed as a series of tangents that shall be no more than 5 feet from the actual Zone 2 boundary. 

3.	
When the tangent survey is used, metes and bounds descriptions of the tangent lines and the actual outer boundary of Neuse River Riparian Zone 2 (without metes and bounds) shall be shown on the recorded plat. Tree disturbing activities are prohibited and unlawful in the area between the tangent Zone 2 boundary and the actual Zone 2 boundary to the same extent as tree disturbing activities are within Zone 2 areas, but these areas shall not count toward the percentage tree conservation requirements of Sec. 9.1.3., Sec. 9.1.4.A. and Sec. 9.1.4.B. as demonstrated to the Parks and Cultural Resources Director. 



C.	
Secondary Conservation Areas
1.	
Where secondary tree conservation areas (Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.a. and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.b.) abut one another, metes and bounds descriptions shall not be required for the boundary line between abutting tree conservation areas.

2.	
Previously recorded tree conservation areas and greenways may be shown without metes and bounds provided that the correct Book of Maps is referenced and greenways are re-recorded as greenway tree conservation areas.



D.	
Replacement by Condemnor


Whenever any condemnor acquires property through eminent domain it shall be the responsibility of the condemnor to replace, in accordance with the provisions of this UDO, those complying elements which were removed unless a less stringent standard is required. 
E.	
Payment In Lieu of Compliance
1.	
	Requests for fee-in-lieu payments will be considered, but not limited to, the following cases:
a.	
Site condtions caused by man-made or natural topography that would require use of a retaining wall where the cost of wall construction would be greater than the fee-in-lieu for the area being relieved from compliance. In such cases, justification must be provided to demonstrate there are no alternate methods of construction other than use of a retaining wall. Quotes from 3 independent design firms or contractors must be provided to estimate the construction cost of the retaining wall; and

b.	
Site conditions where the existence of priority areas under Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.c. and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.d. render a site undevelopable.



2.	
	General conditions for all fee-in-lieu requests.
a.	
No primary tree conservation area is eligible for a fee-in-lieu payment. 

b.	
Fee-in-lieu payments for tree conservation area will not be considered when the objective is to develop the site without regard for the tree conservation priorities of Sec. 9.1.4.

c.	
Fee-in-lieu payments for tree conservation area will not be considered when the objective is to achieve increased site visibility at the expense of tree conservation. 

d.	
Prior to requesting a monetary payment in lieu of compliance, the applicant must examine alternate methods to preserve the required tree conservation priority areas. Upon submittal of a fee-in-lieu request, the applicant must provide proof of consideration of alternatives and justification why the alternatives are not feasible. The City may require that additional alternate methods be examined.

e.	
Alternative methods to preserve tree conservation areas include but are not limited to: re-design of the subdivision or site plan, use of retaining walls, alternate methods of construction (such as trex decking in place of concrete sidewalk) and arboricultural practices that include active tree preservation (such as root pruning of no more than 30% of the root zone with active tree preservation aftercare) performed under supervision of a certified arborist.

f.	
Secondary tree conservation areas approved for a fee-in-lieu payment shall be paid at a rate equal to the tax value of the land.

g.	
All fee-in-lieu payments shall be as indicated on the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule and adjusted on an annual basis using the percent change Dec-Dec column of the Consumer Price Index chart available through the US Department of Labor.



3.	
	All collected monies, including any income derived from such monies, shall be spent either for acquisition of lands where trees will be preserved or for tree planting. The City Council shall set forth specific eligible activities for tree preservation and tree plantings. All collected monies must be spent within the same open space fee zones from which the payments were collected.



Sec. 9.1.6. 
Permitted Tree Disturbing Activities


No tree disturbing activity shall take place in designated tree conservation areas except in conformity with the following.
A.	
Within Zone 2 of Neuse River Riparian Buffers and in watercourse buffers in a -MPOD, permitted tree disturbing activities are allowed for: 
1.	
Any work that is ancillary to activities allowed by the North Carolina Division of Water Quality in Zone 1 that is approved by the City; 

2.	
Any sanitary sewer installation when an existing permanent structure or any part of an existing permanent structure that is to remain on the site is within the width of the proposed permanent and temporary construction sanitary sewer easement plus 10 feet; and

3.	
More than 50% of a reach of sanitary sewer main will be over 12 feet deep. 



B.	
Within primary tree conservation areas and secondary tree conservation areas tree disturbing activities are allowed when all of the following are met.
1.	
A tree conservation permit is obtained from the City. Tree conservation permits may be issued for one or more of the following: 
a.	
A certified arborist, registered forester or a licensed landscape architect certifies to the City in writing that the tree is either unsafe or is unhealthy. No certification is required if it can be shown that the tree died of natural causes and the dead tree is replaced in accordance with the replacement standards of this Article.

b.	
Tree removal or grading is being done to remove a visual obstruction from a sight triangle as set forth in the North Carolina Department of Transportation’s Policy on Street and Driveway Access to North Carolina Highways Manual and all subsequent amendments. 

c.	
The removal or grading is being done to install public improvements made pursuant to this UDO.

d.	
Where existing vegetation meets the minimum applicable tree conservation requirements for an applicable district or meets applicable transitional yard requirements, a tree conservation permit may be issued for wooded area clean-up of shade trees less than 2 inches DBH and understory trees less than 1 inch in DBH. 

e.	
No permit for such removal may be issued until a plan is submitted showing the nature and extent of all tree work, how the work will be undertaken without compacting soils and damaging preserved trees and maintaining minimum applicable requirements. 



2.	
When a tree conservation permit is issued in accordance with Sec. 9.1.6.B.1., the property owner must install replacement trees for any tree situated within the limits of the tree disturbing activities in one of the following ways: 
a.	
One or more undisturbed areas of equal size containing vegetation similar in size and quantity as that which is being removed is preserved in alternate undisturbed areas meeting the requirements ofSec. 9.1.4.B. through Sec. 9.1.4.E. for priority areas  Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.a.and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.b. 

b.	
For each 200 square feet of tree disturbed land area, a 2-inch caliper tree is either planted between the principal building and the roadway or is planted in approved alternate areas of the site.

c.	
Whenever a tree of priority area under Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.c. and Sec. 9.1.4.B.1.d. is removed after being certified as a hazardous tree, unhealthy or dead; it shall be replaced with 10 caliper inches of new shade trees. Any replacement tree shall be planted within the tree conservation area previously recorded for the removed tree. The minimum size of any replacement tree shall be 2 caliper inches.

d.	
All substituted natural areas and newly planted areas must be designated as tree conservation areas on plats with metes and bounds descriptions recorded with the Wake County Register of Deeds.



3.	
All portions of critical root zones of trees situated inside a designated tree conservation area that adjoin proposed tree disturbing activities shall remain undisturbed areas for trees with 10 inches or greater DBH. 

4.	
Prior to commencing any tree disturbing activity, the boundaries of such activities shall be delineated by a protective fence in the field. 



Sec. 9.1.7. 
Penalties

A.	
A violation of this Article, where unlawful tree disturbing activity has occurred and trees and stumps are absent, shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of a minimum of $1,000 for the first tree plus 35 cents of every square foot of unlawful tree disturbing activity. 

B.	
Where trees or stumps are present after unlawful tree disturbing activity has occurred, the civil penalty shall instead be calculated as $1,000 for the first tree plus $100 per diameter inch for any other tree or stump 3 inches diameter and larger. Civil penalties shall be processed as set forth in Sec. 10.4.2.

Sec. 9.1.8. 
Restoration

A.	
In addition to the civil penalty of Sec. 9.1.7., the owner of real property, where a violation has occurred, shall remove each unlawfully disturbed tree and replace with a tree or trees of equal caliper. 

B.	
Prior to any replanting, the Parks and Cultural Resources Director shall first approve a replacement planting and maintenance plan. Replacement trees shall be 2 inches in caliper and no replacement tree shall be located in those portions of a tree conservation area with a basal area of over 80 square feet per acre. 

C.	
All replacement trees shall be planted in a planting area of at least 200 square feet in area with minimum dimensions of 8 feet. 

D.	
If the tree conservation area where the violation has occurred fails to contain sufficient land area to replant the required replacement trees and replacement trees can not be planted on other portions of the property, then in lieu of such replacement trees, a replacement fee equal to $100 per caliper inch of replacement trees shall be paid to the City. 


Sec. 9.1.9. 
Watershed Protection Overlay Districts 

A.	
Except as otherwise provided below, every lot located within a -UWPOD, -FWPOD or -SWPOD must provide and maintain an area set aside for trees equal to at least 40% of the lot area. Within this area, trees must either be preserved or planted in accordance with the following:
1.	
Tree areas may be 1 contiguous area or scattered areas throughout the lot, but no required tree area may be less than 1/5 of the total gross land area required to be set aside for trees; 

2.	
All areas required to be set aside for trees shall be maintained as wooded areas; 

3.	
Wooded areas may consist of either areas where active tree preservation is observed or tree planting areas; 

4.	
Each active tree preservation area must contain a minimum of 2 inches of tree caliper per every 100 square feet and within such areas, active tree preservation shall be followed;

5.	
Areas that are set aside for trees that do not meet the standards for active tree protection areas must be planted with shade trees; and 

6.	
The minimum size and planting rate of new tree plantings used to fulfill this requirement shall be either 1 bare-root seedling at least 14 inches tall planted per 100 square feet (10 feet by 10 feet centers) or one 2-inch caliper tree planted per 200 square feet. 



B.	
After wooded areas have been determined and prior to or concurrent to any subdividing of the property or issuance of building permit, the landowner shall record with the local County Register of Deeds a plat with metes and bounds descriptions of all wooded areas.

C.	
For lots located within areas designated “New Urban” by the Swift Creek Land Management Plan, the regulations of Sec. 9.1.9.A. above apply with the exception that only 25% of each lot must contain an area set aside for trees. 

D.	
For lots located within a conservation development, areas set aside for trees may in lieu of being situated on the individual dwelling lots may instead be located within the required open space, provided that the overall acreage set aside for trees is not diminished. 

E.	
The requirements of this section do not apply to lots devoted exclusively to stormwater control measures or to those lots located in those areas of the Comprehensive Plan designated for impervious surfaces in excess of 30%. 

Sec. 9.1.10. 
Lots Without Recorded Tree Conservation Areas

A.	
Applicability
1.	
Any tree disturbing activity, except a minor tree removal activity, on sites 2 acres and larger in size that do not have an established or recorded tree conservation area shall meet the requirements of this section.

2.	
Nothing in this section shall prevent the otherwise lawful grading and installation of streets, utilities or other improvements shown on an approved subdivision plan or site plan. 

3.	
All applicable laws, including soil erosion and sedimentation control and tree protection regulations, must be obeyed. No champion tree, including its critical root zone, is subjected to any tree disturbing activity.



B.	
Tree Protection Plan Required
1.	
A tree protection plan must be approved by the Parks and Cultural Resources Director for all applicable tree protected areas.

2.	
Tree protection fences must be in place prior to the issuance of any City permit and prior to engaging in any tree disturbing activity.



C.	
Perimeter Buffers 
1.	
No tree disturbing activity, except a minor tree removal activity, shall occur within a 32-foot wide perimeter buffer when the adjoining or adjacent property is vacant.

2.	
No tree disturbing activity, except a minor tree removal activity, shall occur within a 65-foot wide perimeter buffer when the adjacent property is a roadway other than a Thoroughfare or is not vacant.

3.	
No tree disturbing activity, except a minor tree removal activity, shall occur within a 50-foot wide perimeter buffer when the adjoining or adjacent property is a Thoroughfare or higher designation roadway.

4.	
No trees 10 inches DBH or larger can be removed, with the exception that a maximum of 5 trees between 10 inches and 22 inches DBH may be removed within the 32-foot wide buffer, the 65-foot wide buffer or 50-foot wide Thoroughfare buffer, within a continuous 5-year period, with a permit issued by the City, provided that such tree removal would not diminish future tree conservation areas that may be required, all as shown on a report submitted to Development Services Department.

5.	
In lieu of protecting perimeter buffers, tree conservation areas may be designated in conjunction with an approved development plan,or an approved forest management plan, provided that all tree conservation areas are shown on recorded plats.



D.	
Forest Management Activity Allowed 
1.	
Forest management activity is allowed in the perimeter buffers provided that the landowners first record with the local County Register of Deeds a covenant running with and binding the land stating: "That forest management operations were initiated within regulated perimeter buffers of the real property on ____________ (date and year) and that pursuant to State Law, no building permit, site plan or subdivision plan will be approved by the local governing authority for a period of 5 years following harvesting completion date." 

2.	
A copy of this covenant recorded with the local County Register of Deeds shall be provided to the to the City.

3.	
The allowable hours of operation any given day are between 7 AM and 8:30 PM, other than emergency work for the preservation of public health or safety.

4.	
Access ways through perimeter buffers shall not exceed 25 feet in width and all construction entrances of the access ways must be constructed in accordance with the latest City "Guidelines for Land-Disturbing Activities" or latest State of North Carolina "Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual", whichever is more stringent. 

5.	
At least 1 access way shall be permitted and additional access ways may be allowed provided such additional access ways are justified by a North Carolina registered forester and additional access ways fronting the same roadway are spaced at least 1,000 feet apart.



E.	
Violations 
1.	
A violation of this section, where unlawful tree disturbing activity has occurred and trees and stumps are absent, shall subject the violator to a civil penalty equal to $1,000 for the first tree plus 35 cents of every square foot of unlawfully disturbed perimeter buffer.

2.	
Where trees or stumps are present after unlawful tree disturbing activity has occurred, the civil penalty shall instead be calculated as $1,000 for the first tree plus $100 per diameter inch for any other tree or stump 3 inches diameter and larger.

3.	
No civil penalty shall exceed 1/3 of the current land tax value of the entire site. 

4.	
The penalty shall be processed as set forth in Sec. 10.4.2. In addition to this civil penalty, within the unlawfully disturbed perimeter buffer, the land owner shall install one 2-inch caliper tree for each 200 square feet of all of the unlawfully disturbed perimeter buffer; provided that, in R-1 and R-2 no more than 15% of the acreage of the entire tract and no more 10% of the acreage of the entire tract of all other districts shall be planted. 

5.	
Prior to any replanting, the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources Director shall first approve a replacement planting and maintenance plan. 

6.	
The replanting areas shall be designated as tree conservation areas on plats with delineated metes and bounds descriptions recorded with the local County Register of Deeds, however, the replacement planting areas shall not count toward the tree conservation percentage requirements of Sec. 9.1.3. Following the recording of this plat, no tree disturbing activity shall take place within the designated tree conservation areas.

7.	
When an unlawful tree disturbing activity violation has occurred, the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources Director may require active tree preservation measures instead of tree removal and replacement and the owner shall carry out the active tree preservation measures required.




Article 9.2. 
Stormwater Management

Sec. 9.2.1. 
General Provisions

A.	
Applicability


Prior to any land disturbing activity or subdivision of land, stormwater control measures, watercourse buffers or both must be provided in conformity with the requirements of this Article. 
B.	
Manual and Guidelines Incorporated


The Raleigh Stormwater Management Design Manual along with the Guidelines for Land Disturbing Activities and amendments, on file in the City Clerk’s Office, is adopted by reference as part of this UDO.
Sec. 9.2.2. 
Active Stormwater Control Measures

A.	
Exemptions


Subject to the additional runoff controls required in Sec. 9.2.2.E.3 and the impervious surface limitations and other regulations of subsection A.4 below, the following are exempt from the active stormwater control measures required by Sec. 9.2.2:
1.	
Grandfathered Lots
a.	
Defined




Any lot which was either recorded prior to May 1, 2001 (the first application of the Stormwater Management Ordinance) or lawfully recorded later as part of a subdivision approved prior to May 1, 2001.
b.	
Use Standards
i.	
A grandfathered lot of any size, including grandfathered lots that are recombined with other grandfathered lots, used for any detached house used for single-unit living or any attached house used for two-unit living, including accessory uses.

ii.	
A grandfathered lot of one-half acre or less that has not been altered to be larger than one-half acre in size, used for any other lawful use requiring a plot plan or site plan.




2.	
Subdivided Lots
a.	
Defined 




A lot created by a subdivision approved after May 1, 2001.
b.	
Use Standard
i.	
Any detached house used for single-unit living or any attached house used for two-unit living, including their accessory uses, situated on a subdivided lot that was part of a subdivision of one acre or less in aggregate size, including subdivided lots that are recombined with other similar subdivided lots.

ii.	
Any other lawful use requiring a plot plan or site plan situated on a subdivided lot that was part of a subdivision of one-half acre or less in aggregate size.




3.	
Other Exemptions
a.	
Land-disturbing activities, not otherwise exempted, that do not require a land-disturbing permit under Sec. 9.4.6 are exempted provided that, upon application of any impervious surfaces this exemption shall not apply.

b.	
Substitution of impervious surfaces when all the standards of Sec. 10.3.4.E are met.

c.	
Substitution of impervious surfaces with approved pervious surfaces.



4.	
Impervious Surfaces Limitations and Other Regulations
a.	
Lots exempted by subsections A.1 or A.2 above shall be subject to Sec. 9.2.2  et seq. when the applicable maximum impervious surface area of the lot exceeds:




Zoning District Maximum Percentage of Impervious Surface Coverage
R-1
 20%
 
R-2
 25%
 
R-4
 38%
 
R-6
 51%
 
R-10 and all other base zoning districts
 65%
 


Where the lot is part of a cluster unit development or townhouse development or planned development approved prior to May 1, 2001, the imputed acreage of the lot shall be calculated by combining the individual lot area with the pro rata lot portion of 85% of the common open space shown on recorded plats of the development.
Notwithstanding the impervious surface limitations of this subsection, any lot with either an existing detached house used for single-unit living or an existing attached house used for two-unit living shall be entitled to a one-time 400 square foot increase of impervious surface area without providing the additional stormwater control measures required by this subsection.  This one-time exemption shall only be allowed if the qualifying structure (i) existed prior to the application of this ordinance, and (ii) the qualifying structure exists when the one-time exemption is applied to the property.  However, the exemption once used shall remain with the property even if the qualifying structure is later demolished, voluntarily or involuntarily, from the property.  This exemption, if not used, shall be inapplicable if the qualifying structure is voluntarily demolished from the property.
Editor’s Note: This ordinance was first applied on November 27, 2016.
b.	
The impervious surface limitations in this subsection may be exceeded if:
i.	
	It is demonstrated to the City that (with or without measures) the post-development volume of stormwater leaving the site is equal to or less than the volume of stormwater for the zoning district maximum percentage of impervious surface coverage allowed under subsection a. during the 90th percentile storm.




For lots where the existing impervious surface area already exceeds the zoning district maximum percentage of impervious surface coverage limitations listed in subsection a. above, the post-development volume must be equal to or less than the volume of stormwater for the 90th percentile storm for the existing conditions; or
ii.	
It is demonstrated to the City that (with or without measures) the flood level difference between the pre-development and post-development conditions for the 2-, 10-, 25-, 50- and 100-year storm events is equal to or less than 0.04 foot rise.


c.	
For any property owner installing any measure to comply with subsection b.1 or b.2 above, the following additional requirements shall apply:
i.	
The property owner must submit an annual inspection report to the Stormwater Management Division of the Engineering Services Department.  The inspection report shall contain all of the following:
a)	
The name and address of the property owner;

b)	
A statement that an inspection was made of all required stormwater control facilities and/or required open space area;

c)	
The date of the inspection;

d)	
A statement that all inspected stormwater control facilities and/or open space areas are performing properly and are in compliance with the approved stormwater control plan, the applicable maintenance manual required by Sec. 9.2.2.D.2 and the Raleigh Stormwater Management Manual.  No sampling of pollutant loading is required as part of the inspection;

e)	
Current photographs of the stormwater control facilities and/or open space areas;

f)	
The original signature of the owner;

g)	
All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the City beginning from the date of the as-built certification under Sec. 9.2.2.D.3 and each year thereafter on the anniversary date of the certification.



ii.	
On lots with measures, prior to issuance of a building permit, or recordation of a subdivision plat, whichever first shall occur, the property owner shall deed an access easement and temporary construction easement to the benefit of the City of Raleigh.  The easements shall be in the form of a deed that the property owner records in the County in which the property is located.  A copy of this recorded deed shall be provided to the Development Services Department.




B.	
Nitrogen Reduction
1.	
Requirement
a.	
Any new or expansion of existing development, not in compliance with the stormwater control master plan approved for its drainage basin, may not contribute a nitrogen export load exceeding 3.6 pounds per acre per year. 

b.	
Compliance with stormwater control master plan must include the installation within the development of all stormwater control measures shown on the stormwater control master plan, payment of fees in lieu of installation, when allowed by the City and payment of any applicable drainage fees.

c.	
Stormwater control measures shown on the stormwater control master plan for a new development or expansion of existing development that are demonstrated to control stormwater on a runoff volume basis will be deemed to meet the nitrogen export load requirement, provided that the post-development volume of stormwater leaving the site is equal to or less than the pre-development volume of stormwater leaving the site based on the 90th percentile storm. For the purpose of meeting this requirement for new development sites, the pre-development land cover must be assumed to be forested for the entire development site. For redevelopment of a developed site, any impervious area added as part of the redevelopment must be assumed to be forested in the pre-development condition. In any case, output from appropriate Nutrient Sensitive Waters methodology shall be provided to the City for purposes of recordkeeping and reporting.



2.	
Payment In Lieu Option




The nitrogen export load limitations for a development may be off-set through a payment made to the North Carolina Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund or private mitigation bank. The payment shall be based on the latest fee adopted by the State and shall meet the following requirements. 
a.	
In General
i.	
Installation of City-approved stormwater control measures or payment in lieu option or a combination of both may be used to satisfy the nitrogen load requirement.

ii.	
For subdivisions with an approved stormwater control facilities plan, all payments shall be made prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit. Where no land disturbance permit is required, fees shall be due prior to recording of the plat.

iii.	
For all other developments, payments shall be paid to the North Carolina Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund prior to the issuance of applicable development permits.



b.	
Residential Development
i.	
For any detached house used for single-unit living or any attached house used for two-unit living, a one-time offset payment may be paid to the North Carolina Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund to reduce the nitrogen export load of up to 6 pounds per acre per year to 3.6 pounds per acre per year. 

ii.	
All residential development that exceeds nitrogen export loads of 6 pounds per acre per year must install City-approved stormwater control measures to reduce the nitrogen export load of their development to 6 pounds per acre per year limitation to become eligible for the payment in lieu option.



c.	
Mixed Use and Nonresidential Development
i.	
For mixed use and nonresidential development, a one-time offset payment may be paid to the North Carolina Riparian Buffer Restoration Fund to reduce the nitrogen export load of up to 10 pounds per acre per year to 3.6 pounds per acre per year.

ii.	
Mixed use and nonresidential development that exceeds nitrogen export loads of 10 pounds per acre per year must install City-approved stormwater control measures to reduce the nitrogen export load of their development to 10 pounds per acre per year limitation to become eligible for the payment in lieu option.




C.	
Stormwater Control Permits
1.	
No development, expansion of existing development or the placement of more than 12,000 square feet of any impervious surface, may occur on a site without a stormwater control permit from the Development Services Department. 

2.	
No stormwater control permit may be approved until a stormwater control plan is first approved by the City in accordance with Sec. 9.2.2.D.

3.	
No stormwater control permit may be issued except in strict conformity with the provisions of this Article, the Raleigh Stormwater Management Design Manual.

4.	
No stormwater control permit may be issued until the boundaries of any watercourse buffer, riparian surface water buffer or transitional protective yard in a -MPOD, -UWPOD, -FWPOD or -SWPOD or CM District and permanently protected undisturbed open space areas which are adjacent to or encompass a work site are clearly and accurately demarcated by a protective fence in the field. Protection measures must be field verified by a Professional Land Surveyor.



D.	
Stormwater Control Plans
1.	
General Requirements
a.	
Stormwater control plans must be prepared by a qualified registered North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor or landscape architect. 

b.	
All parts of a stormwater control plan, including data calculation design and installation of storm control measures and devices shall be in compliance with the Raleigh Stormwater Control and Watercourse Buffer Manual. 

c.	
Stormwater control plans must show how nitrogen reduction and stormwater runoff control requirements are being met and how watercourse buffers are being protected.

d.	
A surety equal to 125% of the cost of construction of a stormwater device shall be paid to the City prior to permit issuance. If the amount of impervious surfaces for the bonded area exceeds 15% , the City may cash the surety.



2.	
Maintenance Manual and Budget 
a.	
The stormwater control plan must be accompanied by a stormwater operations maintenance manual and budget. 

b.	
Prior to either grading any portion of the development or submitting construction drawing plans of any applicable stormwater control facility to the City, whichever event first occurs, a stormwater operations maintenance and budget shall be submitted to Engineering Services.

c.	
The maintenance manual shall contain a narrative describing each installed measure and device and its design specifications.

d.	
The maintenance manual shall describe which lots are served by each device.

e.	
The maintenance manual shall indicate for each installed measure and device what operation and maintenance actions are needed and what specific quantitative criteria will be used to determine when these actions will be taken. 

f.	
The maintenance manual must indicate the steps that will be taken to restore a measure or device to the design specifications if a failure occurs. 

g.	
The maintenance manual must contain a statement about the expected life of each stormwater control facility and a replacement schedule derived by dividing the initial construction cost of each stormwater control facility by the expected life of that stormwater control facility. 

h.	
The budget shall include annual costs such as routine maintenance, repair, periodic sediment removal and replenishment of rip-rap, insurance premiums associated with the stormwater control facilities, taxes levied against the stormwater control facilities, mowing and reseeding, required inspections.



3.	
As-Built Plans and Certification 




Stormwater control plans must be followed by as-built plans certified under seal, that the stormwater measures and devices and their installation are in compliance with the Stormwater Management Design Manual and the City-approved or modified stormwater control plan. No certificate of compliance or occupancy may be issued by the Developmental Services without approved as-built plans. At a minimum, the as-built plans must contain the following information:
a.	
The name and address of the land owner; 

b.	
The recorded book and page number of the lot of each required stormwater control facility and required open space area; 

c.	
	A statement that all inspected stormwater control facilities and open space areas are in compliance with the approved stormwater control plan, the applicable maintenance manual required and the Raleigh Stormwater Management Design Manual; and 

d.	
The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor or landscape architect.


E.	
Stormwater Runoff Controls
1.	
Runoff Limitation 
a.	
After May 1, 2001, the peak stormwater runoff leaving any site for the two-year and 10-year storms shall be no greater at every point of discharge for post-development conditions than pre-development conditions. The same methodologies used to calculate stormwater runoff must be used for both pre-development and post-development conditions.

b.	
For any denuded area on sites between 5 and 15 acres in size the peak stormwater runoff leaving the site at each discharge point for the two-year storm and 10-year storm shall be no greater during construction than for pre-development conditions. For any land disturbing activity on sites, greater than 15 acres in size the peak stormwater runoff leaving the site at each discharge point for the two-year storm, 10-year storm and 25-year storm shall be no greater during construction than for pre-development conditions. However, this regulation shall not be applicable when the development site conforms to all of the following:
i.	
The disturbed acreage is less than 5 acres; and

ii.	
The two-year peak discharge for the disturbed condition, for all points of discharge, is less than 10% of the peak discharge from the contributing watershed as measured at the nearest receiving watercourse.





2.	
Exemptions 




The stormwater runoff control requirements do not apply to sites with any of the following conditions. 
a.	
The development complies with the stormwater control master plan approved for its drainage basin. 

b.	
The increase in peak stormwater runoff between pre-development and post-development conditions for the two-year and 10-year and 25-year storms is 10% or less at each point of discharge.

c.	
The maximum impervious surface coverage of the lot, including any existing impervious surfaces, is no more than 10% and the remaining pervious portions of the lot are utilized to convey and control the stormwater runoff of the lot to the maximum extent practical. In the event that the site is subsequently subdivided, reduced by recombination or the impervious surface is equal to or exceeds 15% the site may no longer be exempt. 

d.	
Compliance with Sec. 9.2.2.E.1. above, would result in greater adverse downstream impact, such as local flooding, as determined by City-approved engineering studies. 

e.	
Compliance with the 10-year storm and 25-year storm runoff limitations in Sec. 9.2.2.E.1. above results in no benefit to current and future downstream development, as determined by City-approved engineering studies.


3.	
Additional Runoff Controls 


The City may require the installation of stormwater runoff control measures for projects without any stormwater measures present when the benchmarks contained in the subsections a. through d. below are applicable. The City reserves the right to require additional stormwater runoff control measures for projects which are compliant with Sec. 9.2.2.A or Sec. 9.2.2.E.1. above, if stormwater runoff from the site could cause adverse effects on other properties including, without limitation, public streets, greenways and utility easements. 
a.	
As part of an application for rezoning, subdivision or site plan for sites at or upstream of documented structural flooding cases, the applicant shall submit a stormwater impact analysis to the Engineering Services Director.

b.	
This requirement does not extend to sites initially zoned and added to the territorial coverage of as a result of annexation, extraterritorial jurisdictional expansion or otherwise or application of any overlay district. 

c.	
The stormwater impact analysis shall look at the flood level differences between pre-development and post-development conditions for the 25-, 50- and 100-year storm events. If the analysis shows an increase greater than 0.04 feet between pre-development and post-development flood levels at the site of structural flooding then mitigation to pre-development flood conditions will be required to prevent further damage to the affected property. 

d.	
In the case where the area of the subject property is less than 5% of the drainage area, measured to the location of the documented structural flooding, then this analysis shall not be required.

e.	
In the event flood levels are increased, then the affected property owners will be notified in writing of any increase by the applicant.


F.	
Preservation of Open Space Areas
1.	
Open Space Areas Preserved 
a.	
Areas designated on approved stormwater control plans as open space to be used for complying with this Article shall be preserved and protected. 

b.	
The only activities allowed in designated open space areas are those activities allowed by the approved stormwater control plan or allowed in riparian surface water buffers under Title 15A North Carolina Administrative Code Article 2B, section .0233, as amended from time to time. Determinations required by the North Carolina Administrative Code shall be made by the City. 

c.	
No work in open space areas shall proceed without a written protected watercourse buffer permit from the City. 

d.	
Permanently protected undisturbed open space areas identified on stormwater control plans shall be recorded on plats recorded with the County Register of Deeds and clearly delineated with a fence. 



2.	
Exchange of Open Space Areas 




Open space areas may not be subdivided or conveyed by the owner. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the mortgaging and hypothecating of open space areas; provided the mortgage applies to all portions of the tract and not just the open space areas, the mortgagee is informed that the open space areas are used for complying with the requirements of the Article and the rights of the mortgagee are subordinated to the rights of any property owner association and its members. Furthermore, nothing shall prevent the exchanging of open space areas for other properties when all of the following are met: 
a.	
If the open space area is owned by a homeowners' association, written notice of the exchange is given to each member of the association except in cases where the exchange is done to eliminate an encroachment; 

b.	
After the notice is given, if required, the owner of the open space area approves the exchange; 

c.	
The exchanged properties and other considerations are of like value and utility; 

d.	
The acreage and configuration of the remaining open space area including real property to be received in such exchange equal or exceeds the requirements of the City Code; and 

e.	
The exchange is approved by the Engineering Services Director.


G.	
Maintenance of Stormwater Control Measures and Devices
1.	
General Requirements 
a.	
The land owner or person in possession or control of the land shall maintain all on-site stormwater control facilities and all open space areas required by the approved stormwater control plan unless those facilities and open space areas are accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency. 

b.	
The land owner entitled to the exclusive use of an off-site drainage easement for one or more stormwater control facilities not accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency shall maintain said stormwater control facilities.



2.	
Maintenance Covenant 




For off-site stormwater control facilities and all other stormwater control facilities which serve more than 1 lot that are not accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency, the developer shall execute and record with the local county register of deeds office a maintenance covenant. The maintenance covenant shall be on an approved City form, with the contents described below.
When a stormwater control facility benefits a lot owned by a unit of government, alternate compliance to the Maintenance Covenant may be allowed. This alternate compliance must be in the form of a written agreement and must, to the satisfaction of the Engineering Services Director, address maintenance responsibilities, cost sharing, the City’s right to assess the property, and rights of access to the City.  The alternate compliance described herein shall not relieve any lot owner of any other applicable provisions of this UDO.
a.	
Location of Stormwater Control Facilities and Drainage Easements
i.	
A description of portions of property where stormwater control facilities are located as well as a description of the location of all private drainage easements conveying stormwater to and from the development to the facilities.

ii.	
A process for relocating private drainage easements, with any relocation to require the prior written consent of the City.



b.	
Easement Rights of Lot Owners


A statement that owners of properties that will be served by the stormwater control facilities are: 
i.	
Granted perpetual, irrevocable and non-exclusive easement rights and privileges to use, construct, install, inspect, replace, reconstruct, repair and maintain those stormwater control facilities including the right to access those stormwater control facilities, private drainage easements and other portions of the development as reasonably necessary to perform the granted easement rights; and

ii.	
The granting of perpetual, irrevocable and non-exclusive easement rights and privileges to transport, store and discharge stormwater to and from the stormwater control facilities.


c.	
City Easement/Right of Entry/No City Responsibility
i.	
A grant from the developer, the association (if any) and the lot owners to the City of a permanent non-exclusive irrevocable easement over the lots, stormwater control facilities and private drainage easements for inspection, maintenance, repair, construction, installation, re-construction, replacement and other work on, in and over the stormwater control facilities. 

ii.	
A grant from the developer, the association (if any) and the lot owners to the City of a permanent, irrevocable, nonexclusive right of ingress, egress and regress over and across all public or private easements on the property and through all access easements benefitting the developer, association (if any) and the lot owners through any adjacent properties, including but not limited to private roads, for inspection, maintenance, repair construction, installation, reconstruction, replacement and other work on the stormwater control facilities. The rights granted to the City shall include employees, agents and contractors of the City of Raleigh. The grant of these rights does not obligate the City to exercise them or to take any other action.



d.	
Stormwater Operations and Maintenance Manual and Budget


A stormwater operations and maintenance manual and budget conforming to Sec. 9.2.2.D.2. shall be attached to and incorporated into the maintenance covenant as an exhibit.
e.	
Insurance


The party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater control facilities shall, as part of the routine costs and expenses of maintaining any stormwater control facility, procure and maintain in full force and effect liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 of coverage.
f.	
Standards of Maintenance for Stormwater Control Facilities


A statement that stormwater control facilities shall be maintained in accordance with the attached stormwater operations and maintenance manual and budget and at all times, the stormwater control facilities shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, rules and directives of governmental authorities and that the stormwater control facilities shall perform as designed.
g.	
Responsibility for Stormwater Control Maintenance
i.	
A statement that the property owners' association or a designated commercial lot owner, shall be responsible for all stormwater control facilities in accordance with the attached stormwater operations and maintenance manual and budget. 

ii.	
A statement that the failure to maintain any stormwater control facility in accordance with the terms of the maintenance covenant and this UDO is a violation of the City Code, potentially subjecting each lot owner subject to the maintenance covenant to significant daily civil penalties and other enforcement actions.



h.	
Stormwater Control Facilities Maintained by an Association
i.	
If a property owners' association is delegated maintenance responsibilities for the stormwater control facilities, then membership into the association shall be mandatory for the owner of each parcel served by the facility, such membership shall be appurtenant to the parcel and shall run with ownership of the parcel. 

ii.	
The property owners' association shall have the power to levy assessments for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater control facilities and all unpaid assessments levied by the association shall become a lien on the individual parcel. 

iii.	
The calculation of the assessment charge shall be set forth in a subsequent recorded document. 

iv.	
Any property owners’ association responsible for maintenance of stormwater control facilities shall be established in accordance with N.C. Gen. Stat., Chapter 47C and Chapter 47F and the property owners’ association declaration (or equivalent) shall conform to all applicable provisions of the City Code. 

v.	
The common expenses of the property owners' association shall include, without limitation, costs and expenses for operation and maintenance of stormwater control facilities, all costs for insurance premiums and any other costs listed in the stormwater operations maintenance manual and budget.



i.	
Stormwater Control Facilities Maintained by a Commercial Lot Owner
i.	
If a commercial lot owner is responsible for the maintenance of the stormwater control facilities, said owner is responsible for making all repairs and replacements of the stormwater control facilities in accordance with the construction drawings approved by the City. 

ii.	
Each owner of a parcel served by the stormwater control facility shall be subject to an assessment charge levied by the designated responsible lot owner. 

iii.	
The assessment charge shall include, without limitation, the actual costs for repairing and maintaining the stormwater control facility, all costs for insurance premiums associated with the stormwater control facility, all costs of required inspections of the stormwater control facility and any other costs listed in the stormwater operations maintenance manual and budget. 

iv.	
The calculation of the assessment charge shall be set forth in a subsequent recorded document. 

v.	
Any assessment charge levied against a lot and remaining unpaid for a period of 30 days after the payment due date shall be delinquent and shall constitute a default of this covenant entitling the lot owner responsible for maintenance of the stormwater control facilities to bring an action at law against the defaulting party plus interest charges, together with all costs and expenses of collection incurred, including, without limitation, court costs and reasonable attorney fees actually incurred. 

vi.	
Each parcel owner served by the stormwater control facility shall have the right to maintain, repair and replace the facility if, after 45 days written notice, the commercial lot owner responsible for maintenance, repair and replacement fails to faithfully discharge its responsibility. 

vii.	
The parcel owner performing any maintenance or repair of the facility shall have the same rights as the designated commercial lot owner to assess all other parcels served by the stormwater control facility. 

viii.	
At any time, the commercial lot owner responsible for the maintenance of stormwater control facility may assign its responsibilities and rights to a property owners’ association established in accordance with N.C. Gen. Stat., Chapter 47C and Chapter 47F. In such instance, the owners of the parcels served by the stormwater control facility shall be members of the property owners’ association.



j.	
City Right to Maintain and Repair Stormwater Control Facilities and City’s Right of Reimbursement
i.	
	If the stormwater control facilities are not performing adequately or as intended or are not properly maintained or replaced, the City, in its sole discretion, may, after written notice sent to the lot owners and any association, enter the development and perform such construction, installation, repair, reconstruction, replacement and maintenance of the stormwater control facilities as is necessary to remedy the situation. 

ii.	
If the City undertakes the activities listed above, the City shall be fully reimbursed for its costs of inspecting, monitoring, designing, constructing, repairing, reconstructing, replacing and/or installing the stormwater control facility or facilities. Such costs shall include the City’s costs of administration, overhead, contracting and public advertising. 

iii.	
In addition to any other rights the City has to be reimbursed for its costs, the City may levy an assessment against each lot served by the noncompliant stormwater control facility. No assessment will be levied by the City without prior notice to affected lot owners. Any unpaid assessment levied by the City shall be, as allowed by law, a lien against the delinquent lot.



k.	
City’s Right To Private Assessments
i.	
In addition to all of the remedies set forth herein, if the City has not been fully repaid for the work the City performed on any stormwater control facility owned, in fee or easement, by either a property owners' association or a commercial lot owner with the power to assess lot owners for maintenance of the stormwater control facility, the property owners' association and the private commercial lot owner shall assign to the City their right to receive common expense assessments, including stormwater assessments. 

ii.	
The association and private commercial lot owner shall designate and appoint the City as attorney in fact for the expressed and limited purpose of assessing and pursuing collection of such unpaid reimbursement owed to the City. 

iii.	
No assignment of assessment rights shall become effective without 60 days prior written notice to the applicable private commercial lot owner, property owners' association and its members.



l.	
Action for Specific Performance
i.	
That, recognizing the consequences to the City of noncompliance with the obligations of the maintenance covenant, the City shall have the right to seek, in any court of appropriate jurisdiction, judicial action for specific performance of any of the obligations and remedies established in this maintenance covenant. 

ii.	
The rights of the City within the maintenance covenant shall not limit any other remedies or enforcement options available to the City under the maintenance covenant, the City Code or State law.



m.	
No Public Adoption
i.	
A statement that the City’s exercise of its rights under this maintenance covenant, its abatement of public nuisance or its repair of unsafe structures shall not constitute adoption of any stormwater control facility by the City. 

ii.	
A statement that the legal authority of the City is not intended to impede or prohibit the property owners' association or lot owners from taking all necessary actions to inspect, maintain, repair, replace and reconstruct stormwater control facilities so that they function safely, perform the function for which they were created and comply with the provisions of this maintenance covenant and the City Code.



n.	
City’s Right of Non-Action


A statement that the maintenance covenant shall not obligate the City to monitor, maintain, repair, reconstruct, install or replace any stormwater control facility or measure and that the City shall not be liable for the condition or operation of stormwater control facilities.
o.	
Governmental Functions; Superseding Regulations
i.	
A statement that nothing contained in the maintenance covenant shall be deemed or construed to, in any way, stop, diminish, limit or impair the City from exercising or performing any regulatory, policing, legislative, governmental or other powers or functions. 

ii.	
A statement that the maintenance covenant shall not restrict or prevent the application of later adopted ordinances or other enactments which may supplement or supersede the provisions of the maintenance covenant.



p.	
Joint and Several Liability
i.	
A statement that each lot owner served by one or more stormwater control facilities is jointly or severally responsible for repairs, replacement and maintenance of the stormwater control facilities, including payment of any unpaid ad valorem taxes, public assessments for improvements and unsafe building and public nuisance abatement liens charged against the stormwater control facility and/or the lots served by the facility, including all interest charges thereon, together with all cost and expenses of collection incurred, such as, without limitation, court costs and attorney’s fees incurred. 

ii.	
The maintenance covenant shall establish a right of contribution in favor of each owner who pays more than the owner’s pro rata share of costs and expenses against all other owners whose real property is served by the same stormwater control facility. 

iii.	
A statement that pro rata sharing may be established either by maintenance assessment provisions for stormwater control facilities in subsequently recorded documents or by dividing the acreage of such owner’s portion of the real property served by the stormwater control facilities by the total acreage of the portion of the development served by the same stormwater control facility when no maintenance assessment covenants apply to the property.

iv.	
A statement that failure to maintain the stormwater control facilities in accordance with the terms of the maintenance covenant and the City Code is a violation of the City Code potentially subjecting each parcel owner subject to the maintenance covenant to significant daily civil penalties and other enforcement actions.



q.	
Permanently Protected Undisturbed Open Space Areas


A statement that within permanently protected undisturbed open space areas there shall be no land-disturbing activity, no tree disturbing activity, no placement of impervious surface, no removal of vegetation, no encroachment or no construction or erection of any structure shall occur except in accordance with a permit first being issued by the City.
r.	
Severability


The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrase of the maintenance covenant are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of the maintenance covenant is declared invalid by a valid judgment, order or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the maintenance covenant.
s.	
Completion and Recording of Maintenance Covenant Form
i.	
The maintenance covenant shall be binding on all current and subsequent owners of property served by the stormwater control facilities. To protect the interests of the City and the public at large, any existing deed of trust, mortgage or lien encumbering the property, other than tax liens for the current tax year or governmental improvement assessments, must be subordinated to the maintenance covenant.

ii.	
Prior to recording the maintenance covenant, the attorney who prepared the maintenance covenant shall certify in writing to the City that the maintenance covenant was prepared on a City form that contains all the contents required by Sec. 9.2.2.G.2. Certifications shall be on forms approved by the City and shall accompany the maintenance covenant forms.

iii.	
The maintenance covenant shall be recorded with the local county register of deeds office immediately following the recording of any new lot served by the stormwater control facility or prior to the issuance of any building permit for any existing lot except for improvements made pursuant to Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Standards The maintenance covenant must be the first encumbrance recorded subsequent to the recording of the subdivision plat. 

iv.	
A recorded copy of the maintenance covenant shall be given to the Engineering Services Department within one business day following recordation. No building permit shall be issued for the property subject to the maintenance covenant until a recorded copy of the maintenance covenant is provided to the Development  Services Department.




3.	
Payment to Stormwater Facility Replacement Fund
a.	
At the time of either recording a subdivision plat or issuance of a building permit for a lot not established by subdivision, whichever event first occurs, the developer shall pay to the City a stormwater facility replacement fund payment, which payment shall equal 24% of the estimated cost of constructing all stormwater control facilities shown on applicable development plans.

b.	
The purpose of the stormwater replacement fund is to ensure that adequate funds are available to the City for the maintenance, repair replacement and reconstruction of stormwater control facilities required by this UDO. Funds expended from the stormwater facility replacement fund shall be used only for the repair, maintenance, reconstruction and/or replacement of stormwater control facilities, together with the costs incurred by the City associated with any work and/or redesign of the facilities. 

c.	
No funds from the stormwater facility replacement fund shall be used for administration of this fee program. Monies collected from the stormwater replacement fund may be spent for maintenance, repair, reconstruction and replacement of any stormwater control facility required by this UDO and located within the City limits or its extra-territorial jurisdiction. 

d.	
Payments collected by the City pursuant shall be kept separate from other revenues of the City. Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested as allowed in N.C. Gen. Stat. §159-30; all income derived shall be deposited in the separate account and may only be used for repair, maintenance, reconstruction and replacement of stormwater control facilities together with the costs incurred by the City associated with any work or redesign of the facilities. 

e.	
Monies expended from the stormwater facility replacement fund, together with interest, may be recouped by the City from lot owners served by stormwater control facilities maintained, repaired, reconstructed and replaced by the City or its contractors. All recouped monies and interest shall be returned to the stormwater facility replacement fund.

f.	
The payment of stormwater facility replacement fees is not intended as a substitute for security to ensure the construction of the facilities, which security may be required at such point in the development process as specified in City ordinances and policies.




H.	
Annual Inspections and Inspection Report Required


The responsible party for maintenance of the stormwater control measures or devices must submit an annual inspection report from a qualified registered North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor or landscape architect to the Engineering Services Department. The inspections report shall contain all of the following: 
1.	
The name and address of the land owner; 

2.	
The recorded book and page number of the lot of each required stormwater control facility and required open space area; 

3.	
A statement that an inspection was made of all required stormwater control facilities and open space areas; 

4.	
The date of the inspection;

5.	
	A statement that all inspected stormwater control facilities and open space areas are performing properly and are in compliance with the approved stormwater control plan, the applicable maintenance manual required by Sec. 9.2.2.D.2. and the Raleigh Stormwater Control and Watercourse Buffer Manual. No sampling of pollutant loading is required as part of the inspection; 

6.	
The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor or landscape architect; and

7.	
All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the City. An original inspection report shall be given to the Development Services Department beginning from the date of the as-built was first certified under Sec. 9.2.2.D.3. and each year thereafter on the anniversary date of the certification.


Sec. 9.2.3. 
Watercourse Buffers

A.	
Natural Resource Buffers
1.	
General Rules for All Natural Resource Buffers




Natural resource buffers are intended to provide an area where stormwater flows in a diffuse manner so that the stormwater runoff does not become channeled and infiltration of the stormwater and filtering of pollutants can take place. The following rules apply to all required natural resource buffers. 
a.	
Natural resource buffers shall be delineated on recorded final subdivision plats or at the time of development of the property. 

b.	
The City Council may reduce the width of natural resource buffers when it determines that the extent of the natural resource buffer yard will deprive the landowners of reasonable use of their property.

c.	
The width of the natural resource buffer shall be measured perpendicularly to the flow of the watercourse and horizontally from the edge of the watercourse banks. When no watercourse banks exist, the centerline of the watercourse shall be used.

d.	
Open space requirements for Conservation Development and Compact Development (Sec 2.5), and Planned Development (Sec. 4.7) may receive an open space bonus if the site exceeds the minimum natural resource buffer requirement. The open space bonus shall be based on a sliding-scale factor from 0.9 (10% greater than required buffer) to 0.5 (100% greater than required buffer). The open space credit factor shall be determined as follows: (Area of required natural resource buffer)/(Area of proposed natural resource buffer) = Credit Factor. See required buffer area in Section 2.5.2.A.2. This credit factor may be multiplied times the required open space area and may meet up to 50% of Conservation Development, Compact Development, and Planned Development open space requirements. This bonus does not apply to open space requirements in Section 9.2, Stormwater Management.


2.	
Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District, Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District and Conservation Management District Watercourse Buffers 


Natural resource buffers shall be established along primary and secondary watercourses in a -FWPOD, -SWPOD or CM District. 
a.	
Primary Watercourse Natural Resource Buffers


Natural resource buffers along primary watercourses must meet the following standards.
i.	
The buffer must be a minimum of 60 feet wide along each side of any watercourse draining 25 or more acres.

ii.	
The buffer must be a minimum of 35 feet wide along each side of any watercourse draining 5 or more acres but less than 25 acres.

iii.	
The buffer must be a minimum of 35 feet wide along each side of any watercourse which is a stream draining less than 5 acres.

iv.	
In the event that the property or subdivision contains impervious surface lot coverage in excess of 24% in a secondary reservoir watershed protection area, the buffer shall be no less than 100 feet wide along each side of the watercourse.


b.	
Secondary Watercourse Natural Resource Buffers 


Unless part of a primary watercourse natural resource buffer, the secondary watercourse natural resource buffers consists of one or more of the following: 
i.	
Lands within the flood prone areas that adjoin primary watercourse natural resource buffers; or 

ii.	
Lands with slopes 15% or greater, adjoining a primary watercourse natural resource buffers or a flood prone area. 


3.	
Metro-Park Overlay District Watercourse Buffers


Natural resource buffers shall be established as primary tree conservation areas pursuant to Sec. 5.2.2.C.2. and Article 9.1. Tree Conservation along primary and secondary watercourses in a -MPOD. Required tree conservation areas shall meet the following standards. 
a.	
The primary tree conservation area must be a minimum of 50 feet wide along each side of any watercourse draining 25 or more acres.

b.	
The primary tree conservation area must be a minimum of 25 feet wide along each side of any watercourse draining 5 or more acres but less than 25 acres.


4.	
Urban Water Supply Watershed Protection Overlay District Watercourse Buffers 


Natural resource buffers shall be established along primary and secondary watercourses in a -UWPOD. Required natural resource buffers shall meet the following standards. 
a.	
A minimum 30 foot wide natural resource buffer is required for all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps. 

b.	
A minimum 100-foot wide natural resource buffer is required for all new development activities that exceed: 
i.	
Two dwelling units per acre or 20,000 square foot lot excluding roadway right-of-way; or 

ii.	
24% lot coverage for all other residential and nonresidential development.



c.	
Within -UWPOD, these natural resource buffers do not apply to: 
i.	
New detached houses on a nonconforming lot of record;

ii.	
Redevelopment of lots containing detached houses; and

iii.	
Activity in a single development that disturbs less than 1 acre.




B.	
Uses Allowed Within Natural Resource Buffers


No development, expansion of development or change in use may occur within a required natural resource buffer except as allowed below.
1.	
Property outside of a riparian water surface buffer, but situated within a required natural resource buffer, shall comply with all of the following.
a.	
Driveways and vehicular surface areas, not including public streets, are allowed; provided that, all of the following are met: 
i.	
Any crossing is as close to perpendicular as practicable and insures minimal impact to the surrounding buffer; and

ii.	
The driveway or vehicular use area does not constitute more than 40% of the front yard area of any detached house. 



b.	
Fences, walls, statuary, monuments, fountains or signs shall be located outside any primary watercourse buffer. 

c.	
Garden crops involving cultivation shall be located outside any primary watercourse buffer.

d.	
Greenways, sidewalks and walkways shall be located outside of a primary watercourse buffer and meet the requirements of Sec. 9.2.3.C.2. or shall be unpaved.

e.	
New drainage ditches, roadside ditches and stormwater outfalls shall meet the requirements of Sec. 8.8.2.and Sec. 9.2.3.C.2. 

f.	
Playground equipment on single-unit or two-unit living lots. 

g.	
Ponds, stormwater management ponds, reservoirs, provided that, the standards of Sec. 9.5.1.C., Sec. 9.5.2.C.or Sec. 9.5.3.C. are met.

h.	
Public streets, provided that the standards of Sec. 9.3.6., Sec. 9.3.7. and the Raleigh Street Design Manual are met. 

i.	
Railroad crossings.

j.	
Stormwater control facilities and stormwater outfalls shall meet the requirements of Sec. 9.2.3.C.2. if there is no feasible alternate location.

k.	
Utility lines.
i.	
Non-electric utility lines are allowed, but if located in a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD or CM District, the utility lines must meet the standards of Sec. 9.2.3.C. if situated within a primary watercourse buffer area.

ii.	
Underground electrical utility lines are allowed, but if located in a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD or CM District, the underground utility lines must meet the standards of Sec. 9.2.3.C. if situated within a primary watercourse buffer area.

iii.	
Overhead electric utility lines are allowed, but if located in a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD or CM District, the overhead utility lines must meet the standards of Sec. 9.2.3.C. if situated within a primary watercourse buffer area. 



l.	
With the exception of any display area or any gasoline pump island, accessory structures and uses are allowed within a secondary watercourse of a -FWPOD, -SWPOD or CM District, provided that the following standards are met.
i.	
No land-disturbing activity for any allowed use shall affect more than 12% of the portion of a lot within a secondary watercourse natural resource buffer.

ii.	
Land-disturbing activity on slopes between 15% and 20% may occur no closer than 80 feet to the edge of a watercourse.

iii.	
Land-disturbing activity on slopes greater than 20% may occur no closer than 95 feet to the edge of a watercourse. 

iv.	
Upon a recommendation of the Stormwater Management Advisory Commission and approval by the City Council, land-disturbing activities may exceed the standards above; provided that the person submitting the request shows that the potential for stormwater infiltration within a site, the control of stormwater velocity and the restriction of sedimentation both during and after construction are equal to or greater than that which would have been achieved following standards in this Article. The applicant must also show that maintenance provisions are made to maintain the level of infiltration, velocity control and sedimentation on the site. 





2.	
Property located within a riparian water surface buffer and within a required natural resource buffer, must also comply with Title 15A of the North Carolina Administrative Code Subarticle 2B, section .0233, as amended from time to time. 

3.	
Property located inside of a riparian water surface buffer and outside a required natural resource buffer is subject to Title 15A of the North Carolina Administrative Code Subarticle 2B, section .0233, as amended from time to time. 


C.	
Regulations Applied to Uses Allowed in Watercourse Buffers
1.	
Regulations Applying to All Natural Resource Buffers 




Persons who install utility mains shall submit a plan to the City proving that sediment loss during and after installation is less than would have been achieved if other locations outside the buffer were used. 
2.	
Regulations Applying to Both Primary and Secondary Buffer Areas 
a.	
Stormwater Control Facilities in Primary or Secondary Areas




Stormwater control facilities may be allowed within a primary or secondary area only if the following requirements are met:
i.	
The constructed uses within the buffer area require the use of such facilities;

ii.	
The provisions of Sec. 9.4.4.G.4. require facilities in the buffer area; 

iii.	
A wet pond is required by Sec. 9.5.1., Sec. 9.5.2.or Sec. 9.5.3.; or 

iv.	
A lake or wet pond is created or preserved. 


b.	
Stormwater Control Facilities in Required Buffers


Stormwater control facilities may be allowed within required buffer areas only if the following requirements are met.
i.	
The velocity of the stormwater shall not exceed a non-erodible velocity, according to Sec. 9.4.4.G.3., beyond the outlet of the storm control facilities. 

ii.	
Trees over 2-inch DBH which: 
a)	
Would be destroyed by installation of storm control facilities, but not including lakes or wet ponds; 

b)	
Lie within the greater distance of either a 7-foot radius or 1 foot in diameter for each inch of circumference of the tree measured from the outer edge of the grading limits of a storm drainage project shall be replaced by 1 new tree planted in the same general location, all to achieve the same effect as shown on an approved site plan. The planting must be a minimum caliper of 2 inches and be at least 8 feet tall at time of planting; and

c)	
This provision shall not require trees to be planted on cleared land forming the basin of a wet pond or lake. 



iii.	
Stormwater control facilities, which are permitted in the primary and secondary buffer area, shall comply with Sec. 9.5.1.C., Sec. 9.5.2.C. or Sec. 9.5.3.C.


D.	
Diffuse Stormwater Flow Required
1.	
All stormwater runoff from new man-made stormwater control facilities, including new ditches or canals, which flow into a watercourse natural resource buffer or into riparian surface water buffer shall be diffused flow so as not to concentrate stormwater or form gullies.

2.	
Diffuse flow shall be maintained. 

3.	
The landowner or person in possession or control of the land shall be responsible for dispersing concentrated flow of stormwater runoff. 

4.	
The landowner shall take corrective action to prevent the formation of erosion gullies and the landowner shall take corrective action to restore diffuse flow. 

5.	
When diffuse flow is impractical to achieve, stormwater control facilities that attenuate the flow of stormwater runoff and control nitrogen may be approved by the City as an alternative means of compliance. 



E.	
Watercourse Buffer Permits
1.	
No development, expansion of development or change in use may occur on a lot containing a natural resource buffer or open space area required as part of an approved stormwater control plan, without first being issued a written watercourse buffer permit from the City. 

2.	
The City may not issue a watercourse buffer permit until the boundaries of any required natural resource buffer, riparian surface water buffer or permanently protected undisturbed open space areas that are adjacent to or encompass a work site are demarcated by a protective fence in the field. 

3.	
No watercourse buffer permit may be issued for work in a riparian surface water buffer regulated by the State pursuant to Title 15A of the North Carolina Administrative Code Subarticle 2B, Section .0233 unless: 
a.	
The North Carolina Division of Water Quality has determined that surface waters are not present;

b.	
The applicant provides sufficient documentation to demonstrate that the requested work is exempt under the rule;

c.	
The North Carolina Division of Water Quality has determined that the requested work is allowable with mitigation under the rule; or 

d.	
The North Carolina Environmental Management Commission has issued a variance under the rule.



4.	
Before receiving a watercourse buffer permit, the applicant must present to the Engineering Services Department with a copy of the applicable determination of the North Carolina Division of Water Quality or a copy of the variance issued by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission. 



Sec. 9.2.4. 
Inspections

A.	
Agents and officials of the City shall have the right to inspect sites subject to the requirements of this Article to determine whether the measures, devices and open space areas required by this Article to control the rate and quality of stormwater are installed and operating as approved, whether such measures, devices and open space areas are being maintained and to determine if any encroachments or activities in any watercourse buffer area not permitted by this Article have occurred. 

B.	
Notice of this right to make inspections shall be included in the stormwater control and watercourse buffer permits. 

C.	
No person shall obstruct, hamper, delay, resist or interfere with City agents or officials while in the process of carrying out their official duties.

Sec. 9.2.5. 
Enforcement

A.	
Civil Penalties
1.	
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article; or who undertakes or continues any activity for which a stormwater control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan shall be subject to the specific civil penalties set forth in Sec. 9.2.5.F. 

2.	
The penalties shall be assessed by the Engineering Services Department. The initial civil penalty shall be assessed from the date of the violation. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served by registered mail, certified mail-return receipt requested, personal service notice of violation or any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4. 

3.	
The notice shall specify a time by which the person must comply with this Article or any regulation, rule or order, duly adopted pursuant to this Article and inform the person of the actions that need to be taken to comply. 

4.	
In setting the time for compliance, the City shall take into consideration the quantity and complexity of the work, the consequences of delay, the effectiveness of action taken by the violator and the staff investigative costs, but in no event shall the specified time limits be more than 10 calendar days for compliance, except a shorter time period may be required by the City inspector for an imminent threat to either severely degrade a watercourse or cause severe runoff. 

5.	
The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the additional civil and criminal penalties for a continuing violation. If, after the allotted time period has expired, corrective action has not been completed, the additional civil penalties shall be assessed from the date of the initial violation. Each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation.

6.	
The Engineering Services Department shall make written demand for payment upon the person in violation and shall set forth the amount of the penalty and the reason for assessing the penalty. Notice of the assessment shall be by registered or certified mail or any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-a, Rule 4. If the payment is not received within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City, in the appropriate division of the general court of justice in Wake County for recovery of the penalty. Such civil actions must be filed within 3 years of the date the assessment was due.



B.	
Stop-Work
1.	
A stop-work order may be issued if an activity is being conducted or was conducted in violation of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article or is being undertaken or continued for which a stormwater control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan and that either:
a.	
The activity is being conducted without an approved plan, a permit or both;

b.	
The violation endangers life, property or both or that such endangerment is imminent; and 

c.	
The activity is being conducted without installing all protective measures and devices in accordance with the approved stormwater control plan.



2.	
All stop-work orders shall be in writing served on and directed to the person doing the work and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 

3.	
The stop-work order shall be rescinded by written notice if all the violations for which the stop-work order were issued are corrected, no other violations have occurred and all measures necessary to abate the violations have been taken.



C.	
Criminal Penalties
1.	
Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this Article, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this Article or who knowingly or willfully undertakes or continues an activity for which a stormwater control plan is required, except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or both, in the discretion of the court.



D.	
Injunctive Relief
1.	
Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this Article, rule, regulation or order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this Article or any term, condition or provision of an approved stormwater control plan, the City may, either before or after the institution of any other action or preceding authorized by this UDO, institute a civil action to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The action shall be brought in the Superior Court of Wake County.

2.	
Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, the court shall enter any order or judgment that is necessary to abate the violation, to ensure that restoration is performed or to prevent the threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this Subsection shall not relieve any party to the proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations to this UDO.



E.	
Restoration
1.	
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article; or who undertakes or continues an activity except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved stormwater control plan is required to restore the waters, land and vegetation affected by the violation so as to minimize detrimental effects. 

2.	
The restoration plan shall first be approved by the City. This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this section. The owner of any land on which unauthorized tree clearing or tree damaging, in whole or in part has occurred within a watercourse buffer or within a permanently protected undisturbed open space area, shall re-stabilize the land and plant 9 inches of tree circumference for every 100 square feet of disturbed land area or disturbed vegetative area. All replacement trees shall be native woodland species. Any watercourse that has been unlawfully piped, relocated or otherwise unlawfully disturbed shall be re-established. These plantings shall be installed within the time limit specified by the Engineering Services Director. In setting the time limit for compliance, the Engineering Services Director shall take into consideration the quantity of work, planting season and the consequences of delay.



F.	
Specific Civil Penalties


Civil penalties for specific violations of Article 9.2. Stormwater Management shall be assessed as follows.
1.	
Work without a Permit


$5,000 per day for failure to secure a valid required stormwater control permit or watercourse buffer permit prior to conducting any land-disturbing activity, any development or expansion, any placement of impervious surfaces or any new use or construction.
2.	
Failure to Follow Plan


$3,000 per day for failure to conduct a land-disturbing activity, placement of impervious surfaces, development or expansion in accordance with the provisions of an approved stormwater control plan.
3.	
Failure to Maintain Stormwater Control Facilities


$2,500 per day for failure to maintain stormwater control facilities.
4.	
Failure to File Inspections Report


$2,500 per day for failure to file required inspection report.
5.	
Failure to Submit As-Built Plans


$2,500 per day for failure to submit required as-built plans.
6.	
Failure to Certify 


$2,500 per day for failure to certify that installed stormwater measures and devices are in compliance with the Raleigh Stormwater Control and Watercourse Buffer Manual and City approved the stormwater control plan, including modifications thereto approved by the City.
7.	
Falsified Certification


$3,000 for making a falsified certification.
8.	
Failure to Record


$2,500 per day for failure to record or timely record with the local register of deeds required plats identifying stormwater control facilities or required maintenance covenants or required escrow agreements.
9.	
Failure to Revise Plan


$2,500 per day for failure to file an acceptable, revised stormwater control plan within the established deadline after being notified of the need to do so.
10.	
Failure to Correct a Violation


$5,000 per day for failure to correct a violation within the time limitations established in a notice of violation.
11.	
Failure to Obey a Stop-Work Order


$5,000 per day for a violation of a stop-work order.
12.	
Any other Action


$2,500 per day for any other action or failure to act that constitutes a violation of the Article.
13.	
 Repeated Violation


An additional civil penalty of $1,000 per day shall be charged to any person assessed a civil penalty for any violation of this Article within the prior 2 years. No initial civil penalty shall exceed $5,000; this limitation shall be inapplicable to continuous violations.
Sec. 9.2.6. 
Variances and Appeals

A.	
Any variance request or appeal of an administrative decision of a regulation contained within this Article must be presented at a quasi-judicial public hearing before the City Council. All procedural requirements of Section 10.2.10 and 10.2.11 shall apply.

Article 9.3. 
Floodprone Area Regulations

Sec. 9.3.1. 
Floodprone Areas

A.	
Mapped Floodprone Areas
1.	
The mapped floodprone areas are divided into 3 primary areas:
a.	
Floodway areas;

b.	
Floodway fringe areas; and 

c.	
Future conditions flood hazard areas. 



2.	
Floodprone areas are identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study and accompanying flood insurance rate maps, flood hazard soil maps and drainage basin study maps. These maps together with all explanatory matter attached to them are adopted and incorporated by reference into this UDO. 

3.	
Floodprone area regulations are superimposed on the zoning districts established in Article 1.3. Zoning Districts and the requirements of this Article apply in addition to any base zoning requirement. 

4.	
The City Council may, on its own motion or upon petition after public notice and hearing amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations and the flood hazard boundary maps and the delineated flood storage area maps. Amendment to flood insurance rate maps originating from the Federal Insurance Administration shall not become official until a letter stating approval from the Federal Insurance Administration is received by the City.



B.	
Additional Floodprone Areas


Floodprone areas adjoining creeks, streams, tributaries and watercourses not defined on the flood hazard boundary maps include the following.
1.	
Watercourses that drain 1 square mile or more, lying 5 vertical feet from the outer limit of the flood hazard soils or the made land which spans flood hazard soils lying along such watercourses; and 

2.	
Watercourses draining less than 1 square mile are defined as those areas lying within 2 additional feet vertical from the outer limits of the flood hazard soils or made land which traverses such soils. 


Sec. 9.3.2. 
Flood Hazard Soils

A.	
Flood hazard soils are shown on aerial photographic base maps prepared by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service and the North Carolina Agricultural Experiment Station from a soil survey. 

B.	
The outer limits of flood hazard soils may be specifically described by metes and bounds or other means from detailed surveys by owners of property on which they lie, provided the accuracy of such description is reviewed and approved by the Engineering Services Director and that maps or plats of such description are filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court and with the Register of Deeds of Wake County.

C.	
Upon approval by the Engineering Services Director, drainage basin study maps may supersede flood hazard soil maps. Floodprone areas and flood elevation data shall be obtained from the most current drainage basin study maps or the flood studies.

Sec. 9.3.3. 
Rules for Interpretation of Boundaries

A.	
The boundaries of floodprone areas shown on flood insurance rate maps shall be initially determined from the information obtained from the Corps of Engineers and presented in the flood insurance rate maps and the flood insurance study by FEMA. 

B.	
Floodprone boundaries shall be based on the engineering data that most accurately reflects actual field and hydrologic conditions. Field and hydraulic conditions shall prevail over mapped boundaries shown on flood insurance study profiles, flood hazard soils and drainage basin study maps. 

C.	
In areas between official cross-sections, floodprone area boundaries shall be determined by scaling distances on the flood insurance rate maps. Where interpretation of the lateral location of scaled distances is needed to determine the actual field location of these boundaries, the Engineering Services Director is directed to make the necessary interpretation and corrections of flood insurance rate maps applying the following: 
1.	
The base flood elevation shall be the controlling factor in locating the outer limits of a floodway fringe or future conditions flood hazard area boundary; 

2.	
Interpretations of floodway boundaries on flood insurance rate maps shall be based on the current procedures for interpreting floodways in accord with the FEMA guidelines; and

3.	
Interpretation of the flood hazard soils boundaries shall be based upon hydrologic analysis and hydraulic routing methods used by the Corps of Engineers to establish flood insurance rate maps. These methods are contained in the flood insurance study for Wake County as published by FEMA. Approved interpretations of flood hazard soils boundaries may be described by bearings and distances and drawn with elevations in mean sea level datum given for each cross-section used in the routing computations. 



D.	
All interpretation requests shall be accompanied with a list of the names, mailing addresses and Wake County tax parcel numbers of any property owner, including the petitioner, affected by the requested interpretation. The Engineering Services Director shall give notice by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested or by personal service to such property owners. The notices required to be given in this section are for the convenience of property owners and any defect or omission shall not impair the validity of any hearing or decision with respect to any interpretation. 

E.	
The notice shall inform affected property owners that within 14 days of the date of the letter, they may direct the Engineering Services Director to conduct a public hearing on the matter. All requests for a public hearing shall be directed to the Engineering Services Director. At least 10 days prior to a requested public hearing, the Engineering Services Director must by certified or registered mail-return receipt requested or by personal service give notice of the time and place of the hearing to the petitioner and to affected property owners. Hearings shall follow the procedures prescribed by law for hearings before the Board of Adjustment. The establishment and documentation of field conditions used in interpretations shall be based on certified testimony or information supplied by a licensed registered land surveyor and all calculations shall be made and certified by a registered and qualified professional. 

F.	
Upon rendering a decision, the Engineering Services Director shall immediately give notice by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested or by personal service to the petitioner and to affected property owners. Within 15 days after receipt of written notice of the interpretation, any affected property owner, including petitioner, may appeal the decision of the Engineering Services Director to the City Council. 

G.	
All approved interpretations of floodprone boundaries shall be described on maps or plats, which shall then be filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court and with the Register of Deeds of Wake County. The map or plats shall show the locations of all cross-sections, the elevation at the boundary of the floodway fringe areas, future conditions flood hazard area and flood storage area at the cross-section, the location of a benchmark used for vertical control; its elevation in reference to mean sea level datum, all floodplain boundaries and the source of the floodplain area. The map or plats shall also bear the name, title and professional seal of the person who supplied the survey and the calculation as well as the date the interpretation was approved by the Engineering Services Director. 

Sec. 9.3.4. 
Floodway and Non-Encroachment Areas

A.	
Prohibited Uses
1.	
No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, structures, manufactured homes, use and other developments, are permitted within the floodway or non-encroachment areas unless it has been demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not:
a.	
Adversely affect the capacity of the channel's floodway and non-encroachment areas or drainage facilities or systems; 

b.	
Redirect velocities of water of the base flood or future conditions flood onto adjacent properties; or 

c.	
Result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood or future conditions flood based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain administrator prior to issuance of flood permit or Conditional Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment. 



2.	
No chemical storage facilities which store or process acetone, acetylene gas, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, gasoline, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid, magnesium, materials or fuel which are flammable or explosive, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, petroleum products, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, sulfur or any other item which in time of flooding is buoyant or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is allowed in the floodway and non-encroachment areas. 

3.	
No new solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities and salvage yards are allowed in the floodway or non-encroachment areas.



B.	
Allowed Uses


Provided they are not otherwise prohibited in this UDO, the following uses are allowed within floodway and non-encroachment areas.
1.	
General farming, pasture, outdoor plant or nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game preserves and other similar agricultural wildlife and related uses.

2.	
Lawns, yards, gardens, parking areas, play areas and other similar uses.

3.	
Golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, greenways, bikeways, hiking or horseback-riding trails, botanical gardens, open space and other similar private and public recreational uses.

4.	
Any other use not employing a structure and not subject to floating away during a flood.

5.	
Any use employing a structure, provided all portions of any structure, including foundation and supports, shall be located outside the floodway area and that any structure which overhangs the floodway is elevated above the depth of the 500-year flood. 

6.	
Other encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, structures as defined in the North Carolina State Building Code, manufactured homes, use and other developments when it has been demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not do any of the following: 
a.	
Adversely affect the capacity of the channels floodway and non-encroachment areas or drainage facilities or systems;

b.	
Redirect velocities of water of the base flood or future conditions flood onto adjacent properties; and

c.	
Result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood or future conditions flood all based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit or a Conditional Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment.




C.	
Restrictions on Existing Structures 
1.	
No structure existing and lying within a floodway shall be considered a nonconforming structure. All such structures may be repaired, improved, strengthened and enlarged; provided that no construction is permitted which will: 
a.	
Enlarge the foundation area of the structure within the floodway; 

b.	
Increase the bulk of the building or structure within the floodway below the base flood or future conditions flood level; or 

c.	
Enlarge the surface area perpendicular to the direction of flow of the watercourse to which the floodway relates. 



2.	
In the event of damage to an existing structure in a floodway by flood or other means that requires a substantial improvement of the structure, the structure may be repaired; provided that:
a.	
The surface area of the floodway formerly occupied by the structure shall not be increased; 

b.	
The repairs to the structure shall incorporate appropriate floodproofing measures; and 

c.	
The repairs shall not increase the bulk of the structure below the base flood or future conditions flood level. 



3.	
Additions may be made to existing structures located in a floodway upon recommendation from the Corp of Engineers and upon a letter of approval from FEMA to the City Council that the impact of the proposed addition would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



Sec. 9.3.5. 
Floodway Fringe and Future Hazard Areas

A.	
Prohibited Uses
1.	
The storage or processing of acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid, magnesium, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, sodium, sulphur or any other item which in time of flooding could be caustic is prohibited. 

2.	
New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management facilities and salvage yards are prohibited in the floodway fringe areas and future conditions flood hazards areas.

3.	
In flood hazard soils, areas of watercourses that drain areas less than 1 square mile may use a structure or encroachment, including fill, which is located within 90% of the distance of the outer limits of the flood hazard soils,as measured from either side of the center line of the stream channel or the low point when there is no stream channel, or the midpoint, when there is no stream channel or low point and which increases the elevation of the base flood or future conditions flood at any point by more than ½ foot, is prohibited. 

4.	
Nothing in this section prevents a landowner from redelineating flood hazard soils areas of water courses which drain less than 1 square mile to accommodate more than a ½ foot rise of the base flood or future conditions flood if: 
a.	
All of the more than ½ foot flood rise for the base flood or future conditions flood remains on the property of petitioner; 

b.	
The establishment and documentation of field conditions used in the redelineation are based on information supplied by a licensed registered land surveyor and all calculations are made and certified by a licensed professional engineer; 

c.	
Any sanitary sewer manholes in an area of increased depth are floodproofed by the petitioner; 

d.	
The petitioner notifies by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, all adjoining property owners and tenants, including the petitioning property. Such notice shall explain the proposed redelineation and it shall inform such persons that they can appeal the proposed redelineation to the Engineering Services Director within 10 days after receipt of the letter; 

e.	
Appeals from decisions of the Engineering Services Director shall be to the City Council; and

f.	
Upon the approval of the revised delineation by the City, the new delineation is recorded with the Register of Deeds of Wake County. Recorded delineations shall mark any additional lands subject to flooding as a “flood storage area.” 





B.	
Allowed Uses


Provided they are not otherwise prohibited in this UDO, the following uses are allowed within floodway fringe and future conditions flood hazard areas.
1.	
Uses Allowed Below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation 
a.	
Uses permitted and regulated in floodways. 

b.	
Nonresidential structures and residential accessory structures which comply with Sec. 11.4.6.B.2. or Sec. 11.4.6.B.3. subject to Sec. 9.3.5.C. below.

c.	
Underground storage and structure foundations and supports which are watertight and substantially impermeable to the passage of water and are designed to withstand the flood depths, pressure, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood or future conditions flood at the location of the structure. 



2.	
Uses Allowed Above the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation 
a.	
Structures which comply with Sec. 11.4.6.

b.	
Manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes that comply with Sec. 11.4.6.

c.	
Structures constructed on fill so that the lowest floor is above the regulatory flood protection elevation, provided the top of the fill is no lower than 1 foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation for the area and extends in all directions at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any structure or building. 

d.	
Open storage of materials subject to floating away during a flood provided the storage is placed on fill at least 1 foot above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 




C.	
Limits of Development


The lot coverage of any lot may not exceed 50% of the portion of the floodway fringe or future conditions flood hazard areas on that lot, with the following exceptions.
1.	
Uses permitted in floodways.

2.	
Ground level loading areas, parking areas, heliports and other similar ground level uses.

3.	
Any lot ½ acre or less in size which was recorded prior to May 2, 2006.

4.	
No existing or approved structure, for which a building permit has been issued prior to May 2, 2006, shall be considered a nonconforming structure. In the event of damage to such a structure by flood or other casualty requiring a substantial improvement of said structure, the structure may be repaired or rebuilt with:
a.	
An administrative approval by the Floodplain Administrator, if all of the following are met:
i.	
The land use existing at the time of the flood or other casualty remains the same; 

ii.	
The area of the footprint of the structure does not increase; and

iii.	
There is no rise in the Base Flood Elevation or, if there is any rise in the Base Flood Elevation, as determined by a Flood Study identifying upstream and downstream structures that will be impacted, it will:
a)	
Not raise the levels of the base flood or future conditions flood onto impacted structures; and

b)	
Not redirect velocities of water onto impacted structures.





b.	
A variance by the City Council, if all of the following are met:
i.	
The land use existing at the time of the flood or other casualty remains the same; 

ii.	
The area of the footprint of the structure does not increase; 

iii.	
There are unique circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence to the provisions of this Article will result in unnecessary hardship or create practical difficulties; and

iv.	
The variance granted is the minimum necessary to maintain the land use

v.	
A written request for a variance shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall state the specific variance sought, the justification for the variance and what measures will be taken to ensure the requirements of this Article have been met to the maximum extent practicable. 



c.	
An administrative approval by the Floodplain Administrator for any redevelopment that does not increase the flood elevation and that decreases the bulk of an existing building or structure below the base flood or future conditions flood level by at least 25% of the portion exceeding 50% of the floodway fringe or future conditions flood hazard areas. Any additional fill or material being added as a part of the redevelopment shall be included for calculation of the bulk of the proposed redevelopment. A written request for a variance shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 



5.	
Notwithstanding the preceding exceptions, the City Council may approve a variance to the 50% lot coverage limitation where the following conditions are met: 
a.	
There are unique circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence to the provisions of this Article will result in unnecessary hardship or create practical difficulties;  

b.	
The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Article; and

c.	
In granting this variance, public safety and welfare has been assured and substantial justice has been done.

d.	
A written request for a variance shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall state the specific variance sought, the justification for the variance and what measures will be taken to insure the requirements of this Article have been met to the maximum extent practicable. 



6.	
Upon a determination that the extent of the development limit will deprive the land owner of reasonable use of their property, the City Council may allow development in excess of the 50% lot coverage limitation of the floodway fringe or future conditions flood hazard areas. 


Sec. 9.3.6. 
Street Crossings Watercourses 

A.	
All streets and driveways or any bridge or culvert associated with any street or driveway, crossing a watercourse, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City standards. 

B.	
Street crossings of natural resource buffer yards shall be as close to a perpendicular angle as possible. 

C.	
Any street, driveway, bridge or culvert associated with any street or driveway, which is located in a floodprone area draining less than 1 square mile and not shown on a FEMA map or located outside a floodprone area, may either increase the flow levels and area of flooding of the 10 through 100 year frequency floods or redirect floodwaters if the following is met: 
1.	
Copies of recorded flood easements or flood easements on recorded plats adequate to contain the increased flow levels are first submitted to the City; and 

2.	
Land areas contained within the easement boundaries shall be delineated as flood storage areas.



D.	
The following additional standards shall apply to all streets and driveways crossing watercourses draining 10 acres or more and which are located inside floodprone areas.
1.	
Any street, driveway, bridge or culvert associated with any street or driveway shall pass the 100 year flood crest, under free flow conditions that will not result in any increase in the elevation of the 10- through 100-year floods above those specified in the Flood Insurance Study, City of Raleigh, Federal Emergency Management Agency, latest publication. 

2.	
If the drainage areas exceed 1 square mile, the maximum rise allowed for the 100-year flood shall not exceed a total of 1 foot above the base flood elevation established for flood hazard soil areas or those elevations specified either in the drainage basin study maps or in the Flood Insurance Study, City of Raleigh, Federal Emergency Management Agency, latest publication.

3.	
Base flood elevations for return periods of less than 100-years may be increased to exceed 1 foot, provided that the portion of the flood increase which is greater than 1 foot is either limited to the site boundaries of the property of the owner requesting this increase or restricted to flood storage areas shown on a recorded plat. 



Sec. 9.3.7. 
Streets in Floodprone Areas

A.	
All streets in floodprone areas shall be designed and constructed to provide a minimum of 2 feet of vertical freeboard, as measured from the predicted 10 year flood peak water surface elevation to the low point of the top of curb or edge of pavement for streets without curbs. The following are exceptions to this standard: 
1.	
Those portions of streets within allowable vertical and horizontal controls which act as a transition to existing streets; or 

2.	
When the City Council finds that the public benefit derived from the construction of the thoroughfare or collector street would be better served if these standards were varied. 

3.	
All thoroughfares in floodprone areas shall be designed and constructed so as not to be overtopped during the predicted 50 year storm. All other streets in floodprone areas shall be designed and constructed so as not to be overtopped during the predicted 25-year storm. 



B.	
For any street in floodprone areas, any proposed increase above floodway levels specified in the Flood Insurance Study, City of Raleigh, Federal Emergency Management Agency, latest publication may be allowed, provided that the change is approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

C.	
Any proposed street or driveway, bridge or culvert associated with a street or driveway (including fill), located in the floodprone area must be accompanied by a sealed written statement by a registered professional engineer licensed in North Carolina certifying that such structure is designed and constructed in accordance with this section and shall specify which provision applies. 

D.	
Outside of regulated discharge floodplain areas, the maximum depth of any overtopping flow during the predicted 100 year flood shall not exceed 1 foot. The downstream slope of the roadway section shall be protected from erosion due to the overtopping flow. Streets located within regulated discharge floodplain areas must be located at or above the 100 year flood elevation, consistent with the regulations of Sec. 9.3.5.A. 

Sec. 9.3.8. 
Warning & Disclaimer of Liability

A.	
The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 

B.	
This Article does not imply that areas outside the boundaries of floodprone areas or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 

C.	
This Article shall not create liability on the part of the City or by any officer or employee for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made. 

Sec. 9.3.9. 
Penalties

A.	
Civil Penalties
1.	
Any person controlling or managing any building or land where there is placed or there now exists anything in violation of this Article; or, any person who shall commit or assist in the commission of any violation of this Article; or, any person who shall build contrary to this Article after plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved by the Engineering Services Director; or, any person who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act provided for in this Article shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100 per day of continuing noncompliance. 

2.	
No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served by registered mail notice to comply. The notice shall set forth a description of the violation for which the penalty has been invoked. 

3.	
As an additional remedy or in lieu of other remedies, the City Council may either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this section, institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain or prevent any violation of this Article or the City Council may direct the removal or abatement of any obstruction which violates this Article and direct the restoration of conditions existing before the placement of the unlawful obstruction. 

4.	
The institution of an action for abatement or injunctive relief shall not relieve any party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Article. 



B.	
Criminal Penalties
1.	
Any person controlling or managing any building or land where there is placed or there now exists anything in violation of this Article or any person who shall assist in the commission of any violation of this Article; or any person who shall build contrary to this Article after plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved by the Engineering Services Director; or any person who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act provided for in this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 

2.	
Failure to correct an identified violation shall constitute a separate violation for each 10 days that such failure continues after written notice has been received. 



Sec. 9.3.10. 
Variances and Appeals

A.	
Any variance request or appeal of an administrative decision of a regulation contained within this Article must be presented at a quasi-judicial public hearing before the City Council. All procedural requirements of Section 10.2.10 and 10.2.11 shall apply.

Article 9.4. 
Erosion & Sedimentation Control

Sec. 9.4.1. 
Applicability

A.	
This Article applies to all land-disturbing activities with the following exclusions: 
1.	
Land-disturbing activities, including but not limited to, the breeding and grazing of lifestock undertaken on agricultural land for the production of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to:
a.	
Forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, tobacco, cotton and peanuts; 

b.	
Dairy animals and dairy products; 

c.	
Poultry and poultry products; 

d.	
Livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats; 

e.	
Bees and apiary products; and 

f.	
Fur-producing animals.



2.	
Land-disturbing activities undertaken on forest land for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in accordance with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality, Title 15A North Carolina Administrative Code, Subarticle 11, sections 1.010-.0209, as adopted by the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources. If land-disturbing activity undertaken on forestland for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products is not conducted in accordance with best management practices set out in Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality, Title 15A North Carolina Administrative Code, Subarticle 11, sections 1.010-.0209, the provisions of this Article shall apply to such activity and any related land-disturbing activity on the tract. 

3.	
Activities for which a permit is required under the Mining Act of 1972, N.C. Gen Stat., Chapter 74, Article 7. 

4.	
Land-disturbing activities undertaken for the duration of an emergency, activities essential to protection of human life.



B.	
This Article does not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, as such activities are subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the North Carolina Sediment Control Commission: 
1.	
Activities conducted by the State of North Carolina; 

2.	
Activities conducted by the United States; 

3.	
Activities conducted by persons having the power of eminent domain; 

4.	
Activities conducted by local governments, except that the City Council of the City of Raleigh hereby declares its intent that all of the departments and agencies of the City, its contractors and subcontractors shall also comply with the regulations set forth in this Article; and 

5.	
Activities funded in whole or in part by the State of North Carolina or the United States. 



Sec. 9.4.2. 
Guidelines Incorporated


The Raleigh Guidelines for Land Disturbing Activities and amendments, on file in the City Clerk’s Office, is adopted by reference as part of this UDO.
Sec. 9.4.3. 
Objectives

A.	
The objectives to be considered in planning, developing, implementing and maintaining adequate erosion and sedimentation controls and undertaking land-disturbing activities are to.
1.	
Identify Critical Areas 




Identify on-site areas which are subject to erosion and off-site areas which are vulnerable to damage from erosion or sedimentation and provide special attention to these areas. 
2.	
Limit Time of Exposure


Limit time of exposure of all land-disturbing activities so that such activities are planned and conducted to limit uncovered soil surfaces to the shortest feasible time. 
3.	
Limit Exposed Areas 


Limit exposure of all land-disturbing activities so that these activities are planned and conducted to minimize the size of the uncovered area at any 1 time. 
4.	
Control Surface Water 


Control surface water runoff originating upgrade from uncovered soil surfaces to reduce erosion and sediment during the period of exposure. 
5.	
Control Sedimentation 


Control all land-disturbing activities so that such activities are planned and undertaken to prevent off-site sedimentation damage. 
6.	
Manage Stormwater Runoff 


Manage stormwater runoff when the increase in the velocity of stormwater runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity can cause accelerated erosion at the point of discharge or receiving watercourse, plans are to include measures to control the velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and sedimentation of the receiving watercourse. 
7.	
Control Operations in Lakes or Natural Watercourses 


Control land-disturbing activities in connection with construction in, on, over or under a lake or natural watercourse so that such activities are planned and undertaken to minimize the extent and duration of disturbance of the lake or natural watercourse. Natural watercourses should be preserved. 
B.	
An erosion and sedimentation control plan may be disapproved if the plan fails to address the foregoing control objectives. 

C.	
When deemed necessary by the approving authority, a pre-construction conference shall be held. 

Sec. 9.4.4. 
Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity


No land-disturbing activity shall occur except in accordance with the following standards; wherever there is a conflict between two or more of these standards, the more stringent regulation is controlling.
A.	
General Requirements 
1.	
Prior Plan Approval 
a.	
An erosion and sedimentation control plan must be approved by the Engineering Services Director at least 30 days prior to any regulated land-disturbing activity. This does not restrict the initiation of land-disturbing activities when the plan is approved and the permit is issued in less than 30 days from initial submission. Failure to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove a completed draft erosion and sedimentation control plan within 30 days of receipt shall be deemed approval of the plan. 

b.	
When determining the area of land-disturbance, the square footage of land-disturbance of all land and bodies of water disturbed or to be disturbed shall be aggregated, regardless of whether under single or diverse ownership.

c.	
A surety equal to the cost of clearing, grubbing and reseeding a site shall be paid to the City prior to grading permit issuance. If the property is subject to a continuing violation the City may cash the surety.

d.	
An approved erosion and sedimentation control plan is required for any land-disturbing activity of 12,000 square feet or greater.

e.	
An approved erosion and sedimentation control plan is required for any land-disturbing activity below 12,000 square feet for the following:
i.	
Land-disturbing activity in any Watershed Protection Area;

ii.	
Relocation of any natural watercourse;

iii.	
Upon the occurrence of off-site sedimentation; or

iv.	
When a person conducting a land-disturbing activity has been issued two or more Notices of Violation, within the last 2 years, for failure to comply with the provisions of Article 9.4. For purposes of this subsection, an applicant's record is considered for the 2 years prior to the development permit application date.





2.	
Protection of Property 




Persons conducting land-disturbing activity must take all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property from damage caused by land-disturbing activity. 
3.	
NPDES Stormwater Permit for Construction Activity


Documentation required under the site National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater permit for construction activity shall be submitted to the City.
B.	
Adequate Erosion Control Measures 


Adequate erosion control measures shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 9.2.2.E.
C.	
Design and Performance Standards and Guidelines 
1.	
Copies of design and performance standards which are contained in Guidelines for Land-Disturbing Activities will be published by the City and placed on file in the Office of the City Clerk and the Engineering Services Director. 

2.	
All erosion control plans, erosion control measures, ground covers, maintenance and calculations must be in accordance with the applicable Guidelines for Land-Disturbing Activities and State of North Carolina Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual; in the event of any conflict, the more stringent regulation applies. 



D.	
Buffer Zones
1.	
Buffer Zones Generally
a.	
No land-disturbing activity during periods of construction or improvement to land are allowed in proximity to a lake or natural watercourse unless a buffer zone is provided along the watercourse to confine visible siltation within 25% of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity. 

b.	
Unless otherwise provided, the width of a buffer zone is measured from the edge of the watercourse to the nearest edge of the disturbed area.



2.	
Buffer Zone Exceptions




This section does not apply to a land-disturbing activity in connection with the construction of facilities to be located on, over or under a lake or natural watercourse. No land-disturbing activity, except as permitted in Sec. 9.2.3.B. and Sec. 9.2.3.C. or Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas, shall take place: 
a.	
Within any watercourse buffer area unless it conforms to the requirements of Sec. 9.2.3.B. and Sec. 9.2.3.C. and the provisions of this Article; and

b.	
Within any high-quality water zone unless it conforms to the requirements of Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas and the provisions of this Article.


E.	
Graded Slopes and Fills 


The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than the angle which can be retained by vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control devices or structures. In any event, slopes left exposed shall be provided with ground cover, devices or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. For all areas of moderate or steep slopes, temporary ground cover shall be provided if the slope has not been disturbed for a period of 14 days.
F.	
Ground Cover
1.	
Whenever a land-disturbing activity occurs, the person undertaking the activity shall install such ground cover, devices or structures sufficient to restrain erosion and retain sediment within the boundaries of the tract at all times. 

2.	
Any portion of a site upon which further land-disturbing activity is not being undertaken shall be provided with ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion within 14 calendar days of temporarily or permanently suspending the land disturbing activity. Permanent ground cover shall be installed within 14 calendar days following completion of construction or development.



G.	
Downstream Protection of Discharge Points and Receiving Watercourses 
1.	
Permanent Protection




Any area of a land-disturbing activity and all receiving watercourses or discharge point must be permanently protected from accelerated erosion caused by increased velocity of stormwater runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
2.	
Post Construction Velocity


For any land-disturbing activity, the post construction velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving water-course to the discharge point does not exceed the greater of: 
a.	
The velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving watercourse prior to a development; 

b.	
The velocity specified according to the following table for a discharge point into a receiving watercourse with bare soil or rock bed or banks; or


Maximum Permissible Velocities
 
Material
 (F.P.S.)
 (M.P.S.)
 
Fine sand (noncolloidal)
 2.5
 0.8
 
Sandy loam (noncolloidal)
 2.5
 0.8
 
Silt loam (noncolloidal)
 3.0
 0.9
 
Ordinary firm loam
 3.5
 1.1
 
Fine gravel
 5.0
 1.5
 
Stiff clay (very colloidal)
 5.0
 1.5
 
Graded, loam to cobbles (noncolloidal)
 5.0
 1.5
 
Graded, silt to cobbles (colloidal)
 5.5
 1.7
 
Alluvial silts (noncolloidal)
 3.5
 1.1
 
Alluvial silts (colloidal)
 5.0
 1.5
 
Course gravel (noncolloidal)
 6.0
 1.8
 
Cobbles and shingles
 5.5
 1.7
 
Shales and hard pans
 6.0
 1.8
 


c.	
 The velocity specified according to the following for a discharge point into a vegetated receiving watercourse.


Group
No.
 Vegetation
 Depth of Flow
(feet)
 Maximum 
Permissible
Velocity* (F.P.S.)
 
1
 Bermudagrass
 t1
 4 
 
u1
 6 
 
2
 Tall fescue
 t1
 3 
 
Reed canarygrass
Kentucky bluegrass
 u1
 6 
 
3
 Grass and legumes, mixed
 t1
 3 
 
Weeping lovegrass
 u1
 4 
 
4
 Lespedeza, sericea
 t1
 2.5 
 
Red fescue, Red top
 u1
 2.5 
 
5
 Annuals:**
Annual lespedeza (KOBE)
 t1
 2.5 
 
Sundangrass
Small grain (rye, oats, barley): Ryegrass
 u1
 2.5 
 
Group
No.
 Vegetation
 Depth of Flow
(feet)
 Maximum 
Permissible
Velocity* (F.P.S.)
 
*Do not use on channel slopes steeper than 10%, except for side slopes.
**Annuals: use as temporary protection until permanent cover established.
 


3.	
General Velocity Standard 


Any area of a land-disturbing activity or receiving watercourses subject to stormwater runoff velocities in excess of those specified in Sec. 9.4.4.G.2. above from accelerated erosion by provision of an erosion-resistant lining of vegetation in accordance with Sec. 9.4.4.G.2.c. above provided, armored, paved or otherwise nonvegetative watercourse lining shall be provided anywhere the velocity in the receiving watercourse exceeds Sec. 9.4.4.G.2.c. and the prior development velocity by 10%.
4.	
Critical Soils


When the following soils (as defined and described in the soil survey of Wake County North Carolina Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agricultural, November, 1970) which are especially vulnerable to erosion from stormwater discharge from land-disturbing activities, occur between a point of stormwater discharge and the next confluence of concentrated stormwater runoff, such areas, on- or off-site shall be protected from accelerated erosion by diverting the stormwater discharge from those soil surfaces. The application of this section may not prevent discharge of stormwater from a land-disturbing activity site. Diversion may include the provision of piped, paved or armored storm drainage facilities: 
a.	
Applying sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (ApP);

b.	
Cecil sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (CeD);

c.	
Cecil sandy loam, 15% to 45% slopes (CeF);

d.	
Creedmore sandy loam, 10% to 20% slopes (CrE);

e.	
Enon fine sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (EnD2);

f.	
Georgeville silt loam, 10% to 15% slopes (GeD2);

g.	
Granville sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (GrD);

h.	
Helena sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (HeD);

i.	
Herndon silt loam, 10% to 25% slopes (HrD2);

j.	
Herndon silt loam, 15% to 25% slopes (HrE);

k.	
Lloyd loam, 10% to 15% slopes (LdD2);

l.	
Louisburg loamy sand, 10% to 15% slopes (LoD);

m.	
Made land, (Ma) greater than 4% slopes under actual field conditions;

n.	
Madison sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (MdD2);

o.	
Madison sandy loam, 15% to 25% slopes (MdE2);

p.	
Mayodon sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (MfD2);

q.	
Mayodan sandy loam, 15% to 25% slopes (MfE);

r.	
Mayodan silt loam, 10% to 15% slopes (MyD);

s.	
Pinkston sandy loam, 10% to 45% slopes (PkF);

t.	
Wake, 10% to 25% slopes (WkE);

u.	
Wedowee sandy loam, 10% to 15% slopes (WmD2);

v.	
Wedowee sandy loam, 15% to 25% slopes (WmE);

w.	
White Store sandy loam, 10% to 20% slopes (WsE);

x.	
White Store clay loam, 2 to 15% slopes (WvD3);

y.	
Wilkes, 10% to 20% slopes (WwE);

z.	
Wilkes, 20% to 45% slopes (WwF); and

aa.	
Wilkes, 15% to 25% slopes (WxE).


5.	
Armored 


Armored or otherwise non-vegetatively lined watercourse lining shall, in addition to the requirements of Sec. 9.4.4.G.3. above, be provided at the storm outlet and for those portions of the receiving watercourse which have undergone land-disturbing activity. 
6.	
Exception 


Where piped, paved or armored storm drainage facilities connect to existing off-site piped, paved or armored storm drainage facilities or where it can be demonstrated that stormwater discharge velocities will not create an erosion problem in the receiving watercourse, none of the foregoing provisions of this section shall apply. 
7.	
Equivalent Alternatives


The management of stormwater runoff to minimize or control downstream channel and bank erosion is a developing technology. Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used when shown to have the potential to produce successful results. Alternatives include, but are not limited to: 
a.	
Avoid increases in surface runoff volume and velocity by including measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased runoff from areas rendered impervious; 

b.	
Avoid increases in stormwater discharge velocities by using vegetated or roughened swales and waterways in lieu of closed drains and high velocity paved sections; 

c.	
Provide energy dissipators at outlets of storm drainage facilities to reduce flow velocities to the discharge point. These may range from simple rip-rapped sections to complex structures; and 

d.	
Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving cross-sections or providing erosion-resistant lining.


H.	
Operations in Lakes or Natural Watercourses
1.	
Any land-disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over or under a lake or natural watercourse shall be planned and conducted in such a manner so as to minimize the extent and duration of disturbance of the stream channel and to prevent off-site sedimentation. 

2.	
The relocation of a natural watercourse must meet the provisions of Sec. 9.4.4.G. and must minimize changes to the stream flow characteristics. The relocation of a natural watercourse may not occur in natural resource buffer yards of a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD, -MPOD or CM District.



I.	
High-Quality-Water Zones 


Within high-quality-water (HQW) zones the following additional design standards shall apply.
1.	
Uncovered areas in HQW zones shall be limited at any time to a maximum total area within the boundaries of the tract of 20 acres. Only the portion of the land-disturbing activity within an HQW zone shall be governed by this section. Larger areas may be uncovered within the boundaries of the tract with the written approval of both the Director of the Division of Land Resources of the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources and the City Council. 

2.	
Sediment basins shall be designed and constructed such that the basin will have a settling efficiency of at least 85% for the 40 micron size soil particle transported into the basin by the runoff of that two-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures required by this Article. 

3.	
Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be designed and constructed with side slopes no steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical if vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit a steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using mechanical devices, structural devices or other acceptable ditch liners. In any event, the angle for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion. 


J.	
Keep Dirt and Mud Off Public Streets 


The accumulation of more than 1/32 inch of dirt, mud or both on any public street, measured 6 feet from an entrance or exit of any land-disturbing activity, is prohibited. 
Sec. 9.4.5. 
Maintenance

A.	
During the development of a site, any person undertaking the land-disturbing activity must install and maintain all temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the approved plan, any provision of this Article, the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 or any order adopted pursuant to this Article or the Sedimentation Pollution Control Act. 

B.	
After site development, the land owner or person in possession or control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary permanent erosion and sediment control measures, except those measures installed within a road or street right-of-way or easement accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency. 

C.	
Whenever a permanent erosion and sediment control measure is washed out or is otherwise disabled the land owner or person in possession or control of the land shall replace the permanent erosion and sediment control measure within 15 working days or 30 calendar days, whichever period is shorter, unless a longer period of time is allowed in writing by the Engineering Services Director. 

D.	
When energy dissipators or other adequate erosion control measures serve more than 1 lot and are located on private property, they shall be located on a lot or lots which are as large or larger in size than the typical lot size within the development. There shall be recorded, after approval by the City, in the Wake County Registry a map of those lots and said map shall bear the following note: 


"The energy dissipator which controls stormwater velocities, stormwater retention or detention devices and other erosion control measured located on this lot are required to be maintained by the property owner or owners for that portion of the device on his lot in accordance with the requirements of the Raleigh City Code.”
E.	
Whenever stormwater control facilities serve more than 1 lot that are not accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency, prior to recording any lot served by the facility a maintenance covenant conforming with Sec. 9.2.2.G.2. shall be recorded with the local county register of deeds offices.

Sec. 9.4.6. 
Land Disturbing Activity Permit & Control Plans Required

A.	
All land-disturbing activity permits shall be obtained from the City. 

B.	
No person shall initiate any land-disturbing activity in a -FWPOD or -SWPOD in any watercourse natural buffer yard established pursuant to Sec. 9.2.3. in open space areas or to relocate any natural watercourse or in any other area if more than 12,000 square feet is to be uncovered unless, 30 or more days prior to the anticipated date for initiating the activity, an erosion and sedimentation control plan for such activity is filed with and approved by the City; but this shall not restrict the initiation of land-disturbing activities when the plan is approved and the permit is issued in less than 30 days from initial submission. 

C.	
No permit authorized by this UDO shall be issued until the boundaries encompassing a work site adjacent to any -FWPOD, -SWPOD, watercourse natural resource buffer, trout water buffer, watercourse natural resource buffers in a -MPOD or in a CM District, a high-quality water zone, any tree protection limits of any -MPOD, CM and -SHOD- or any area where vegetation is required to be maintained by a conditional use district or an approved site plan are clearly and accurately demarked by a protective fence in the field. The location and extent of all authorized land-disturbing activities shall be similarly demarcated for so long as any land-disturbing activity continues. 

D.	
The following table summarizes the plan approval process required:


Size of Site
 
Plan required to be prepared and filed with:
 Less than
12,000 sq. ft.
 Between 12,000
sq. ft. and 1 acre
 Greater 
than 1 acre
 
City of Raleigh
 No 
 Yes
 Yes
 
Plan approval required prior to commencement of land disturbance
 No
 Yes
 Yes
 


Sec. 9.4.7. 
Additional Measures

A.	
Whenever the City determines that off-site sedimentation may occur or is occurring as a result of a previous or on-going land-disturbing activity, despite application and maintenance of protective practices, the person undertaking the land-disturbing activity or the person responsible for maintenance will be required to and shall provide further adequate erosion control measures. 

B.	
The City shall serve one or more of the following: any person undertaking a land-disturbing activity or the person responsible for maintenance or any of their appointed agents, written notice of violation with this section, specifying the noncompliance. 

C.	
Service shall be done in any of the following ways: Registered mail, certified mail return receipt requested, personal service or any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4.

D.	
The notice shall set forth the measures needed to come into compliance and shall state the time within which such compliance must be completed and warn that failure to correct the violation within the time period will result in the additional civil and criminal penalties for a continuing violation. Alternative equivalent measures may be submitted and, if approved by the City, must be completed within the time period stated for compliance. 

E.	
In determining the measures required and the time allowed for compliance, the City shall take into consideration the economic feasibility, technology, quantity of work required and extent of damage; it shall then set reasonable and attainable time limits for compliance. 

F.	
The failure to comply with the notice or approved alternate equivalent measures within the time specified shall be a further violation of this UDO. 

Sec. 9.4.8. 
Appeals

A.	
Except as provided in Sec. 9.4.8.D. below, the disapproval or required modification of any proposed erosion control plan or the refusal to issue a grading or other necessary permit by the City shall entitle the person who submitted the plan or applied for the permit to appeal this decision to the City Council. 

B.	
Appeal must be made in writing to the City Clerk and the Engineering Services Director within 15 days of written notice of disapproval or modification of plan or refusal to issue a permit. 

C.	
No appeal, other than to reduce the width of the natural resource buffer yards, that would be inconsistent with either the Standards of the Water Supply Watershed Act, N.C. Gen. Stat. §143-214.5 or the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be granted without the prior approval of the Environmental Management Commission. 

D.	
Upon receipt of an appeal, the City shall notify in writing and in sufficient time to allow a reasonable comment period, all other local governments having jurisdiction within the water supply watershed. Each year the City will transmit to the Environmental Management Commission a report on each appeal it receives.

E.	
Hearings held pursuant to this section shall be held by the City Council within 30 days from the date the appeal is filed in the City Clerk’s office. The City Council shall then render a decision no later than 21 days following said hearing. 

F.	
If the City Council upholds the disapproval or modification of a proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control plan following the hearing, the person submitting the plan shall within 15 days following the decision of the City Council be entitled to appeal the City Council’s action to the Sedimentation Control Commission pursuant to Title 15 4B.0018(b) of the North Carolina Administration Code and N.C. Gen. Stat. §113A-61(c). 

G.	
In the event that an erosion control plan is disapproved, the City shall notify the Director of the Division of Land Resources of the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources of such disapproval within 10 days. The City shall advise the applicant and the Engineering Services Director in writing as to the specific reasons that the plan was disapproved. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 9.4.8.A. through Sec. 9.4.8.C. above, the applicant may appeal the City’s disapproval of the plan directly to the Sedimentation Control Commission. 

H.	
Judicial review of the final action of the erosion plan review committee of the Sedimentation Control Commission may be had in Superior Court of Wake County. 

Sec. 9.4.9. 
Compliance with Plan Requirements

A.	
Any person who fails to file a plan in accordance with this UDO or who undertakes a land-disturbing activity except in accordance with provisions of a plan approved under this UDO shall be deemed in violation of this UDO.

B.	
If it is determined that any person who undertakes a land-disturbing activity has failed to comply with the provisions of this Article, any regulation, rule or order, duly adopted pursuant to this Article, a notice of violation shall be served upon that person or his appointed agent. The initial civil penalty shall be assessed from the date of the violation. 

C.	
The notice shall be served by registered mail, certified mail return receipt requested or by any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4. The notice shall specify a date by which the person must comply with this Article or any regulation, rule or order, duly adopted pursuant to this Article and inform the person of the actions that need to be taken to comply. 

D.	
In setting the time for compliance, the City shall take into consideration the quantity and complexity of the work, the consequences of delay, the effectiveness of action taken by the violator and the staff investigative costs, but in no event shall the specified time limits be more than 10 consecutive calendar days for compliance, except a shorter time period may be required by the City inspector for an imminent threat to either severely degrade a watercourse or cause severe off-site sedimentation. 

E.	
The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the additional civil and criminal penalties for a continuing violation. 

F.	
If, after the allotted time period has expired, corrective action has not been completed, the additional penalties shall be assessed from the date of initial violation and each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation under this section. 

G.	
The notice shall explain the type of enforcement procedures which may be issued for violations. If the person undertaking the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, such person shall be in further violation of this UDO. 

Sec. 9.4.10. 
Inspections

A.	
Agents and officials of the City shall inspect the land-disturbing activities at reasonable times to ensure whether the activities are being conducted in accordance with the approved plan or the requirements of this UDO and to determine whether the measures implemented are effective in controlling accelerated erosion and preventing off-site sedimentation.

B.	
Notice of this right to make inspections shall be included in the certificate of approval of each soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 

C.	
No person shall obstruct, hamper, delay, resist or interfere with City agents or officials while in the process of carrying out their official duties. 

Sec. 9.4.11. 
Enforcement

A.	
Civil Penalties
1.	
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article; or who undertakes or continues a land-disturbing activity for which a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan shall be subject to the specific civil penalties set forth in Sec. 9.4.11.F. 

2.	
The initial civil penalty shall be assessed from the date of the violation. 

3.	
No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation or their appointed agent is served by registered mail, certified mail-return receipt requested, personal service notice of violation or any other means authorized under N.C Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4. 

4.	
The notice shall specify a time by which the person must comply with this Article or any regulation, rule or order, duly adopted pursuant to this Article and inform the person of the actions that need to be taken to comply and shall direct the violator to either pay the assessment or contest the assessment within 30 days by filing a petition for a contest case under N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 150B, Article 3.

5.	
In setting the time for compliance, the City shall take into consideration the quantity and complexity of the work, the consequences of delay, the effectiveness of action taken by the violator and the staff investigative costs, but in no event shall the specified time limits be more than 10 consecutive calendar days for compliance, except a shorter time period may be required by the City inspector for an imminent threat to either severely degrade a watercourse or cause severe off-site sedimentation. 

6.	
The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the additional civil and criminal penalties for a continuing violation. If, after the allotted time period has expired, corrective action has not been completed, the additional civil penalties shall be assessed from the date of the initial violation. Each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation. 

7.	
The Revenue Collector of the City shall make written demand for payment upon the person in violation and shall set forth the amount of the penalty and the reason for assessing the penalty; the Revenue Collector, for continuous violations, shall send within each 10 day period additional notices to the person in violation.

8.	
 Notice of the assessment shall be by registered or certified mail or any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4. If the payment is not received within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City, in the appropriate division of the general court of justice in Wake County for recovery of the penalty. Such civil actions must be filed within 3 years of the date the assessment was due. 

9.	
Civil penalties collected pursuant to this provision shall be used or disbursed as directed by law. 



B.	
Stop-Work


A stop-work order may be issued if a land-disturbing activity is being conducted or was conducted in violation of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article or is being undertaken or continued for which a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan and that either: 
1.	
The land-disturbing activity is being conducted without an approved plan, a permit or both; 

2.	
The violation endangers life, property or both or that such endangerment is imminent; and

3.	
The land-disturbing activity is being conducted without installing all protective measures in accordance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 

4.	
All stop-work orders shall be in writing served on and directed to the person doing the work and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. The stop-work order shall be rescinded by written notice if all the violations for which the stop-work order were issued are corrected, no other violations have occurred and all measures necessary to abate the violations have been taken. 


C.	
Criminal Penalties


Any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any provision of this Article, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this Article or who knowingly or willfully undertakes or continues a land-disturbing activity for which an erosion control plan is required, except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or both, in the discretion of the court. 
D.	
Injunctive Relief
1.	
Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this Article or rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this Article or any term, condition or provision of an approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, the City may, either before or after the institution of any other action or preceding authorized by this UDO, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The action shall be brought in the Superior Court of Wake County. 

2.	
Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, the court shall enter any order or judgment that is necessary to abate the violation, to ensure that restoration is performed or to prevent the threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief shall not relieve any party to the proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations to this UDO. 



E.	
Restoration 


Any person who undertakes a land-disturbing activity and who fails to retain sediment generated by the activity, as required by N.C. Gen. Stat. §113A-57(3), is required to restore the waters and land affected by the failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution by sedimentation. This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this section. 
F.	
Specific Civil Penalties


Civil penalties for specific violations of this Article shall be assessed as follows: 
1.	
Grading without a permit. $5,000 per day for failure to secure a valid required grading permit prior to conducting a land-disturbing activity. 

2.	
Grading beyond the limits of a grading plan. $1,000 per day per 1/10 of a graded acre beyond the limits of an existing grading permit without the approval of an amended grading permit, but not to exceed $7,000 per day. 

3.	
Failure to protect. $5,000 per day for failure to take all reasonable measures to protect public property or private property, from damage caused by the failure to retain sediment on-site for the design storm. 

4.	
Failure to follow plan. $3,000 per day for failure to conduct a land-disturbing activity in accordance with the provisions of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan. 

5.	
Failure to install devices. $5,000 per day for failure, when more than 1 acre is disturbed, $2,500 per day when 1 acre or less than 1 acre is disturbed, to install erosion and sedimentation control devices sufficient to retain the sediment generated by the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract(s) and prevent off-site sedimentation. 

6.	
Failure to maintain permanent and/or temporary measures. $2,500 per day for failure to maintain adequate erosion control measures. 

7.	
Failure to properly maintain slopes and fills. $2,500 per day for failure on graded slopes and fills to maintain an angle sufficient to retain vegetative cover or other adequate erosion control measures. 

8.	
Failure to protect exposed slopes. $2,500 per day for failure, within 15 working days or 30 calendar days of completion of any phase of grading, whichever period is shorter, to plant or otherwise provide exposed, graded slopes or fills with ground cover, devices or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. 

9.	
Failure to provide adequate cover. $2,500 per day for failure on a tract when more than 1 acre is disturbed, $1,200 dollars per day when 1 acre or less than 1 acre is disturbed, to plant or otherwise provide ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion within 15 working days or 60 calendar days, whichever period is shorter, following completion of construction or development. 

10.	
Failure to revise plan. $2,500 per day for failure to file an acceptable, revised erosion and sedimentation control plan within the established deadline after being notified of the need to do so. 

11.	
Failure to correct a violation after notice. $5,000 dollars per day for failure to correct a violation within the time limitations established in a notice of violation. 

12.	
Failure to obey a stop-work order. $5,000 per day for a violation of a stop-work order. 

13.	
Any other action or failure to act that constitutes a violation of this Article. $2,500 per day for any other action or failure to act that constitutes a violation of this Article. 

14.	
Failure to keep dirt and mud off public streets. $1,000 per day for failure to prevent the accumulation of dirt, mud or both on public streets in violation of this Article plus 1 dollar per every 6 linear feet of street if cleaned by the City, its employees or its contractors. 

15.	
An additional civil penalty of $1,000 per day shall be charged to any person assessed a civil penalty for any violation of this Article within the prior 2 years. No initial civil penalty shall exceed $7,500; this limitation shall be inapplicable to continuous violations. 


Sec. 9.4.12. 
Revisions


The City of Raleigh shall incorporate revisions required by the Sedimentation Control Commission within 8 months following receipt of the required revisions. If standards and provisions of this UDO currently meet or exceed the required revi­sions, the Sedimentation Control Commission must be notified within 90 days of their receipt.
Sec. 9.4.13. 
Variances and Appeals

A.	
Any variance request or appeal of an administrative decision of a regulation contained within this Article must be presented at a quasi-judicial public hearing before the City Council. All procedural requirements of Section 10.2.10 and 10.2.11 shall apply.


Article 9.5. 
Watershed Protection Areas

Sec. 9.5.1. 
Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD) 

A.	
Natural Resource Buffer Yards 


Natural resource buffer yards consistent with Sec. 9.2.3. must be established along all perennial watercourses. 
B.	
Impervious Surface Coverage 
1.	
All lots or portions of lots in existence prior to April 19, 2005 or lots established outside the subdivision process after that date, no additional impervious surface may be added to the property, which would result in greater coverage by impervious surface than allowed by the following table: 




Area
 No Stormwater Control 
Measures
 Retention, Detention or Capture First 1/2 Inch of Runoff
 
Primary water supply watershed protection areas
 24% or 2 units of a single-unit living per acre or 20,000 square foot lot. 
 50%
 
Secondary water supply watershed protection areas
 24% or 2 units of a single-unit living per acre or 20,000 square foot lot or 3 dwellings per acre or 36% built upon area for projects with­out curb and gutter street systems.
 70%
 


2.	
Land will be deemed compliant with the intensity requirements if the intensity of all existing development at the time of reclassification does not exceed the density requirement when densities are averaged throughout the area. 

3.	
Impervious surfaces include all proposed streets within the development approved after April 19, 2005 and all impervious surfaces on any lot and common area. 

4.	
Calculation of the area of the development includes all lots, street rights-of-way and common areas within the watershed. Calculation of the area of the development must exclude any widening of existing street rights-of-way, existing street rights-of-way and new street rights-of-way reserved in accordance with the Roadway Corridor Official Map Act, N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 136 Article 2E. 

5.	
Redevelopment is permitted when the activity does not result in a net increase of impervious surface and provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development and substitutions of impervious surfaces is done in accordance with Sec. 10.3.5.A. 

6.	
Any lot of record existing prior to October 12, 2008, that does not conform to the area or impervious surface coverage regulations of this section and which contains a detached house is exempt from the regulations of this overlay district, except there may be no exemption if the lot is contiguous to any other lot owned by the same person. Additions and expansions to existing structures must comply with the requirements of this overlay district, however, impervious surfaces existing prior to the initial application of these regulations must not be included in the impervious surface coverage calculations. 


C.	
Required Stormwater Measures
1.	
Stormwater Retention, Detention and Capture




Within any primary or secondary watershed protection area, lots which are connected to both City water and sewer utilities and have a total maximum impervious surface of more than 24%, provided that the first ½ inch of stormwater which directly or indirectly runoff off the surface in excess of 24%, from the lot is: 
a.	
Retained for water harvesting and use on the site, infiltration into the soil, evaporation into the air, or a combination of these;

b.	
Detained for at least a 12-hour period

c.	
Captured by an approved stormwater treatment device; or

d.	
A combination of the above.


2.	
Stormwater Runoff From Streets


Where impervious surface coverage is greater than 24%, the first inch of stormwater which directly or indirectly runs off any street must be contained within the development in accordance with the retention or detention or capture methods set forth above.
D.	
Maintenance of Stormwater Control Measures


When retention devices, detention devices or wet ponds serve more than 1 lot and are located on private property, a maintenance covenant which complies with Sec. 9.2.2.G.2. for sharing the maintenance costs must be recorded. After approval by the City, a map must be recorded in the Wake County Registry, showing the location of the retention device, detention device or wet pond on the lot; the map must bear the following note: " The stormwater control facilities, which serve more than 1 lot, that are not accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency are required by the Raleigh City Code to be owned and maintained by a property owners association for which all lot owners shall be a member.”
E.	
Exemptions
1.	
	The impervious surface coverage limitations and stormwater retention, detention and capture requirements within the secondary water supply watershed protection area of the -UWPOD are inapplicable to any street, right-of-way, lot or improvement if its stormwater runoff flows by gravity to a watercourse located outside the overlay district. All gravity flow drainage plans shall be approved by the Engineering Services Department.

2.	
	Any lot of record existing prior to October 12, 2008, that does not conform to the area or impervious coverage regulations contained in the schedule of Maximum Impervious Surface Limits in a -UWPOD and Required Measures and which lot contains a dwelling used for single-unit living is exempt from the regulations of this overlay district, except there shall be no exemption if the lot is contiguous to any other lot owned by the same person. Additions and expansions to existing structures shall comply with the requirements of this overlay district, however, impervious surfaces existing prior to the initial application of these regulations shall not be included in the impervious surface coverage calculations.




3.	
	For all lots or portions of lots in existence prior to October 12, 2008 or lots established outside the subdivision process after that date, the impervious surface coverage limitations and stormwater retention, detention and capture requirements within the -UWPOD are inapplicable to any single development that disturbs less than 1 acre. 


Sec. 9.5.2. 
Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-FWPOD)

A.	
Natural Resource Buffer Yards


Natural resource buffer yards consistent with Sec. 9.2.3. must be established.
B.	
Impervious Surface Coverage 
1.	
For all lots or portions of lots in existence prior to March 1, 1988 or lots established outside the subdivision process after that date, no additional impervious surface may be added to the property which would result in greater coverage by impervious surface or by built area than allowed by the following table:




Area
 No Stormwater Control 
Measures
 Retention, Detention or Capture First Half Inch of Runoff
 Management of First Inch of Rainfalll
 
Primary water supply watershed protection areas
 6% impervious surface; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 12% impervious surface
 N/A
 N/A
 
Secondary water supply watershed protection areas not connected to both City water and sewer utilities 
 12% impervious surface; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 24% impervious surface
 N/A
 N/A
 
Area
 No Stormwater Control 
Measures
 Retention, Detention or Capture First Half Inch of Runoff
 Management of First Inch of Rainfalll
 
Secondary water supply watershed protection areas with connections to both City water and sewer utilities 
 12% impervious surface; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 24% impervious surface
 24% impervious surface
 30% built area; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 50% built area; 70% built area in areas designated in the Compre­hensive Plan for higher impervious surfaces 
 


2.	
Impervious surfaces and built areas include all proposed public and private streets within the development approved after June 20, 1993 and all impervious surfaces and built areas on any lot and common area.

3.	
Calculation of the area of the development includes all subdivision lots, new street rights-of-way established after June 20, 1993 and common areas within the watershed. Calculation of the area of the development excludes any widening of existing street rights-of-way, existing street rights-of-way and new street rights-of-way reserved in accordance with the Roadway Corridor Official Map Act, N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 136 Article 2E. 

4.	
All lots established after June 20, 1993 must comply the impervious surface coverage standards and the built area coverage standards of the Article. 

5.	
Substitutions of impervious surfaces done in accordance with Sec. 10.3.5.A. are allowed. 


C.	
Required Stormwater Measures
1.	
Stormwater Retention, Detention and Capture
a.	
Within any secondary watershed protection area, lots which are connected to both City water and sewer utilities and have a total maximum impervious surface of more than 3,500 square feet may have an impervious coverage of more than 12% and less than 24%; provided that the first ½ inch of stormwater which directly or indirectly runs off the surfaces in excess of 12%, from the lot is:
i.	
Retained for water harvesting and use on the site, infiltration into the soil, evaporation into the air, or a combination of these;

ii.	
Detained for at least a 12-hour period;

iii.	
Captured by an approved stormwater treatment device; or

iv.	
A combination of the above.



b.	
Built area coverage of 24% or higher is allowed in secondary reservoir watershed protection areas when the first inch of rainfall (including the amount from the first 24% built area coverage) is captured by an approved stormwater treatment device. Such runoff must be managed in accordance with Sec.9.5.2.C.3 below.



2.	
Stormwater Runoff From Streets
a.	
Where impervious surface coverage is equal to or less than 12% in any primary water supply watershed protection area or equal to or less than 24% in any secondary water supply watershed protection area, the first ½ inch of stormwater which runs off any street must be contained within the development capture methods set forth in Sec. 9.5.2.C.1. above. 

b.	
Where impervious surface coverage is greater than 12% in any primary water supply watershed protection area or greater than 24% in any secondary water supply watershed protection area, the first inch of rainfall from streets must be managed in accordance with Sec. 9.5.2.C.3. below. 



3.	
Use of GSI in Secondary Watershed Protection Areas
a.	
When built area exceeds 24% in secondary reservoir watershed protection areas, runoff from the entire development site must be controlled on a runoff volume basis such that the post-development volume of stormwater leaving the site is equal to or less than the pre-development volume of stormwater leaving the site based on the 90th percentile storm. For the purpose of meeting this requirement for new development sites, the pre-development land cover must be assumed to be forested for the entire development site. The developer may request, and the City may approve, a design exception to this requirement based on one or more of the following criteria:
i.	
Low infiltration rates of native soils on the site.

ii.	
Shallow depth to seasonally high groundwater table on the site.

iii.	
Shallow depth to bedrock on the site.

iv.	
Other hardship approved by the Engineering Services Director based on site conditions.








In requesting a design exception to this requirement, the developer must demonstrate that runoff resulting from the first inch of rainfall over the entire development site will be detained or retained using conventional stormwater treatment practices, GSI practices, or a combination.
b.	
Except where located in areas designated in the Comprehensive Plan for higher impervious surfaces, the maximum percent of impervious surface coverage in those portions of the secondary reservoir watershed protection areas connected to both City water and sewer utilities shall not exceed 30% unless the impervious surface coverage is 3,500 square feet per lot or less; in such instances the maximum impervious surface coverage allowed shall not exceed 50%. 

c.	
When the development is located in portions of secondary reservoir watershed protection areas that are specifically designated in the Comprehensive Plan for higher impervious surfaces, the maximum impervious surface coverage may not exceed 70%; provided that the property is connected to both City water and sewer utilities. No more than 5% of the land area within any 1 secondary reservoir watershed protection area may be developed with an impervious surface coverage in excess of 50% unless approved by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission. 

d.	
The design of wet ponds must meet the specifications and requirements found within the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 


D.	
Nitrogen and Phosphorous Loading
1.	
New Development
a.	
Applicability
i.	
The following regulations apply to new development and expansions to impervious surfaces occurring on or after June 1, 2011. 

ii.	
Substitutions of impervious surface done in accordance with Sec. 10.3.5.A. are allowed provided there is no net increase in impervious surface and equal or greater stormwater control is provided.

iii.	
Lots and structures existing prior to June 1, 2011 are not to be considered nonconforming solely because of the application of these regulations. Additions and expansions to existing impervious surfaces, uses and structures must comply with the requirements of these regulations; however, impervious surfaces existing prior to the initial application of these regulations are not to be included in the nitrogen and phosphorous loading calculations. 

iv.	
All stormwater management plans required for new development on properties located within a -FWPOD must comply with the following regulations.



b.	
Requirement
i.	
Nitrogen and phosphorous loads contributed by the proposed new development activity may not exceed the unit-area mass loading rates as follows:
a)	
Nitrogen: 2.2/10 pounds per acre per year; and

b)	
Phosphorus: 33/100 of a pound per acre per year.



ii.	
The developer’s stormwater management plan must determine the load reductions necessary to comply with the above maximums by utilizing the loading calculation method prescribed in the Stormwater Control and Watercourse Buffer Manual. 

iii.	
	Developments that comply with the watershed stormwater control master plan approved for its watershed protection area are exempted from the requirements of this section. Compliance with watershed stormwater control master plan must include:
a)	
The installation within the development of all stormwater control measures shown on the watershed stormwater control master plan;

b)	
The payment of fees in lieu of installation, when allowed by the State; and 

c)	
The payment of any applicable drainage fees if the facilities prescribed by the master plan are constructed. 





c.	
Option for Offsetting a Portion of Nutrient Loading
i.	
The developer shall have the option of offsetting a portion of the nitrogen and phosphorous load by implementing or funding off-site management measures. Prior to utilizing any off-site option, the developer’s stormwater management plan must implement structural stormwater controls that attain a minimum of 60% reduction in increased post-construction nitrogen loading rate and a minimum of 60% in increased post-construction phosphorus loading rate on-site and, when applicable, implementing all engineered stormwater controls for compliance with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements and any other State-mandated stormwater regulation. 

ii.	
Offsetting measures provided off-site by the developer must achieve at least equivalent reductions in nitrogen and phosphorus loading as needed on-site to comply with the maximum loading rates specified above. Offsetting measures provided off-site must meet the requirements of State Administrative Rule 15A NCAC 02B .0282, which may include the following:
a)	
Payments to the NC Ecosystem Enhancement Program contingent upon acceptance of payments by that program;

b)	
A City approved offset program prescribed in the Raleigh Stormwater Control and Watercourse Buffer Manual; or

c)	
An offset program proposed by the property owner which is located within the applicable reservoir watershed protection area basin subject to final approval by the Public Works Director. 





d.	
Maintenance of Stormwater Control Measures and Devices






The land owner or person in possession or control of the land must maintain, repair, reconstruct, replace and make payments for all stormwater control measures and devices and open space areas required by the stormwater control plan in accordance with Sec. 9.2.2.G., unless those measures, devices and open space areas are accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency.	
E.	
Maintenance of Stormwater Control Measures
1.	
When retention devices, detention devices or wet ponds serve more than 1 lot and are located on private property, a maintenance covenant which complies with Sec. 9.2.2.G.2. for sharing the maintenance costs must be recorded.

2.	
After approval by the City, a map must be recorded in the Wake County Registry, showing the location of the retention device, detention device or wet pond on the lot; the map must bear the following note: " The stormwater control facilities, which serve more than 1 lot, that are not accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency are required by the Raleigh City Code to be owned and maintained by a property owners association for which all lot owners shall be a member.”



F.	
Exemptions
1.	
The impervious surface coverage limitations and stormwater retention, detention and capture requirements within the secondary watershed protection area of a -FWPOD are inapplicable to any street, right-of-way, lot or improvement where its stormwater runoff flows by gravity to a watercourse located outside the overlay district. All gravity flow drainage plans must be approved by the Engineering Services Department. 

2.	
The impervious surface coverage limitations and stormwater retention, detention and capture requirements are inapplicable to a lot separated by deed conveyance prior to June 20, 1993; provided that, the lot is developed for single-unit living with no more than 3,500 square feet of impervious surfaces and the owner does not own any other contiguous real property which could be recombined. 



G.	
Forestation of Lots


Except as otherwise provided, every lot located within a -FWPOD must provide and maintain an area set aside for trees equal to at least 40% of the lot area in accordance with Sec. 9.1.9.
Sec. 9.5.3. 
Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD)

A.	
Natural Resource Buffer Yards


Natural resource buffer yards consistent with Sec. 9.2.3. must be established.
B.	
Impervious Surface Coverage 
1.	
For all lots or portions of lots in existence prior to March 1, 1988 or lots established outside the subdivision process after this date, no additional impervious surface may be added to the property which would result in greater coverage by impervious surface or by built area than allowed by the following table: 




Area
 No Stormwater Control 
Measures
 Retention, Detention or Capture First Half Inch of Runoff
 Management of First Inch of Rainfall
 
Primary water supply watershed protection areas
 6% impervious surface; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 12% impervious surface
 N/A
 N/A
 
Secondary water supply watershed protection areas not connected to both City water and sewer utilities 
 12% impervious surface; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 24% impervious surface
 N/A
 N/A
 
Secondary water supply watershed protection areas with connections to both City water and sewer utilities 
 12% impervious surface; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 24% impervious surface
 24% impervious surface
 30% built area; or 3,500 sq. ft. if this is not more than 50% built area; 70% built area in areas designated in the Compre­hensive Plan for higher impervious surfaces
 


2.	
Impervious surfaces and built areas include all proposed public and private streets within the development approved after June 20, 1993 and all impervious surfaces and built areas on any lot and common area. 

3.	
Calculation of the area of the development includes all subdivision lots, new street rights-of-way established after June 20, 1993 and common areas within the watershed. Calculation of the area of the development excludes any widening of existing street rights-of-way, existing street rights-of-way and new street rights-of-way reserved in accordance with the Roadway Corridor Official Map Act, N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 136 Article 2E. 

4.	
All lots established after June 20, 1993 must comply the impervious surface coverage standards and the built area coverage standards of the Article. 

5.	
Substitutions of impervious surfaces done in accordance with Sec. 10.3.5.A. are allowed. 


C.	
Required Stormwater Measures
1.	
Stormwater Retention, Detention and Capture
a.	
Within any secondary watershed protection area, lots which are connected to both City water and sewer utilities and have a total maximum impervious surface of more than 3,500 square feet may have an impervious coverage of more than 12% and less than 24%; provided that the first ½  inch of stormwater which directly or indirectly runs off the surfaces in excess of 12%, from the lot is:
i.	
Retained for water harvesting and use on the site, infiltration into the soil, evaporation into the air, or a combination of these;

ii.	
Detained for at least a 12-hour period;

iii.	
Captured by an approved stormwater treatment device; or

iv.	
A combination of the above.



b.	
Built area coverage of 24% or higher is allowed in secondary reservoir watershed protection areas when the first inch of rainfall (including the amount from the first 24% built area coverage) is captured by an approved stormwater treatment device. Such runoff must be managed in accordance with Sec. 9.5.3.C.3 below.



2.	
Stormwater Runoff From Streets
a.	
Where impervious surface coverage is equal to or less than 12% in any primary water supply watershed protection area or equal to or less than 24% in any secondary water supply watershed protection area, the first ½  inch of stormwater which runs off any street must be contained within the development capture methods set forth in Sec. 9.5.3.C.1. above. 

b.	
Where impervious surface coverage is greater than 12% in any primary water supply watershed protection area or greater than 24% in any secondary water supply watershed protection area, the first inch of rainfall from streets must be managed in accordance with Sec. 9.5.3.C.3 below. 



3.	
Use of GSI in Secondary Watershed Protection Areas
a.	
When built area exceeds 24% in secondary reservoir watershed protection areas, runoff from the entire development site must be controlled on a runoff volume basis such that the post-development volume of stormwater leaving the site is equal to or less than the pre-development volume of stormwater leaving the site based on the 90th percentile storm. For the purpose of meeting this requirement for new development sites, the pre-development land cover must be assumed to be forested for the entire development site. The developer may request, and the City may approve, a design exception to this requirement based on one or more of the following criteria:
i.	
Low infiltration rates of native soils on the site.

ii.	
Shallow depth to seasonally high groundwater table on the site.

iii.	
Shallow depth to bedrock on the site.

iv.	
Other hardship approved by the Engineering Services Director based on site conditions.








In requesting a design exception to this requirement, the developer must demonstrate that runoff resulting from the first inch of rainfall over the entire development site will be detained or retained using conventional stormwater treatment practices, GSI practices, or a combination.
b.	
Except where located in areas designated in the Comprehensive Plan for higher impervious surfaces, the maximum percent of impervious surface coverage in those portions of the secondary reservoir watershed protection areas connected to both City water and sewer utilities shall not exceed 30% unless the impervious surface coverage is 3,500 square feet per lot or less; in such instances the maximum impervious surface coverage allowed shall not exceed 50%. 

c.	
When the development is located in portions of secondary reservoir watershed protection areas that are specifically designated in the Comprehensive Plan for higher impervious surfaces, the maximum impervious surface coverage may not exceed 70%; provided that the property is connected to both City water and sewer utilities. No more than 5% of the land area within any 1 secondary reservoir watershed protection area may be developed with an impervious surface coverage in excess of 50% unless approved by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission. 

d.	
The design of wet ponds must meet the specifications and requirements found within the Stormwater Design Manual. 


D.	
Nitrogen and Phosphorous Loading
1.	
New Development
a.	
Applicability
i.	
The following regulations apply to new development and expansions to impervious surfaces occurring on or after June 1, 2011. 

ii.	
Substitutions of impervious surface done in accordance with Sec. 10.3.5.A. are allowed provided there is no net increase in impervious surface and equal or greater stormwater control is provided.

iii.	
Lots and structures existing prior to June 1, 2011 are not to be considered nonconforming solely because of the application of these regulations. Additions and expansions to existing impervious surfaces, uses and structures must comply with the requirements of these regulations; however, impervious surfaces existing prior to the initial application of these regulations are not to be included in the nitrogen and phosphorous loading calculations. 

iv.	
All stormwater management plans required for new development on properties located within a -SWPOD must comply with the following regulations.



b.	
Requirement
i.	
Nitrogen and phosphorous loads contributed by the proposed new development activity may not exceed the unit-area mass loading rates as follows:
a)	
Nitrogen: 2.2/10 pounds per acre per year; and

b)	
Phosphorus: 33/100 of a pound per acre per year.



ii.	
The developer’s stormwater management plan must determine the load reductions necessary to comply with the above maximums by utilizing the loading calculation method prescribed in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 

iii.	
	Developments that comply with the watershed stormwater control master plan approved for its watershed protection area are exempted from the requirements of this section. Compliance with watershed stormwater control master plan must include:
a)	
The installation within the development of all stormwater control measures shown on the watershed stormwater control master plan;

b)	
The payment of fees in lieu of installation, when allowed by the State; and 

c)	
The payment of any applicable drainage fees if the facilities prescribed by the master plan are constructed. 





c.	
Option for Offsetting a Portion of Nutrient Loading
i.	
The developer shall have the option of offsetting a portion of the nitrogen and phosphorous load by implementing or funding off-site management measures. Prior to utilizing any off-site option, the developer’s stormwater management plan must implement structural stormwater controls that attain a minimum of 60% reduction in increased post-construction nitrogen loading rate and a minimum of 60% in increased post-construction phosphorus loading rate on-site and, when applicable, implementing all engineered stormwater controls for compliance with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements and any other State-mandated stormwater regulation. 

ii.	
Offsetting measures provided off-site by the developer must achieve at least equivalent reductions in nitrogen and phosphorus loading as needed on-site to comply with the maximum loading rates specified above. Offsetting measures provided off-site must meet the requirements of State Administrative Rule 15A NCAC 02B .0282, which may include the following:
a)	
Payments to the City of Raleigh to implement the City-approved offset program;

b)	
A City approved offset program prescribed in the Raleigh Stormwater Management Design Manual; or

c)	
An offset program proposed by the property owner which is located within the applicable reservoir watershed protection area basin subject to final approval by the Engineering Services Director. 





d.	
Maintenance of Stormwater Control Measures and Devices






The land owner or person in possession or control of the land must maintain, repair, reconstruct, replace and make payments for all stormwater control measures and devices and open space areas required by the stormwater control plan in accordance with Sec. 9.2.2.G., unless those measures, devices and open space areas are accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency.	
E.	
Maintenance of Stormwater Control Measures
1.	
When retention devices, detention devices or wet ponds serve more than 1 lot and are located on private property, a maintenance covenant which complies with Sec. 9.2.2.G.2. for sharing the maintenance costs must be recorded.

2.	
After approval by the City, a map must be recorded in the Wake County Registry, showing the location of the retention device, detention device or wet pond on the lot; the map must bear the following note: " The stormwater control facilities, which serve more than 1 lot, that are not accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency are required by the Raleigh City Code to be owned and maintained by a property owners association for which all lot owners shall be a member.”



F.	
Exemptions
1.	
The impervious surface coverage limitations and stormwater retention, detention and capture requirements within the secondary watershed protection area of a -SWPOD are inapplicable to any street, right-of-way, lot or improvement where its stormwater runoff flows by gravity to a watercourse located outside the overlay district. All gravity flow drainage plans must be approved by the Engineering Services Director. 

2.	
The impervious surface coverage limitations and stormwater retention, detention and capture requirements are inapplicable to a lot separated by deed conveyance prior to June 20, 1993; provided that, the lot is developed for single-unit living with no more than 3,500 square feet of impervious surfaces and the owner does not own any other contiguous real property which could be recombined. 



G.	
Forestation of Lots


Except as otherwise provided, every lot located within a  -SWPOD must provide and maintain an area set aside for trees equal to at least 40% of the lot area in accordance with Sec. 9.1.9.
Sec. 9.5.4. 
Inspections

A.	
Agents and officials of the City shall have the right to inspect sites subject to the requirements of this Article to determine whether the measures, devices and open space areas required by this Article to control the rate and quality of stormwater are installed and operating as approved, whether such measures, devices and open space areas are being maintained and to determine if any encroachments or activities in any watercourse buffer area not permitted by this Article have occurred. 

B.	
Notice of this right to make inspections shall be included in the stormwater control and watercourse buffer permits. 

C.	
No person shall obstruct, hamper, delay, resist or interfere with City agents or officials while in the process of carrying out their official duties.

Sec. 9.5.5. 
Enforcement

A.	
Civil Penalties
1.	
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article; or who undertakes or continues any activity for which a stormwater control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan shall be subject to the specific civil penalties set forth in Sec. 9.5.5.F. 

2.	
The penalties shall be assessed by the City. The initial civil penalty shall be assessed from the date of the violation. No penalty shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation is served by registered mail, certified mail-return receipt requested, personal service notice of violation or any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4. 

3.	
The notice shall specify a time by which the person must comply with this Article or any regulation, rule or order, duly adopted pursuant to this Article and inform the person of the actions that need to be taken to comply. 

4.	
In setting the time for compliance, the City shall take into consideration the quantity and complexity of the work, the consequences of delay, the effectiveness of action taken by the violator and the staff investigative costs, but in no event shall the specified time limits be more than 10 calendar days for compliance, except a shorter time period may be required by the City inspector for an imminent threat to either severely degrade a watercourse or cause severe runoff. 

5.	
The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the additional civil and criminal penalties for a continuing violation. If, after the allotted time period has expired, corrective action has not been completed, the additional civil penalties shall be assessed from the date of the initial violation. Each day of continuing violation thereafter shall constitute a separate violation.

6.	
The City shall make written demand for payment upon the person in violation and shall set forth the amount of the penalty and the reason for assessing the penalty. Notice of the assessment shall be by registered or certified mail or any other means authorized under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-a, Rule 4. If the payment is not received within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the City, in the appropriate division of the general court of justice in Wake County for recovery of the penalty. Such civil actions must be filed within 3 years of the date the assessment was due.



B.	
Stop-Work
1.	
A stop-work order may be issued if an activity is being conducted or was conducted in violation of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article or is being undertaken or continued for which a stormwater control plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan and that either:
a.	
The activity is being conducted without an approved plan, a permit or both;

b.	
The violation endangers life, property or both or that such endangerment is imminent; and 

c.	
The activity is being conducted without installing all protective measures and devices in accordance with the approved stormwater control plan.



2.	
All stop-work orders shall be in writing served on and directed to the person doing the work and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 

3.	
The stop-work order shall be rescinded by written notice if all the violations for which the stop-work order were issued are corrected, no other violations have occurred and all measures necessary to abate the violations have been taken.



C.	
Criminal Penalties
1.	
Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this Article, rule, regulation, order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this Article or who knowingly or willfully undertakes or continues an activity for which a stormwater control plan is required, except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved plan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or both, in the discretion of the court.



D.	
Injunctive Relief
1.	
Whenever the City Council has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this Article, rule, regulation or order duly adopted or issued pursuant to this Article or any term, condition or provision of an approved stormwater control plan, the City may, either before or after the institution of any other action or preceding authorized by this UDO, institute a civil action to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The action shall be brought in the Superior Court of Wake County.

2.	
Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or is threatened, the court shall enter any order or judgment that is necessary to abate the violation, to ensure that restoration is performed or to prevent the threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief under this Subsection shall not relieve any party to the proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations to this UDO.



E.	
Restoration
1.	
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, any regulation, rule or order duly adopted pursuant to this Article; or who undertakes or continues an activity except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of an approved stormwater control plan is required to restore the waters, land and vegetation affected by the violation so as to minimize detrimental effects. 

2.	
The restoration plan shall first be approved by the City. This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this section.



F.	
Specific Civil Penalties


Civil penalties for specific violations of this Article shall be assessed as follows.
1.	
Work without a Permit


$5,000 per day for failure to secure a valid required stormwater control permit and/or watercourse buffer permit prior to conducting any land-disturbing activity, any development or expansion, any placement of impervious surfaces or any new use or construction.
2.	
Failure to Follow Plan


$3,000 per day for failure to conduct a land-disturbing activity, placement of impervious surfaces, development or expansion in accordance with the provisions of an approved stormwater control plan.
3.	
Failure to Maintain Stormwater Control Facilities


$2,500 per day for failure to maintain stormwater control facilities.
4.	
Failure to File Inspections Report


$2,500 per day for failure to file required inspection report.
5.	
Failure to Submit As-Built Plans


$2,500 per day for failure to submit required as-built plans.
6.	
Failure to Certify 


$2,500 per day for failure to certify that installed stormwater measures and devices are in compliance with the Raleigh Stormwater Management Design Manual and City approved the stormwater control plan, including modifications thereto approved by the City.
7.	
Falsified Certification


$3,000 for making a falsified certification.
8.	
Failure to Record


$2,500 per day for failure to record or timely record with the local register of deeds required plats identifying stormwater control facilities or required maintenance covenants or required escrow agreements.
9.	
Failure to Revise Plan


$2,500 per day for failure to file an acceptable, revised stormwater control plan within the established deadline after being notified of the need to do so.
10.	
Failure to Correct a Violation


$5,000 per day for failure to correct a violation within the time limitations established in a notice of violation.
11.	
Failure to Obey a Stop-Work Order


$5,000 per day for a violation of a stop-work order.
12.	
Any other Action


$2,500 per day for any other action or failure to act that constitutes a violation of the Article.
13.	
 Repeated Violation


An additional civil penalty of $1,000 per day shall be charged to any person assessed a civil penalty for any violation of this Article within the prior 2 years. No initial civil penalty shall exceed $5,000; this limitation shall be inapplicable to continuous violations.
Sec. 9.5.6. 
Variances and Appeals

A.	
Any variance request or appeal of an administrative decision of a regulation contained within this Article must be presented at a quasi-judicial public hearing before the City Council. All procedural requirements of Section 10.2.10 and 10.2.11 shall apply.



Article 9.1. Tree Conservation	9 – 2Sec. 9.1.1. Intent........................................................................................9 – 2
Sec. 9.1.2. Applicability..............................................................................9 – 2
Sec. 9.1.3. Tree Conservation Required......................................................9 – 2
Sec. 9.1.4. Tree Conservation Area Allocation.............................................9 – 2
Sec. 9.1.5. Documentation of Tree Conservation Areas..............................9 – 5
Sec. 9.1.6. Permitted Tree Disturbing Activities..........................................9 – 6
Sec. 9.1.7. Penalties...................................................................................9 – 7
Sec. 9.1.8. Restoration...............................................................................9 – 7
Sec. 9.1.9. Watershed Protection Overlay Districts ....................................9 – 8
Sec. 9.1.10. Lots Without Recorded Tree Conservation Areas.....................9 – 8


Article 9.2. Stormwater Management	9 – 10Sec. 9.2.1. General Provisions..................................................................9 – 10
Sec. 9.2.2. Active Stormwater Control Measures.....................................9 – 10
Sec. 9.2.3. Watercourse Buffers...............................................................9 – 21
Sec. 9.2.4. Inspections.............................................................................9 – 24
Sec. 9.2.5. Enforcement..........................................................................9 – 24
Sec. 9.2.6. Variances and Appeals............................................................9 – 27


Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations	9 – 27Sec. 9.3.1. Floodprone Areas....................................................................9 – 27
Sec. 9.3.2. Flood Hazard Soils..................................................................9 – 28
Sec. 9.3.3. Rules for Interpretation of Boundaries....................................9 – 28
Sec. 9.3.4. Floodway and Non-Encroachment Areas................................9 – 29
Sec. 9.3.5. Floodway Fringe and Future Hazard Areas..............................9 – 30
Sec. 9.3.6. Street Crossings Watercourses ...............................................9 – 32
Sec. 9.3.7. Streets in Floodprone Areas....................................................9 – 32
Sec. 9.3.8. Warning & Disclaimer of Liability............................................9 – 33
Sec. 9.3.9. Penalties.................................................................................9 – 33
Sec. 9.3.10. Variances and Appeals...........................................................9 – 33


Article 9.4. Erosion & Sedimentation Control	9 – 34Sec. 9.4.1. Applicability............................................................................9 – 34
Sec. 9.4.2. Guidelines Incorporated.........................................................9 – 34
Sec. 9.4.3. Objectives...............................................................................9 – 34
Sec. 9.4.4. Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity...................................9 – 35
Sec. 9.4.5. Maintenance..........................................................................9 – 39
Sec. 9.4.6. Land Disturbing Activity Permit & Control Plans Required......9 – 39
Sec. 9.4.7. Additional Measures...............................................................9 – 40
Sec. 9.4.8. Appeals..................................................................................9 – 40
Sec. 9.4.9. Compliance with Plan Requirements......................................9 – 41
Sec. 9.4.10. Inspections...........................................................................9 – 41
Sec. 9.4.11. Enforcement.........................................................................9 – 41
Sec. 9.4.12. Revisions..............................................................................9 – 43
Sec. 9.4.13. Variances and Appeals...........................................................9 – 44


Article 9.5. Watershed Protection Areas	9 – 45Sec. 9.5.1. Urban Watershed Protection Overlay District (-UWPOD) .......9 – 45
Sec. 9.5.2. Falls Watershed Protection Overlay District (-FWPOD)...........9 – 46
Sec. 9.5.3. Swift Creek Watershed Protection Overlay District (-SWPOD).9 – 50
Sec. 9.5.4. Inspections.............................................................................9 – 53
Sec. 9.5.5. Enforcement...........................................................................9 – 53
Sec. 9.5.6. Variances and Appeals............................................................9 – 55




Page Intentionally Left Blank




CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.1. Review Bodies
Sec. 10.1.1. City Council

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.1. Review Bodies
Sec. 10.1.4. Historic Development Commission

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.1. Review Bodies
Sec. 10.1.4. Historic Development Commission

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.1. Review Bodies
Sec. 10.1.7. ..Planning Director and Development Services Director

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.1. Review Bodies
Sec. 10.1.8. Summary of Review Authority

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.1. Common Review Procedures

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.1. Common Review Procedures

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.2. ..Comprehensive Plan Amendment

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.3. ..UDO Text Amendment

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.4. ..Rezoning

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.4. ..Rezoning

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.4. ..Rezoning

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.4. ..Rezoning

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.5. ..Subdivision Review

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.5. ..Subdivision Review

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.6. ..Non-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded Instruments

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.6. ..Non-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded Instruments

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.7. ..Plot Plan Review

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.8. ..Site Plan Review

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.9. Special Use Permit

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.10. Variance

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.11. ..Appeal of an Administrative Decision

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.12. ..Common Signage Plan

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.14. ..Written Interpretation

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.15. ..Certificate of Appropriateness

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.15. ..Certificate of Appropriateness

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.16. ..Historic Landmark Designation

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.17. Administrative Alternate

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.2. Review Procedures
Sec. 10.2.19. Vested Rights

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities
Sec. 10.3.1. In General

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities
Sec. 10.3.3. ..Nonconforming Principal Structures

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities
Sec. 10.3.5. ..Nonconforming Lots of Record

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities
Sec. 10.3.6. ..Special Use Permits for Nonconformities

CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION   |   Article 10.4. ..Enforcement
Sec. 10.4.3. Administrative Fee

.CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 .

Article 10.1. Review Bodies   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.1.3. Board of Adjustment

Article 10.1. Review Bodies   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.1.4. Historic Development Commission

Article 10.1. Review Bodies   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.1.5. Appearance Commission

Article 10.1. Review Bodies   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.1.7. Planning Director and Development Services Director

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.1. Common Review Procedures

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.1. Common Review Procedures

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.2. ..Comprehensive Plan Amendment

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.2. ..Comprehensive Plan Amendment

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.3. UDO Text Amendment

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.4. ..Rezoning

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.4. Rezoning

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.5. ..Subdivision Review

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.5. ..Subdivision Review

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.5. ..Subdivision Review

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.6. ..Non-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded Instruments

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.7. ..Plot Plan Review

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.8. ..Site Plan Review

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.8. ..Site Plan Review

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.9. ..Special Use Permit

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.10. ..Variance

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.11. ..Appeal of an Administrative Decision

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.13. ..Temporary Use Permit

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.15. Certificate of Appropriateness

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.15. ..Certificate of Appropriateness

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.16. Historic Landmark District

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.16. ..Historic Landmark Designation

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.18. Design Adjustment

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.19. ..Vested Rights

Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.3.2. ..Nonconforming Uses

Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.3.4. ..Nonconforming Site Elements

Article 10.3. ..Nonconformities   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.3.6. ..Special Use Permits for Nonconformities

Article 10.4. ..Enforcement   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.4.1. Violations and Violators

Article 10.2. Review Procedures   |   CHAPTER 10. ADMINISTRATION  
 Sec. 10.2.4. ..Rezoning

Chapter 10. 
Administration

Article 10.1. 
Review Bodies

Sec. 10.1.1. 
City Council

A.	
General Authority
1.	
The City Council may exercise any and all powers prescribed by North Carolina general and local law, including the City Charter, and as described in this UDO and in the City Code.

2.	
The City Council shall approve the rules of procedure and bylaws for all City Boards and Commissions. 

3.	
The City Council may adopt rules of ethics for all City Boards and Commissions.



B.	
Specific Approval Authority


The City Council is responsible for final action regarding:
1.	
Comprehensive Plan amendments;

2.	
Text amendments to this UDO;

3.	
Rezonings;

4.	
Subdivision approvals in the Metro-Park Overlay District other than single-unit living;

5.	
Subdivision approvals in a Historic Overlay District or for a designated Historic Landmark;

6.	
Historic landmark designations; and

7.	
Amendments to floodprone area maps.

8.	
Variances to Article 9.2 Stormwater Management, Article 9.3 Floodprone Area Regulations, Article 9.4 Sedimentation and Erosion Controls or Article 9.5 Watershed Protection Areas.

9.	
Appeals of Administrative Decisions involving Article 9.2 Stormwater Management, Article 9.3 Floodprone Area Regulations, Article 9.4 Sedimentation and Erosion Controls or Article 9.5 Watershed Protection Areas.


Sec. 10.1.2. 
Planning Commission

A.	
In General 
1.	
Establishment 




The Planning Commission is established and may exercise any and all powers prescribed by North Carolina general and local law, including the City Charter, and as described in this UDO and in the City Code, and perform duties as lawfully directed by the City Council. 
2.	
Composition
a.	
The Planning Commission shall consist of 10 members. 

b.	
Nine members shall reside within the corporate limits of the City. The 9 members shall be appointed by the City Council for terms of no more than 2 years. 

c.	
One member shall reside outside the corporate limits of the City but reside within the limits of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. This member shall be appointed by the Chairman and Board of Commissioners of Wake County for a term of no more than 2 years. 

d.	
Vacancies on the Planning Commission will be filled in the same manner and by the same governing body as the original appointment. 



3.	
	Rules of Procedure 
a.	
The Planning Commission shall establish its own rules of procedure, subject to approval by the City Council.

b.	
The rules, regulations, minutes and actions of the Planning Commission shall be maintained at the office of the City Clerk. 




B.	
Specific Review Authority


The Planning Commission is responsible for review and recommendation regarding:
1.	
Comprehensive Plan amendments; 

2.	
Text amendments to this UDO; and

3.	
Rezonings.


Sec. 10.1.3. 
Board of Adjustment

A.	
In General
1.	
	Establishment 




 The Board of Adjustment is established and may exercise any and all powers prescribed by North Carolina general and local law, including the City Charter, and as described in this UDO and in the City Code, and perform duties as lawfully directed by the City Council.  
2.	
Composition 
a.	
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of 5 regular members and 3 alternate members. Four of the regular members and 2 of the alternate members shall reside within the corporate limits of the City. They shall be appointed by the City Council for terms of 2 years. 

b.	
One of the regular members and one of the alternate members shall reside outside the corporate limits of the City but within the limits of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. They shall be appointed by the Chairman and Board of Commissioners of Wake County.

c.	
Vacancies on the Board of Adjustment will be filled in the same manner and by the same governing body as the original appointment. 

d.	
An alternate member whose place of residence is within the City’s corporate limits may vote on the Board of Adjustment only in the absence of a regular member residing within the City's corporate limits or the inability of the regular member to vote. 

e.	
The alternate member from the extraterritorial jurisdiction may vote only in the absence of the Board of Adjustment regular member from the extraterritorial jurisdiction or the inability of the regular member to vote.

f.	
When serving on the Board of Adjustment, alternate members have the same powers and responsibility as the regular members they are replacing. 



3.	
Vote Required and Jurisdiction


The concurring vote of 4/5 of the members of the Board of Adjustment is necessary to approve a variance request. All other matters may be approved by an affirmative vote of a simple majority.
4.	
Rules of Procedures 
a.	
The Board of Adjustment shall establish its own rules of procedure, subject to approval by the City Council.

b.	
The rules of procedure shall at minimum provide for selection of officers of the Board of Adjustment, responsibilities of Board of Adjustment members, order for the conduct of quasi-judicial public hearings and times for filing appeals and holding public hearings. 

c.	
The rules, regulations, minutes and actions of the Board of Adjustment shall be maintained at the office of the City Clerk. 




B.	
Specific Approval Authority


The Board of Adjustment is responsible for final action regarding:
1.	
Special use permits;

2.	
Variances;

3.	
Appeals from administrative decisions;

4.	
Appeals in the nature of certiorari of Historic Development Commission decisions granting or denying certificates of appropriateness;

5.	
Design adjustments; and

6.	
Appeals from decisions or orders related to minimum housing code standards pursuant to the terms of Section 11.6.11.


Sec. 10.1.4. 
Historic Development Commission

A.	
	In General
1.	
Purpose
a.	
The City is authorized by the North Carolina General Statutes to safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving any property or district that embodies important elements of its culture, history, architectural history or prehistory and to promote the use of and conservation of historic districts and historic landmarks for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of the City and state as a whole.

b.	
The purpose of the Historic Development Commission is to provide the organizational vehicle by which certain areas, structures, buildings and objects within the City's planning jurisdiction that have special significance in terms of history, prehistory, architecture, archaeology and culture and possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and association may be preserved and protected.



2.	
Composition
a.	
The Historic Development Commission consists of 12 members, appointed by City Council for uniform overlapping 2-year terms.

b.	
A majority of the members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, archaeology or related fields.

c.	
All members shall reside either within the City’s corporate limits or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction area.

d.	
At least ¼ of the membership shall either reside or own property in a Historic Overlay District or that is designated as a Raleigh Historic Landmark.

e.	
The Historic Development Commission may appoint advisory bodies and committees as appropriate.

f.	
In event of a vacancy, the City Council shall appoint a new member within 60 days; members shall serve until their successors have been appointed.



3.	
Rules of Procedure
a.	
The Historic Development Commission may establish its own rules of procedure, subject to approval by the City Council.

b.	
The rules of procedures shall at minimum provide for selection of the officers of the Commission, the time and place of its regular meetings, which shall at least be held monthly, the calling of special meetings and the procedures for the conduct of public hearings and voting.

c.	
The Historic Development Commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson and vice-chairperson, who shall serve for terms of 1 year, who shall be eligible for reelection and who shall have the right to vote. The chairperson shall preside over the Commission.

d.	
In the absence or disability of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson.

e.	
The rules, regulations, minutes and actions of the Historic Development Commission shall be maintained as a separate document as a public record at the office of the Commission.





B.	
General Authority


The powers of the Historic Development Commission are as follows.
1.	
Undertake an inventory of properties of historical, prehistorical, architectural, archaeological or cultural significance.

2.	
Recommend to the City Council districts or areas to be designated as a Historic Overlay District and recommend individual structures, buildings, sites, areas or objects to be designated as Historic Landmarks.

3.	
Recommend to the City Council that designation of any area as a Historic Overlay District or part of a Historic Overlay District be revoked or removed for cause and recommend that designation of individual structures, buildings, sites, areas or objects as Historic Landmarks be revoked or removed for cause.

4.	
Restore, preserve and operate historic properties.

5.	
Conduct an educational program with respect to historic properties and districts within its jurisdiction.


6.	
Cooperate with the State, Federal and local governments. The City Council or the Historic Development Commission, when authorized by the City Council, may contract with the State or the United States of America or any agency of either or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with State or Federal law.

7.	
Request the advice and assistance of any officer or agency of the City Council with respect to any matter arising under its purview.

8.	
Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private land for examination or survey. However, no member, employee or agent of the Historic Development Commission may enter any private building or structure without either the express consent of the owner or occupant or authority of law.

9.	
Conduct any meetings or hearings necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the Historic Development Commission.

10.	
Acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included property interest, including options to purchase, to properties within any established Historic Overlay District or to any properties designated as Historic Landmarks, to hold, manage, preserve, restore and improve the same and to exchange or dispose of the property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or other legally binding restrictions that will secure appropriate rights of public access and promote the preservation of the property. All lands, buildings or structures acquired by the Historic Development Commission from funds other than those appropriated by the City Council may be acquired and held in the name of the Historic Development Commission, the City or both.

11.	
Recommend to the City Council acquisition of the fee or any lesser included property interest (including public access), preservation easements and other covenants of historic property. The City Council may make appropriations and own such property under the following conditions:
a.	
Acquisition. Within the limits of its jurisdiction for planning and regulation of development the City Council may acquire properties within Historic Overlay Districts and/or properties designated as Historic Landmarks. In the event the property is acquired but is not used for some other governmental purpose, it shall be deemed to be “museum” under the provisions of General Statutes notwithstanding the fact that the property may be or remain in private use, so long as the property is made reasonably accessible to and open for visitation by the general public;

b.	
Ownership. All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds appropriated by the City Council shall be acquired in the name of the City unless otherwise provided by the City Council. So long as owned by the City, historic properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the City; and 

c.	
Negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure, site, area or object for its acquisition or its preservation, when such action is reasonably necessary or appropriate.



12.	
Take steps, during the period of postponement of demolition of any Historic Landmark or property within a Historic Overlay District, to ascertain what the City Council can or may do to preserve such property, including consultation with private civic groups, interested private citizens and other public boards or agencies and including investigation of potential acquisition by the City Council when the preservation of a given historic property is clearly in the interest of the general welfare of the community and such property is of certain historic and architectural significance.

13.	
Propose to the City Council changes to the Historic Overlay District regulations or any other ordinance and propose new ordinances or laws relating to Historic Landmarks and the Historic Overlay District or relating to a total program for the protection or development of the historic resources of the City.

14.	
Study and recommend to the City Council means by which historic preservation efforts can be coordinated and strengthened.

15.	
Study and recommend revisions to the Historic Preservation Element of the Comprehensive Plan.

16.	
Review and act upon proposals for restoration, alteration, reconstruction, relocation, demolition or new construction within a Historic Overlay District, pursuant to procedures established in this UDO and for proposals for alteration, reconstruction, restoration, relocation, new construction or demolition of designated Historic Landmarks outside a Historic Overlay District, pursuant to procedures outlined in this UDO.


17.	
Report violations of Historic Landmark and Historic Overlay District regulations or other ordinances affecting Historic Landmarks and properties within Historic Overlay Districts, to the appropriate enforcement agency.

18.	
Accept funds to be used for preservation purposes that are granted to the Historic Development Commission by private individuals, organizations and local governing bodies.

19.	
Receive appropriations as may be made to the Historic Development Commission by the City Council.

20.	
City Planning shall provide such technical, administrative and clerical assistance as required by the Historic Development Commission.


C.	
Specific Review Authority
1.	
The Historic Development Commission is responsible for review and recommendation regarding:
a.	
Historic district rezoning;

b.	
Historic landmark designation; and 

c.	
Subdivision approvals in a Historic Overlay District or for a designated Historic Landmark.



2.	
The Historic Development Commission is responsible for review regarding Non-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded Instruments.



D.	
Specific Approval Authority


The Historic Development Commission is responsible for final action on certificates of appropriateness that are subject to summary proceedings or to a quasi-judicial public hearing.
Sec. 10.1.5. 
Appearance Commission

A.	
In General 
1.	
Establishment 




The Appearance Commission is established to exercise any and all powers prescribed by North Carolina general and local law under N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A, Article 19, Part 7, including the City Charter, and to perform duties as lawfully directed by the City Council.
2.	
Composition
a.	
The Appearance Commission shall be composed of 15 members who shall reside either within the City corporate limits or within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City. 

b.	
Members of the Appearance Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. Each member shall be appointed for a term of 2 years. 

c.	
Where possible, appointments to the Appearance Commission shall be made in such manner as to maintain a majority of members with special training or experience in a field of design such as architecture, landscape design, horticulture, city planning, urban design or a closely-related field. 



3.	
Rules of Procedure 
a.	
The Appearance Commission shall establish its own rules of procedure, subject to approval by the City Council.

b.	
The Appearance Commission shall, no later than April 15 of each year, submit to the City Council a written report of its activities, a statement of its expenditures to date for the current fiscal year and its requested budget for the next fiscal year. All accounts and funds of the Appearance Commission shall be administered in accordance with the requirements of all applicable State and local laws.




c.	
The Appearance Commission may receive contributions from private agencies, foundations, organizations, individuals and the State or Federal government or any other source in addition to any sums appropriated for its use by the City Council. It may accept and disburse these funds for any purpose within the scope of its authority as specified in this section and under all applicable State and local laws.

d.	
 The rules, regulations, minutes and actions of the Appearance Commission shall be maintained by City Planning. 


B.	
General Authority
1.	
The Appearance Commission shall make a careful study of the visual aspects of the City and its planning and zoning jurisdiction and shall make plans and carry out programs that will enhance and improve the visual quality and aesthetic characteristics of such areas within the Appearance Commission's scope of the powers. 

2.	
The Appearance Commission may recommend to the City Council suitable arrangements for the procurement or provision of staff or technical services for the Commission and may establish an advisory council or other committee to aid it in its work. 

3.	
The Appearance Commission shall in accordance with this UDO conduct public meetings and evaluate requests for Administrative Alternates and may recommend to the Planning Director approval of the alternate, approval of the alternate with changes or denial of the alternate. 



Sec. 10.1.6. 
 Open Meeting Requirements 


Meetings of the City Council and its Boards and Commissions are subject to all ap­plicable requirements of the North Carolina open meetings law.
Sec. 10.1.7. 
Planning Director and Development Services Director

A.	
Delegation of Authority
1.	
Planning Director
a.	
The Planning Director serves as the administrator of this UDO unless otherwise stated.

b.	
The Planning Director may designate any staff member as their designee in any function assigned by this UDO to the Department of City Planning; the Planning Director remains responsible for any action taken by their designee.

c.	
The Planning Director is the administrative director of the Department of City Planning and has the authority to supervise all activities and decisions of the Department of City Planning.



2.	
Development Services Director
a.	
The Development Services Director may designate any staff member as their designee in any function assigned by this UDO to the Development Services Department; the Development Services Director remains responsible for any action taken by their designee.

b.	
The Development Services Director is the administrative director of the Development Services Department and has the authority to supervise all activities and decisions of the Development Services Department.





B.	
General Authority
1.	
Planning Director
a.	
Administration and coordination of the City's Planning program, including liaison information and technical assistance to citizens, community groups, commissions and supervisions of planning studies and reports;

b.	
Administration of the technical maintenance of this UDO;

c.	
Assembling of data, preparation of maps, maintenance of a complete information system;

d.	
Assistance in implementation of plans, studies and coordination of efforts dealing with environment, open space, urban design and historic preservation;

e.	
Neighborhood studies and coordination with regard to housing and neighborhood planning;

f.	
Assistance to other departments; and

g.	
Urban design.



2.	
Development Services Director
a.	
Administration of land use controls through the review of development plans and permit review;

b.	
Assistance to other departments; and

c.	
Receive development plans, permit review, schedule inspection and issue permits.





C.	
Specific Review Authority
1.	
Planning Director is responsible for review and recommendation unless otherwise noted regarding:
a.	
Annexation petitions;

b.	
Comprehensive Plan amendments;

c.	
Text amendments;

d.	
Rezonings (review only);

e.	
Special Use Permits (review only);

f.	
Variances (review only);

g.	
Historic Landmark designations, and

h.	
Major certificates of appropriateness (review only).



2.	
Development Services Director is responsible for review unless otherwise noted regarding;
a.	
City Council approved subdivisions (review only);

b.	
Subdivision waivers (review only);





D.	
Specific Approval Authority


Subject to any right of appeal, the Planning Director or Development Services Director is responsible for final action regarding:
1.	
Planning Director
a.	
Minor certificate of appropriateness;

b.	
Administrative Alternates.



2.	
Development Services Director
a.	
Preliminary subdivision plans except for subdivision approvals, other than single unit living in the Metro-Park Overlay, subdivision approvals in any Historic District Overlay District or for a designated Historic Landmark or when a subdivision waiver is requested;

b.	
Final subdivision plats;

c.	
Plot plans;

d.	
Site plans; and

e.	
Temporary use permits.




Sec. 10.1.8. 
Summary of Review Authority


The following table summarizes the review and approval authority of the various review bodies with regard to this UDO.
ADMINISTRATION 
 REVIEW BODIES
 PUBLIC NOTICE
 
APPROVAL PROCESS
 X-ref
 City Official
 Historic 
Development 
Commission
 Appearance Commission
 Board of
Adjustment
 Planning 
Commission
 City 
Council 
 Neighborhood Meeting 
 Web
 Site Posted 
 Mailed 
 Published 
 
Comprehensive Plan Amendment 
 Sec. 10.2.2.RRRRD-PHYY(2)Y(3)Text Amendment to UDOSec. 10.2.3.RRRRD-PHYY(3)Rezoning Map Amendment Sec. 10.2.4.RRRRRD-PHYYY(6)YY(3)Subdivision ReviewSec. 10.2.5.Preliminary Subdivision Plan DRRYYFinal Subdivision Plat DSubdivisions in an -MPOD (other than single-unit living)RD-QHYYYYSubdivisions in a -HOD-G or -HOD-S or properties with Historic LandmarksRRRD-QHYYYYOther Map ApprovalsDYNon-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded InstrumentsSec. 10.2.6.DR...A-QH (8)YPlot Plan ReviewSec. 10.2.7.DA-QH (8)Y.7.Y.7.Site Plan ReviewSec. 10.2.8.C.1.dDA-QH (8)YYYSpecial Use PermitSec. 10.2.9.RD-QHYYYYVarianceSec. 10.2.10.RD-QH (8)YYYYCommon Signage PlanSec. 10.2.12.DA-QH (8)Temporary Use PermitSec. 10.2.13.DA-QH (8)YWritten Interpretation of UDOSec. 10.2.14.DA-QH (8)YY.5.Y.5.Certificate of AppropriatenessSec. 10.2.15. MinorDA-QHY MajorRD-QHA-QH (8)YYYYHistoric Landmark DesignationSec. 10.2.16.RRRD-JHYYYAdministrative AlternativeSec. 10.2.17.DRR(4)A-QH (8)YYDesign AdjustmentSec. 10.2.18.RD-QHYYVested RightsSec. 10.2.19.RD-QHYYYYKEY:      R = Review     RR = Review & Recommendation     D = Final Decision     A = Appeal     PH = Public Hearing     QH = Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing 

             JH = Joint Public Hearing with Historic Development Commission      Y = Required... Historic Development Commission reviews applications in -HOD-G, -HOD-S or properties with Historic Landmarks.... Staff to provide mailed notice to non-applicant property owners of proposed future land use map alterations in accordance with Comprehensive Plan..3. Published notice is only required for the Public Hearing..4. Appearance Commission review as specified in this UDO..5. Site posting and mailed notice provided only for written interpretations associated with a specific site plan or subdivision.(6) Site posting is only required for Public Hearing in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.C.4.
       
       
           
  
     
  
       
        
   
      
      
       
        
        
    
     
       
  
    
        
        
       
      
        
 
(7) Site posting and mailed notice is only required when specified in Sec. 10.2.7.E.
(8) Wherever a variance or appeal of administrative decision involves Article 9.2 Stormwater Management, Article 9.3 Floodprone Area Regulations, Article 9.4 Sedimentation and Erosion Controls or Article 9.5 Watershed Protection Areas, the decision shall be made by the City Council in a Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing.
 


Article 10.2. 
Review Procedures

Sec. 10.2.1. 
Common Review Procedures

A.	
Applicability


The following requirements are common to many of the procedures contained in this UDO and apply to applications submitted under this Chapter. Additional details may be included for each specific procedure.
B.	
Application Requirements 
1.	
Initial Application Submittal




All applications for development approval shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of this UDO and shall be filed with the City. 
2.	
Forms


Applications required under this UDO must be submitted, fully completed, on forms and in such numbers as required by the City. For required application forms, as may be found on the City’s web portal, see Sec. 10.2.2. through Sec. 10.2.18.
3.	
Fees Schedule
a.	
The City of Raleigh Fee Schedule is maintained by the Budget and Management Services Department and is updated annually, with fees to be effective the first day of the fiscal year, July 1. Except as otherwise provided within the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule, fee increases shall be based on the average annual prior calendar year United States Department of Labor Consumer Price Index - All Urban consumers and as may be modified from time to time by the City Council.

b.	
Before review of an application, including applications for re-hearings, all filing fees must be paid in full. No refund of the fee or any part of the fee shall be made unless the application is withdrawn prior to a hearing. 

c.	
A fee shall not be required if the application is made by the City or any agency created and appointed by the City Council to perform governmental functions. 



4.	
Application Deadline


Complete applications shall be submitted in accordance with the City’s filing calendar. A calendar indicating submittal dates shall be developed by the City each year and shall be maintained and updated by the City.
C.	
Public Notice Requirements


For public notice, meeting and hearing requirements applicable to each procedure, see Sec. 10.1.8. Any defective notification of a required City procedure, not otherwise required by State or Federal law, does not invalidate the proceedings if the defect is determined to be harmless error by the City.
1.	
Mailed Notice
a.	
	Whenever mailed notice is required by Sec. 10.1.8., at the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall deliver to the City first class stamped envelopes addressed to the property owners of the property included in the proposed application and the owners of all property within 100 feet on all sides of the subject property at the time of submittal. If a portion of a property is requested for rezoning, the notification radius shall be calculated from the property lines, and not the requested zoning boundary. For zoning map amendments, the mailing radius shall be increased to 500 feet. For zoning map amendments that directly affect more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners, the applicant may elect to provide mailed notice of the Planning Commission public meeting by postcard instead of first class mail.

b.	
When mailed notice is required for pre-submittal public meetings, the applicant may provide to the City return receipts from the mailing notification by the applicant to the required property owners by certified mail, returned receipt requested.

c.	
Mailed notice shall be provided to all property owners as listed in the Wake County tax records that own property at the time of submittal. Additionally, all property owners in the area of request shall receive mailed notice.

d.	
Mailed notices must be sent to the addressees at least 10 calendar days prior and not more than 25 calendar days prior to the date of any public meeting.

e.	
Except as otherwise directed by the City Council, the City Board or Commission reviewing the matter shall not require additional notification.

f.	
For zoning map amendments that directly affect more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners, the City may elect to forego mailed notice and instead give notice of the public hearing by publication provided that the newspaper advertisement is not less than ½ of a newspaper page in size. Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the addresses listed in the most recent property tax listing for the affected properties, shall be notified by first class mail.

g.	
Except for a City-initiated zoning map amendment, when an application is filed to request a zoning map amendment and that application is not made by the owner of the parcel of land to which the amendment would apply, the applicant shall certify to the City Council that the owner of the parcel of land, as shown on the county tax listing, has received actual notice of the proposed amendment and a copy of the notice of public hearing. The applicant shall certify to the City Council that proper notice has been provided in fact and such certification shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. Actual notice shall be achieved as follows:
i.	
Actual notice of the proposed amendment and a copy of the notice of public hearing shall be by any manner permitted under N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4(j). 

ii.	
If notice with due diligence cannot be achieved by personal delivery, registered or certified mail or by a designated delivery service, notice may be given by publication consistent with N.C. Gen. Stat. §1A-1, Rule 4(j1). (See N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-384).



h.	
For quasi-judicial hearings, mailed notice shall be provided to all other persons with an ownership interest in the subject property as set forth in all applicable State and local laws.



2.	
Published Notice
a.	
When published notice is required, notice of the public hearing shall be published by the City at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the City not more than 25 or less than 10 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. 

b.	
In the case of any ordinance adopting, amending or repealing any provision of this UDO, including zoning map amendments, notice of a public hearing shall be published once a week in a newspaper having general circulation within the City for 2 successive calendar weeks. 

c.	
In determining the time period, the day of publication is not to be included but the day of the hearing shall be included. 



3.	
Web Notice 
a.	
When web notice is required, notice shall be posted on the City’s web portal within 5 business days following acceptance of a complete application; required web notice of the decision shall be posted on the City’s web portal no later than 3 business days from the date of decision. 

b.	
When web notice of any public meeting is required, notice of the public meeting shall be posted on the City’s web portal not less than 10 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. 

c.	
In determining the time period, the day of posting on the City’s web portal is not to be included but the day of the hearing shall be included. 



4.	
Posted Notice 
a.	
When posted notice of any public meeting is required, signage shall be posted by the City on the property at a point visible from the nearest public street or streets if the property fronts on multiple streets. 

b.	
In the case of multiple parcels, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but sufficient signage shall be posted to provide reasonable notice to interested persons. 

c.	
The sign shall not measure less than 18 inches x 24 inches. Signage shall be posted at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the public meeting.

d.	
The posted sign shall be returned to the City by the applicant either at the public meeting or within 3 business days following the public meeting.

e.	
Posted notice shall not be required for Planning Commission meetings for zoning map amendments that directly affect more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners.



5.	
Content of Notice
a.	
Published, Web or Mailed Notice




The content of required published, web or mailed notice shall be as follows:
i.	
A case number;

ii.	
The address or Parcel Identification Number of the subject property (if available). Zoning map amendments that directly affect more than 50 properties owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners are exempted from this specific content requirement.

iii.	
The general location of the land that is the subject of the application, which may include a location map;

iv.	
A description of the action requested and nature of the questions involved;

v.	
The time, date and location of the public hearing, public meeting or the neighborhood meeting if applicable and the name of the reviewing body;

vi.	
A phone number and e-mail address to contact the City; 

vii.	
The address for the City’s web portal; 

viii.	
A statement that persons may appear at the public hearing, public meeting or at the neighborhood meeting if applicable or make written comments to the City as applicable; and a statement that more specific information is available at the City.


b.	
Posted Notice


Required posted notice of a public meeting or public hearing shall provide at least the following:
i.	
A case number;

ii.	
A description of the action requested; 

iii.	
The address for the City’s web portal; and

iv.	
A phone number and e-mail address to contact the City.


6.	
Notice of Decision
a.	
Except when notice is provided by permit issuance, notice of decision shall provide at least the following:
i.	
A case number;

ii.	
The address of the subject property (if available and relevant);

iii.	
The general location of the land (if relevant) that was the subject of the application, which may include a location map;

iv.	
A description of the application;

v.	
The date the application was decided; 

vi.	
A description of whether the application was approved, approved with conditions or denied;

vii.	
A phone number and e-mail address to contact the City; and

viii.	
The address for the City’s web portal. 



b.	
Unless otherwise stated by general law, this UDO or by the rules of procedure adopted by the applicable reviewing body, within 10 business days following the effective date of a decision, a copy of the decision shall be sent by either electronic notification or first class mailing to the applicant and the property owner (if the property owner is not the applicant) and filed with the City, where it shall be made available for public inspection during regular office hours. In the case of permit issuance, receipt of the permit by the applicant, contractor, property owner or their representative shall constitute written notice of the decision. 

c.	
In the case of a quasi-judicial decision, notice of the decision shall also be given to the applicant, the property owner (if the property owner is not the applicant) and each person who has filed a written request for notice with the presiding officer or secretary of the reviewing body (if any) at the time of the hearing of the case, with such notice to be delivered to the requesting party by either personal service or by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested. 




D.	
Additional Requirements
1.	
Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Requirements 




For notice and hearing requirements applicable to each quasi-judicial procedure see Sec. 10.1.8. 
a.	
Rules of Procedure
i.	
In all quasi-judicial hearings, rulings must be based only upon the evidence received by the reviewing body at the hearing.

ii.	
The review body shall act as an impartial decision-maker. No member shall participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision-maker. Impermissible conflicts include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to the hearing of the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex-parte communication, a close financial business or other associational relationship with an affected person or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not excuse themself, the remaining members of the review body shall by majority vote rule on the objection.

iii.	
The reviewing body shall act as a fact-finding body and shall approve or disapprove the application in accordance with the evidence presented before it which is substantial, competent, relevant and material.

iv.	
The burden of proof is upon the party who files the application and if the party fails to meet its burden, the reviewing body shall deny the request.



b.	
Conduct of Hearing
i.	
The presiding officer of the reviewing body shall call the proceedings to order and announce that the hearing has begun.

ii.	
All witnesses who are to testify at the hearing shall be sworn in.

iii.	
The City's officer shall briefly describe the applicant’s request, introduce and review all relevant City Code provisions and answer questions from the reviewing body. 

iv.	
The applicant (if acting in a pro se capacity) or their legal counsel shall present the case in support of its application. 

v.	
Parties in interest, including the City, shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses, as to any competent, material and relevant facts, inspect documents and make oral argument.

vi.	
Counsel for the reviewing body may advise the reviewing body as to the applicable law and the findings of fact that must be made to approve or deny the request.

vii.	
The reviewing body shall conduct open deliberation of the application. The presiding officer of the reviewing body shall have the discretion to reopen proceedings for additional testimony or argument by the parties when the reviewing body determines that a decision cannot be made with the testimony at hand. 

viii.	
Reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards may be imposed as part of any approval. A condition offered by the reviewing body for an approval must be related to the evidence received by the reviewing body at the hearing as provided for under all applicable State and local laws.

ix.	
Every decision shall include the vote, abstention from voting or absence of each member. The decision, including findings of fact and conclusions of law, shall be filed with the City Clerk. A written copy of the decision shall be delivered in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.C.6.

x.	
The presiding officer of the reviewing body shall rule on the admissibility of evidence and make determinations on whether evidence is competent, material, relevant or redundant.



c.	
Examination


Members of the reviewing body may ask questions of persons presenting testimony or evidence at any time during the proceedings until commencement of deliberation.
d.	
Cross-Examination of Witnesses


After each witness testifies, testimony is subject to cross-examination. 
e.	
Rules of Evidence
i.	
Competent evidence shall not preclude reliance by the decision-making board on evidence that would not be admissible under the rules of evidence as applied in the trial division of the General Court of Justice if;
a)	
The evidence was admitted without objection; or 

b)	
The evidence appears to be sufficiently trustworthy and was admitted under such circumstances that it was reasonable for the reviewing body to rely upon it. 



ii.	
Competent evidence shall not be deemed to include the opinion testimony of lay witnesses as to any of the following:
a)	
The use of property in a particular way would affect the value of other property;

b)	
The increase in vehicular traffic resulting from a proposed development would pose a danger to the public safety; and

c)	
Matters about which only expert testimony would generally be admissible under the rules of evidence.



iii.	
Documentary business records may be presented in the form of a copy or the original. Upon request, parties shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original.



f.	
Statements of Counsel


Statements of counsel, or any individual acting in a pro se capacity, shall only be considered as argument and not testimony unless counsel or the individual is sworn in and the testimony is based on actual personal knowledge of the matters which are the subject of the statements.
g.	
Continuances and Deferrals


The reviewing body shall consider requests for continuances and may grant continuances in its sole discretion. If, in the opinion of the reviewing body, any testimony or documentary evidence or information presented at the hearing justifies allowing additional research or review in order to properly determine the issue presented, then the reviewing body may continue the matter to a time certain to allow for such research or review.
Sec. 10.2.2. 
Comprehensive Plan Amendment 

A.	
Applicability
1.	
The City Council shall consider amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. 

2.	
Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section.



B.	
Pre-Application Conference


Before submitting an application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director.
C.	
Application Requirements
1.	
An application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be submitted in accordance with the general application requirements of Sec. 10.2.1.B. 

2.	
An application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment will only be accepted in accordance with the City's filing calendar. 

3.	
A Comprehensive Plan Amendment form must be filled out completely to initiate a change.



D.	
Approval Process
1.	
Planning Director Action
a.	
The Planning Director shall review the application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment in accordance with Planning Director Review in Sec. 10.2.2.E. and provide a report and recommendation to the Planning Commission of a completed application.






b.	
The Planning Director shall also provide a report and recommendation to the City Council when the City Council considers authorizing a public hearing on the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment. 


2.	
Planning Commission Action 
a.	
Within 45 days following submission of a completed application and City approval of all required technical documents, the Planning Commission shall hold a public meeting on the proposed amendment which shall be noticed in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8. and Sec. 10.2.1.C.

b.	
The Planning Commission may refer the proposed amendment to a work session of the Planning Commission or one of its committees for additional consideration or the Planning Commission may act upon the application.

c.	
Within 90 days after its receipt of the proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council. Within this time period, the Planning Commission may request extensions of time which may be granted by the City Council. If no recommendation is made within this time period and if no extension is granted, the City Council may take action on the application without further involvement of the Planning Commission.

d.	
The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council in writing. The Planning Commission shall recommend that the request be approved, approved as revised, denied or request further study.




3.	
Public Hearing by City Council 
a.	
Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission or expiration of the applicable Planning Commission review period without a recommendation, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall occur within 60 days of receiving the request from the Planning Commission. 

b.	
The public hearing shall be noticed in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8. and Sec. 10.2.1.C.



4.	
City Council Public Hearing and Action
a.	
Before taking final action on a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment, the City Council may consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and Planning Director and comments made at the public hearing.

b.	
The City Council may review the application in light of the considerations in Sec. 10.2.2.E.

c.	
The City Council shall approve, approve as revised, deny, send the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment back to the Planning Commission or Planning Director for additional consideration. 

d.	
Approval by the City Council shall include the adoption of a statement describing how the City Council considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest.

e.	
All enactments, amendments and changes must be in the form of a resolution. Copies of Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk. 




E.	
Considerations for Planning Director Review


The following lists of considerations for the Planning Director’s review and recommendations regarding a proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment are not all-inclusive. Review and recommendations of proposed Comprehensive Plan amendments may consider whether:
1.	
The proposed amendment corrects an error or meets the challenge of some changing condition, trend or fact;

2.	
The proposed amendment is in response to changes in state law;

3.	
The proposed amendment constitutes a substantial benefit to the City as a whole and is not solely for the good or benefit of a particular landowner or owners at a particular point in time; and

4.	
The proposed amendment is consistent with other identified Plan policies and adopted area plans;

5.	
The impact of the proposed amendment has with regard to: 
a.	
Established property or proposed development in the vicinity of the proposed amendment;

b.	
Existing or future land use patterns;

c.	
Existing or planned public services and facilities;

d.	
Existing or planned roadways; 

e.	
The natural environment, including air, water, noise, stormwater management, wildlife and vegetation; and 

f.	
Other policies of the Comprehensive Plan.




Sec. 10.2.3. 
UDO Text Amendment 

A.	
Applicability
1.	
The City Council shall consider amendments to the text of this UDO. 

2.	
Amendments to the text of this UDO shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section.



B.	
Pre-Application Conference


Before submitting an application for a UDO text amendment, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director.
C.	
Application Requirements
1.	
An application for a UDO text amendment shall be submitted in accordance with the general application requirements of Sec. 10.2.1.B.

2.	
A UDO text amendment request by a member of the public also requires authorization by the City Council. 

3.	
City Council may reject the petition or direct further consideration of the UDO text amendment request in accordance with Sec. 10.2.3.D.



D.	
Approval Process 
1.	
Planning Director Action
a.	
The Planning Director shall provide a report and recommendation to the City Council when the Council considers authorizing a public hearing on a UDO text amendment. 

b.	
Upon submittal, the Planning Director shall review the application for a UDO text amendment in accordance with Sec. 10.2.3.E. and provide a report and recommendation to the Planning Commission within 45 days of submittal of a completed application. The Planning Director may request additional time from the City Council.



2.	
Planning Commission Action
a.	
Upon acceptance of the UDO text amendment application, the Planning Commission shall hold a public meeting to discuss the UDO text amendment. Public notice of the text amendment shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8.

b.	
The Planning Commission may refer the application to a work session of the Planning Commission or to 1 of its committees for additional consideration.

c.	
Within 90 days after receipt of the proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council. Within this time period, the Planning Commission may request extensions of time which may be granted by the City Council. If no recommendation is made within this time period and if no extension is granted, the City Council may take action on the application without further involvement of the Planning Commission.

d.	
A recommendation by the Planning Commission shall include the adoption of a statement describing how the Planning Commission considers the action taken to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, reasonable and in the public interest.

e.	
The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council in writing. The Planning Commission shall recommend that the request be approved, approved as revised, denied or request further study.






3.	
Public Hearing by City Council 
a.	
Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission or expiration of the applicable Planning Commission review period without a recommendation, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall occur within 60 days of receiving the request from the Planning Commission. 

b.	
Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8.



4.	
City Council Public Hearing and Action
a.	
Before taking final action on a UDO text amendment, the City Council may consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and Planning Director and comments made at the public hearing.

b.	
The City Council shall approve, approve as revised, deny, send the proposed UDO text amendment back to the Planning Commission or Planning Director for additional consideration.

c.	
Approval by the City Council shall include the adoption of a statement describing how the City Council considers the action taken to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, reasonable and in the public interest. 

d.	
All enactments, amendments and changes must be in the form of an ordinance. Copies of adopted city ordinances shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk.




E.	
Considerations for Planning Director Review


The following lists of considerations for the Planning Director’s review and recommendations regarding a UDO text amendment application are not all-inclusive. Review and recommendations on UDO text amendments to this UDO by the Planning Director may consider whether:
1.	
The proposed text amendment corrects an error or meets the challenge of some changing condition, trend or fact;

2.	
The proposed text amendment is in response to changes in state law; 

3.	
The proposed text amendment is generally consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted area plans;

4.	
The proposed text amendment does not conflict with any specific policy or action item of the Comprehensive Plan;

5.	
The proposed text amendment is generally consistent with the stated purpose and intent of this UDO;

6.	
The proposed text amendment constitutes a benefit to the City as a whole and is not solely for the good or benefit of a particular landowner or owners at a particular point in time;

7.	
The proposed text amendment significantly impacts the natural environment, including air, water, noise, stormwater management, wildlife and vegetation; and 

8.	
The proposed text amendment significantly impacts existing conforming development patterns, standards or zoning regulations.


Sec. 10.2.4. 
Rezoning

A.	
Applicability
1.	
The City Council may on its own motion initiate changes to the Official Zoning Map and shall consider amendments to the Official Zoning Map.

2.	
Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 



B.	
Zoning Change Requirements 
1.	
Where practicable, zoning changes should correspond with the boundary lines of existing tracts and lots. 

2.	
All zoning requirements shall be met within the boundaries of the area being rezoned. If all of the requirements cannot be met on the site being rezoned, the applicant shall revise the request to include all property necessary to meet zoning requirements.



C.	
Pre-Application Conference


Before submitting an application for rezoning, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director.
D.	
Neighborhood Meeting
1.	
A pre-submittal neighborhood meeting is required for all applications for a zoning map amendment, except where the City is the applicant. The applicant shall provide an opportunity to meet with property owners within or adjacent to the development site.

2.	
The required neighborhood meeting must be conducted prior to submittal of the rezoning application. The meeting may not occur more than 6 months prior to the submittal of the application. Notice of the neighborhood meeting must be provided in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.C.1. 

3.	
A report of the meeting, made by the applicant, shall be included with the zoning application given to City Planning.
a.	
The report shall include at a minimum, a list of those persons and organizations contacted about the neighborhood meeting, the date, time and location of the meeting, a roster of the persons in attendance at the meeting and a summary of issues discussed at the meeting. 





E.	
Application Requirements
1.	
General Requirements
a.	
An application for a rezoning shall be submitted in accordance with the general application requirements of Sec. 10.2.1.B.

b.	
A Rezoning Application form must be filled out to initiate a rezoning request. 



2.	
Additional Requirements for Conditional Use Applications
a.	
An application for a conditional use rezoning may specify the use or uses prohibited or the use or uses allowed, including the maximum number of dwelling units and all development regulations which are requested for the property submitted for rezoning. The requested use or uses must be permitted in the corresponding general use district.

b.	
All those regulations which apply to the corresponding general use zoning district are the minimum requirements in the conditional use district. 

c.	
Conditions which represent greater restrictions on development and use of the property than would apply in the corresponding general use district or which involve subdivision, stormwater control, flood protection or other limitations on land which may be regulated by City and State law, may be specified in the application. The City Council may accept zoning conditions that alter the maximum block standards in Sec. 8.3.2., the stub streets standards in Sec. 8.3.4.C. and the driveway standard for Residential Uses, Mixed Use and Nonresidential Uses in Sec. 8.3.5.C.2. and 3. Such zoning conditions shall only be approved by the City Council when the City Council, concurrent with the adoption of the conditional use zoning ordinance, makes a determination that the offered zoning conditions provide for safe, efficient and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access within developments and between adjacent developments and do not adversely affect traffic congestion. These zoning conditions shall be accompanied by additional information as required on the official rezoning application.

d.	
Zoning conditions associated with a lot line common to the subject property and an adjacent property shall reference the Deed Book/Page Number or recorded Book of Maps/Page Number of the associated adjacent property.

e.	
Exclusionary conditions which discriminate based on race or religion, specify ownership status or a minimum value of improvements shall not be submitted as a part of the petition.

f.	
No condition shall be submitted that proposes to regulate right-of-way reimbursement values, prohibit submittal of a traffic impact analysis. Nor shall any site plans, renderings or other images be submitted as part of the conditional use rezoning application unless all elements of the site plan, rendering or image graphically illustrate the written text of the conditions in which case the written zoning conditions shall remain as the controlling instrument. Any condition that prohibits street access or public street connections or extensions shall comply with subsection c above. 

g.	
No condition may be made part of the petition which duplicates an existing City code requirement. 

h.	
For any condition specified on the petition that may affect potential compliance with the requirements of this UDO or any other City ordinance on the property requested for rezoning, proper submittal of information and review shall be requested by City Planning, prior to a City Council decision on the rezoning.

i.	
No condition may be made part of the petition which specifies the establishment and protection of tree conservation areas or tree protection areas unless the condition ensures that 100% of the critical root zones of trees proposed for protection and located on the subject rezoned property shall also be undisturbed areas.

j.	
No condition may be made part of the petition which specifies the authorization or consideration of an Administrative Alternate.

k.	
No variance shall be allowed to a zoning condition that is approved in conjunction with a conditional use rezoning.

l.	
Modification of Previously-Approved Zoning Conditions.






When a property has been rezoned into a conditional use district, the property owner can request subsequent modifications to the zoning conditions. If no change is requested to the zoning map, modifications to the language of zoning conditions may be requested by application for a text change, following the process contained in Sec. 10.2.3 of this UDO. In addition to those procedures, the following shall also apply:
i.	
Prior to submittal of an application, the applicant shall request authorization for a text change from the City Council to modify the existing zoning conditions. The City Council may allow the petition; reject the petition; or direct further consideration of the request.

ii.	
Upon authorization to proceed, the applicant must conduct a neighborhood meeting consistent with the requirements of Sec. 10.2.4.D.

iii.	
The text change application must be signed by all property owners of the parcels to which the proposed change in conditions apply. Changes to the conditions through the approval process must be consistent with Sec. 10.2.4.E.2.

iv.	
The public notice requirements for rezoning map amendments contained in Sec. 10.2.1.C shall be required.


3.	
Additional Requirements for CMP and PD District Applications


In addition to a Rezoning Application, a Master Plan Application Package must be submitted in complete form to initiate a Campus (Article 4.6. Campus (CMP)) or Planned Development (Article 4.7. Planned Development (PD)) rezoning.4.	Additional Requirements for -HOD-G and -HOD-S Applicationsa.	An investigation and report describing the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings included in any proposed -HOD-G and -HOD-S and a description of the boundaries of the district, changes in boundaries or de-designation due to loss of significance, shall be prepared and/or reviewed by the Historic Development Commission. The City Council shall refer the report to the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources. b.	The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through an agent or employee designated by its Secretary, may analyze and make recommendations concerning such report and description of proposed boundaries. Failure by the Department of Cultural Resources to submit its written analysis and recommendations to the City within 30 calendar days after a written request for such analysis has been received by the Department of Cultural Resources shall relieve the City of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis (N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-400.4(b)2).c.	The City Council may refer the report and proposed boundaries to the Planning Commission, in accordance with Sec. 10.2.4.F.4. and to any other interested body for its recommendations prior to taking action to amend the Official Zoning Map. 5.	Additional Requirements for -NCOD Applications a.	Except for applications filed by the City or otherwise authorized by the City Council, City Planning is instructed not to accept -NCOD applications unless the application meets all the following:i.	Is requesting that either at least a minimum of 15 contiguous acres be zoned -NCOD or that an existing -NCOD be extended. If allowed in the underlying zoning district, all uses in the civic use category shall be excluded when determining the minimum 15 acre requirement; however, such civic uses may be used in determining contiguity of the area.ii.	Is signed by a majority of the property owners within the area proposed to be rezoned -NCOD.iii.	Is applied to an area where at least 75% of the lots are developed.iv.	It is located in an area in which the City Council has adopted into Sec. 5.4.3.F.


 specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations.



b.	
Within four years following the City Council adoption of specific neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations, City Planning may accept an application rezone property to a -NCOD. 

c.	
Following the City's official acceptance of an application to rezone property to a -NCOD in accordance with Sec. 5.4.3., no construction permit shall be issued or subdivision or recombination be approved by the City during the pendency of the application to amend the Official Zoning Map unless the proposed construction or the proposed subdivision or recombination meets all of the provisions of the existing zoning district and also the adopted neighborhood built environmental characteristics and regulations contained in Sec. 5.4.3.F. for the proposed -NCOD.

d.	
If the City Council accepts a rezoning petition to apply a -NCOD, staff shall provide direct mailed notice to all property owners in the proposed overlay district. Additional mailed notice shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.C.1.	



6.	
Additional Requirements for DX- District Applications


New applications requesting a DX- District must be for property located contiguous to or directly across the street from an existing DX- District. 
7.	
Additional Requirements for -ADUOD Applications
a.	
After the required pre-submittal neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall poll all property owners within the area to be rezoned. The purpose of the polling is to determine support within the proposed overlay district. This balloting system shall not be a barrier to application, nor shall it be a means to prevent submittal of a rezoning petition.

b.	
The applicant shall provide stamped, addressed envelopes to the City and the City shall mail a ballot to each property located within the proposed overlay district. The property owners shall have an opportunity to complete the ballot, to be returned within thirty (30) days to City Planning where they will be tallied. These ballots will also have an authorization code to allow an online version of the ballot to be cast. After the poll has closed, staff will present the results of the poll to the City Council. Upon receipt of the information, the City Council shall have the option of authorizing a city-initiated rezoning. Conversely, the City Council can ask that the rezoning petition be filed by the property owners.

c.	
Property owners will be identified using current tax administration records.

d.	
A single property having multiple buildings but a single owner (such as apartments) will receive one ballot. A single property with multiple buildings having multiple owners (such as condominiums) will receive one ballot per unit. A single property having multiple owners will receive one ballot.

e.	
The poll shall be deemed complete after the expiration of the polling period described in subsection b above. The following benchmarks shall be used in the City Council's decision to authorize a city-initiated rezoning:




Total Number of Ballots Returned
 25% returned of those mailed
 
Total Number of Ballots in Support
 Majority (50+1%) of those returned
 


F.	
Approval Process 
1.	
Planning Director Action
a.	
The Planning Director shall review the application for a proposed rezoning in light of the considerations for Planning Director Review in Sec. 10.2.4.H. and provide a report to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission recommendation shall be sent to the City Council in advance of the public hearing.b.	In reviewing any required master plan, the Planning Director shall consult with the heads of the departments of Public Utilities, Transportation, Engineering Services, Parks and Cultural Resources, Development Services and Fire to check the proposed master plan against the requirements of the UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City. 2.	Planning Commission Actiona.	Within 45 days following submission of a completed application and City approval of all required technical documents, the Planning Commission shall hold a public meeting on the proposed amendment which shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 10.2.1.C.



b.	
The Planning Commission may refer the application to a work session of the Planning Commission or to 1 of the Planning Commission's committees for additional consideration or the Planning Commission may act upon the application.

c.	
There is no limit on the sets of changes to the conditions following the first deliberation of the application by the Planning Commission. However, no set of changes to the conditions shall be considered and deliberated on by the Planning Commission unless an unsigned draft copy of the new set of conditions has been submitted at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled Planning Commission meeting.

d.	
During the review and deliberations of the Planning Commission, specified conditions may be removed or added, zoning districts changed, zoning boundaries altered and specified conditions may be made more or less restrictive.

e.	
Within 90 days after its receipt of the proposed rezoning, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council. Within this time period, the Planning Commission may request extensions of time which may be granted by the City Council. If no recommendation is made within this time period and if no extension is granted, the City Council may take action on the application without further involvement of the Planning Commission. 

f.	
A recommendation by the Planning Commission shall include the adoption of a statement describing whether the Planning Commission considers the action taken to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable and briefly explaining why the action taken is reasonable and in the public interest.

g.	
The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council in writing. The Planning Commission shall recommend that the request be approved, approved as revised or denied.

h.	
In no case shall changes to the conditions be accepted following an action by the Planning Commission and prior to the Planning Commission's Certified Recommendation being received by the City Council, other than non-substantive, technical revisions to the text of the conditions. 

i.	
For conditional use zoning cases, all conditions in the application must be signed by all of the property owners of the land being rezoned to a conditional use district and must be submitted to City Planning at least 2 business days before the date the City Council authorizes the matter for public hearing. 



3.	
Public Hearing by City Council
a.	
Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission or expiration of the applicable Planning Commission review period without a recommendation, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall occur within 60 days of receiving the request from the Planning Commission. 

b.	
Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8.4.	Conduct of Public Hearinga.	At the public hearing, the Planning Director will explain or identify, by maps or otherwise, the location and area involved in the rezoning and explain the uses permitted in the proposed zoning district. If applicable, the conditions specified in the petition shall be discussed.b.	Those in favor of the rezoning will be allowed a total of 8 minutes to explain their support and those against the rezoning will be allowed a total of 8 minutes to explain their opposition. Additional time may be allowed by the City Council if requested in advance of the public hearing. City Planning staff are not subject to the time limitation.5.	City Council Actiona.	Following the public hearing, revisions may be made to proposed conditions in conditional use zoning cases within 30 days following the public hearing date, provided that any change to any zoning condition is submitted to City Planning at least 10 calendar days before the date of the City Council meeting.b.	Following the public hearing, no changes to conditional zoning conditions permitted by the City Council may be made which are less restrictive, including but not limited to less setback, more dwelling units, greater height, more access points, new uses and fewer improvements. However, more restrictive conditions as well as a reduction in size of the zoning request and a change to a more restrictive zoning district may be made provided the revised conditional zoning conditions are signed by all owners of property covered by the public hearing zoning petition. c.	Signed conditions may be submitted by facsimile or electronic mail so long as the original signed petition is received by the Planning Director at least 24 hours before the date of the meeting where final City Council action is taken; provided that the electronic signature is (1) unique to the person using it; (2) capable of certification; (3) under the sole control of the person using it; and (4) linked to the same page as the petition.d.	Before taking final action, the City Council may consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission and Planning Director and comments made at the public hearing.e.	The City Council, by a three-fourths majority vote, may approve a proposed rezoning on first reading.f.	If a motion to approve receives a simple majority vote, a second reading of the ordinance is required at a subsequent meeting. With a simple majority vote, the request may be denied, referred to a City Council subcommittee, or referred back to the Planning Commission for additional consideration.g.	Approval by the City Council shall include the adoption of a statement describing whether the City Council considers the action taken to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable and briefly explaining why the action taken is reasonable and in the public interest.h.	For general use rezonings, the City Council shall consider all the potential uses and standards which would be allowed under the proposed rezoning. The City Council is not allowed to consider specific site plans or conditions as a basis for such a decision. Following the public hearing, general use rezonings may at the discretion of the City Council be reduced in acreage and height and the City Council may substitute, in whole or in part, a more restrictive zoning district.i.	All enactments, amendments and changes must be in the form of an ordinance. Copies of adopted city ordinances shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk.G.	Considerations for Planning Director ReviewThe following lists of considerations for the Planning Director’s review and recommendations regarding a rezoning application are not all-inclusive. Review of zoning map amendments by the Planning Director may consider whether:1.	The proposed rezoning corrects an error or meets the challenge of some changing condition, trend or fact;2.	The proposed rezoning is generally consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 3.	The proposed rezoning conflicts with any specific policy or action item of the Comprehensive Plan;4.	The proposed rezoning is generally consistent with the Future Land Use Map;5.	The proposed rezoning is generally consistent with the stated purpose and intent of this UDO;6.	The proposed rezoning will reinforce the existing or planned character of the area;7.	The site is appropriate for the development allowed in the proposed district;8.	There are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used according to the existing zoning;9.	The subject property is suitable for the proposed zoning;10.	There is a need for the proposed use at the proposed location;11.	The City and other service providers will be able to provide sufficient public facilities and services including schools, roads, recreation facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply and stormwater facilities, police, fire and emergency medical services, while maintaining sufficient levels of service to existing development; and12.	The proposed rezoning will not have a significant adverse impact on property in the vicinity of the subject property.H.	Withdrawal or Modification of a Pending ApplicationNo application for a proposed rezoning can be withdrawn after the City Council authorizes it for public hearing. Following authorization for a public hearing for a proposed rezoning, no modification to the application may be made except as specifically allowed in Sec. 10.2.4.F.5.I.	Time Lapse between Applications1.	Limitations Between Applicationsa.	Without special waiver approved by the City Council, the Planning Director is not authorized to accept an application for rezoning whenever an application for rezoning on the same property would be heard more than once at a public hearing within a 24-month period. But when the City Council decides not to authorize a public hearing, for the zoning petition, the 24-month waiting period shall be calculated from the date the zoning petition was first filed with City Planning. The increase or decrease of an area or other change in the request for rezoning does not negate this rule. b.	In cases, however, where a proposed rezoning has been applied for by the City or other non-owner of the subject property, heard and acted on, applications by individual property owners (for the return of their property to its former zoning classification) will be accepted within the 24-month period without prior City Council approval. c.	This 24-month period shall also not apply to a change in the underlying district when an application for an overlay district has been heard on the same property within a 24-month period or to a change in the overlay district when an application of the underlying district has been heard on the same property within a 24-month period. d.	The 24-month waiting period shall not apply to any City Council-initiated rezoning when such modifications involve: i.	Re-adoption of the entire Official Zoning Map;ii.	Application of zoning to implement an adopted small area plan; iii.	Application of zoning to new extraterritorial jurisdiction areas; oriv.	Application of zoning to annexed areas which were not previously subject to this UDO. e.	This 24-month period shall not apply to simultaneously submitted applications for rezoning. Zoning applications are simultaneous submitted when all of the following are met:i.	Two or more zoning applications by different persons are filed for portions of the same property on the same work day and within one ½ hour of the first zoning filing on the property;ii.	No other earlier zoning application for portions of the same property have been filed with City Planning during the filing period under Sec. 10.2.1.B.4.; andiii.	Each simultaneous zoning application is complete without any errors or omissions. No additions or corrections to a zoning application shall be allowed to relate back in time to its initial submission with City Planning.f.	For simultaneous submitted applications for rezoning, City Planning is instructed to set the applications for the same public hearing date.2.	Special WaiverFollowing a recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council may grant a special waiver of the 24-month waiting period for one or more of the following grounds: a.	Materially changed conditions;b.	Clerical correction as the basis for the previous rezoning;c.	Newly discovered evidence of adverse impact of the current zoning which by due diligence could not have been discovered in time for the earlier public hearing;d.	Substantially changed zoning request; ore.	The petition changes from a general use district request to a conditional use district request and specific conditions are submitted by all owners of the property, which represents a substantial change from the previous general use district request.Sec. 10.2.5. Subdivision ReviewA.	ApplicabilityExcept as expressly exempted below, no land shall be subdivided within the City or within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction until:1.	A preliminary subdivision plan has been submitted and approved as provided in Sec. 10.2.5.E.; and 2.	Infrastructure Construction Plans have been submitted and approved; and3.	A final plat has been submitted and approved as provided in Sec. 10.2.5.F.; and 4.	The approved final plat has been filed and recorded with the local register of deeds office where the property is located. B.	ExemptionsThe following are exempt and are not subject to subdivision review under this section and the requirements of Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Standards, unless otherwise provided. 1.	The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the applicable zoning district.2.	The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres where no right-of-way dedication is involved.3.	The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors.4.	City of Raleigh right-of-way easement acquisition plats.C.	Limitations on Subdivision Approval1.	No subdivision shall be approved on any parcel of a parent tract when general forestry has occurred on the parent tract and the perimeter buffers under Sec. 9.1.10.C. were removed or substantially removed within the last 5 years. D.	Pre-Application ConferenceBefore submitting an application for subdivision approval, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Development Services Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Development Services Director.E.	Preliminary Subdivision Plan Approval Process1.	Application Requirementsa.	An application for preliminary subdivision plan approval shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.b.	The following forms must be filled out completely in order to process an application for preliminary subdivision plan approval:i.	Preliminary Subdivision Plan Application; ii.	Design Adjustment Request, if applicable (see Sec. 10.2.18.); and iii.	Any Waiver Request.2.	Development Services Department Actiona.	Development Services has the authority to approve preliminary subdivision plans without review by either the City Council or the Board of Adjustment except in the following situations in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8

































: 
i.	
The preliminary subdivision plan is within a Historic Overlay District or of a designated Historic Landmark;

ii.	
The preliminary subdivision plan is located in a -MPOD, other than single-unit living lots; or 

iii.	
A Variance Request is filed.



b.	
After an application has been determined complete, Development Services shall give notice of pending review in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8. If subsequent to the filing of a completed application, a waiver from the Board of Adjustment is requested, Development Services shall give notice of the requested waiver in accordance with Sec. 10.1.8. c.	In reviewing the preliminary subdivision plan, Development Services shall consult with the Public Utilities, City Planning, Engineering Services, Parks and Cultural Resources, Transportation and Fire Departments to check the proposed preliminary subdivision plan against the requirements of the City Code and other applicable technical requirements of the City.d.	Following review of the preliminary subdivision plan for compliance with the City Code and other applicable technical requirements of the City, Development Services shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary subdivision plan. Development Services shall keep written records of any action taken.3.	Action Following Development Services Department Decisiona.	Following the date of the final action, notice of a decision on an administratively reviewed preliminary subdivision plan shall be provided as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.C.6.b.	Within 30 days after the date of the decision on a preliminary subdivision plan, an appeal of Development Services' action may be filed with the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Sec. 10.2.11.4.	Action Following Preliminary Subdivision Plan Approvala.	 A copy of the preliminary subdivision plan, conforming to all conditions of approval, shall be submitted to Development Services, which shall distribute copies to other City departments as necessary. b.	An application for infrastructure construction plan approval shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B. The following forms must be filled out completely in order to process an application for construction drawing approval:i.	Infrastructure Construction Plan Application; andii.	A Phasing Plan in accordance with the standards of Sec. 10.2.5.E.7.c.	 No construction of development-related improvements shall commence until all required construction drawing plans, profiles and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City or other governmental approving agency and all necessary permits issued.5.	Revisions to an Approved Preliminary Subdivision Plana.	Minor revisions to an approved preliminary subdivision plan that reflect the same basic street and lot configurations as used for the original approval may be approved by the Development Services Director.b.	Any request for a revision to an approved preliminary subdivision plan that increases the number of building lots, decreases the amount of common open space or alters a road pattern shall be initiated and processed as a new application for preliminary subdivision plan approval.6.	Phasinga.	If not otherwise set out as part of the preliminary subdivision plan, lots may be recorded and public improvements may be constructed in phases. b.	The Development Services Director shall ensure that the phasing plan is in accordance with the approved preliminary subdivision plan, this UDO, resolutions of the City Council, and conditions of approval.c.	The phasing plan shall indicate timing of the construction of public improvements in such a way that the number of lots in each phase is reasonably proportional to the amount of development-related improvements in each phase and that rights-of-way and utility easements are extended in the initial phase of development to all adjacent lots that do not have public street access or access to public utilities. d.	The number of dwelling units in recorded phases complies with the density requirements of this UDO.e.	In the recorded phase, all setbacks, neighborhood transition zones, transitional protective yards and other special yard areas are met.f.	In the recorded phase, off-street parking requirements for the developed portion are observed.g.		In the recorded phase, the amount of required open space is proportionate to the percentage of land being recorded.h.	The recorded phase conforms to all of the requirements for a legal lot. i.	Unrecorded phases may contain inappropriate densities, setbacks, off-street parking spaces and required open space, provided any such phase at the time of its recordation is combined with other recorded phases of the development so that the combined properties together conform to the density, setback, off-street parking and open space requirements of this UDO.j.	Any residual portion of development complies with the requirements of a legal lot, including its authorization as a subdivided lot and the following:i.	Total acres (gross) recorded;ii.	Total acres of right-of-way approved;iii.	Total acres of right-of-way dedicated;iv.	Total acres (net) approved;v.	Total acres (net) recorded;vi.	Total acres of open space approved; andvii.	Total acres of open space recorded.k.	Amendments to the phasing plan may be made in conjunction with the review of construction plans, but an updated copy of the new phasing plan must be submitted and placed in the case file maintained by the Development Services Director. If the extent of the amendments has an impact on more than one phase, then a revised preliminary plan will be required. 7.	Sunsetting of a Preliminary Subdivision Plana.	Within 3 years after approval of the preliminary subdivision plan, at least ½ of the gross land area shown on the preliminary subdivision plan must have a final subdivision plat recorded in the local register of deeds office where the property is located and all remaining portions of the preliminary subdivision plan shall have the final subdivision plat recorded in the local register of deeds office where the property is located within five years from the approval date of the preliminary subdivision plan. b.	Failure to record final subdivision plats for an approved preliminary subdivision plan within the required time constraints shall automatically void the unrecorded portions of the preliminary subdivision plan unless the Development Services Director finds that all of the following are met: i.	A written request for an extension has been made to the Development Services Director prior to the expiration period; ii.	Unrecorded portions of the preliminary subdivision plan shall conform to all ordinances, laws and City Council resolutions in effect at the time of the requested extension;iii.	The preliminary subdivision plan considers and respects the practical limits of public facilities and services such as stormwater, water and sewer lines, streets, fire, public safety and trash collection; iv.	The applicant has provided the most recent City of Raleigh inspection report from the Engineering Services Department demonstrating that the site is currently in compliance and that any previously graded or cleared portion of the site which is not currently under construction is currently and appropriately stabilized to prevent erosion and sediment erosion control problems during the requested extension period; andv.	No other extension has been granted.c.	If all the requirements of Sec. 10.2.5.E.8.b. above are met, the Development Services Director shall permit only one 3-year extension calculated from the date the request for extension is approved by the Development Services Director. F.	Final Subdivision Plat Approval Process1.	Applicabilitya.	All divisions of land not exempted in Sec. 10.2.5.B. shall require final subdivision plat approval as set forth below.b.	The final subdivision plat shall constitute one or more phases of the approved preliminary subdivision plan. c.	Approval of the final subdivision plat shall be subject to the installation, acceptance, warranty and as-built drawing of the improvements required in Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Standards or the posting of a construction surety as set forth in Sec. 8.1.3.2.	Submittal Requirementsa.	An application for final subdivision plat approval shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.b.	The following forms must be filled out completely in order to process an application for final subdivision plat approval:i.	Recorded Map Application; and ii.	Recorded Map Checklist.c.	 The final plat submission shall contain all of the following.i.	The inclusion of all required items as provided in the Recorded Map Application, Recorded Map Checklist and any other checklist contained within the final subdivision plat application forms.ii.	Compliance with all requirements of N.C. Gen. Stat. §47-30.iii.	A metes and bounds description of all required easements. iv.	Executed copies of all legal instruments required by the City in association with development approval.v.	Posting of a construction surety as set forth in Sec. 8.1.3. for improvements which are not accepted for public maintenance by the City.vi.	Tree conservation plats for approved preliminary subdivisions 2 or more acres in size.  vii.	The final plat and all dedication plats shall contain a ownership certification that certifies and warrants that the undersigned is (are) the sole owner(s) of the property shown on the map or plat and any accompanying sheets having acquired the property in fee simple by deed(s) recorded in the county register of deeds office where the property is located and as such has (have) the right to convey the property in fee simple and that the dedicator(s) hereby agree to warrant and defend the title against any claims of all persons whomsoever excepted as specifically listed herein and that by recording this plat or map I ( we) do irrevocably dedicate to the City of Raleigh for public use all streets, easements, rights-of-way, parks and greenways (as those interests are defined in the City Code) and as the same are shown on the plat for all lawful purposes to which the City may devote or allow the same to use and upon acceptance thereof, in accordance with all City policies, ordinances, regulations or conditions of the City of Raleigh, for the benefit of the public provided any dedication of easements for storm drainage not specifically labeled City of Raleigh or public are not made to the City of Raleigh, but are irrevocably made to the subsequent owners of any and all properties shown hereon for their use and benefit. viii.	Delineations of watercourse buffers and impervious surface area limitations for properties located in a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD, -MPOD or CM District.ix.	Signature of an official from the North Carolina Department of Transportation if public street right-of-way is involved for lands located outside the City limits.x.	Stormwater control facilities, including without limitation, detention facilities, retention facilities, wet ponds, sand filters, wetlands, bio-retention measures, swales and storm pipes required by Article 9.2. Stormwater Management, permanently protected undisturbed open space areas, together with showing the means of transporting stormwater runoff to and from any nitrogen reduction and stormwater runoff control measures or facilities.xi.	A statement on the plat which lots, by number, are served by which stormwater control facility; the stormwater control facility shall be indicated by type and by its general location.xii.	A notation that the dedicators and their successors waive their statutory rights to withdraw dedications of the right-of-way when the public has made reimbursement for the right-of-way or when density has been transferred from the right-of-way.d.	The applicant shall submit all information, maps and data required by the City to properly review the final subdivision plat for conformity with all City ordinances, standards and regulations. For example, building envelopes may be required to show the development potential of any lot and if the lot can not be reasonably developed in accordance with Article 8.3. Blocks, Lots, Access, the lot shall not be recorded notwithstanding any prior preliminary subdivision plan approval of the lot.3.	Development Services Director Action a.	After an application has been determined complete, Development Services shall review the final subdivision plat for compliance with the approved preliminary subdivision plan and conditions of approval.b.	In reviewing the final subdivision plat, Development Services Department shall consult with the Public Utilities, City Planning, Engineering Services, Parks and Cultural Resources, Transportation and Fire Departments. c.	Upon completion of the review, the Development Services Director may meet with the applicant to discuss any changes in development design.d.	If the final subdivision plat contains the dedication of streets and public easements, the construction of development-related improvements or the establishment of private drainage easements, then Development Services shall forward copies of the final subdivision plat to the appropriate City departments for review. e.	Development Services shall complete the review of the final subdivision plat and notify the applicant of nonconformities, omissions or required corrections. If the final subdivision plat is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of the UDO with which the final subdivision plat does not comply. A revised final subdivision plat may be submitted to Development Services for further consideration. f.	Within 20 days after the date of the decision on a final subdivision plat, an appeal of the Development Services Director's action may be filed with the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Sec. 10.2.11..g.	Development Services shall approve the final subdivision plat if it conforms with the approved preliminary subdivision plan and conditions of approval, N.C. Gen.Stat. §30-47 and the content requirements for the plat and recorded map checklist. h.	No final subdivision plat shall be approved until all required public improvements are accepted for public maintenance and completely installed or a construction security is posted with the City as set forth in Sec. 8.1.3.4.	Action Following Final Approval of the Plata.	After a final subdivision plat is approved, the Development Services Director shall certify the plat for recording after the required signatures for recordation have been provided.b.	The City may, as a precondition for recording lots, require the recording of legal instruments.c.	The subdivider shall present to the county register of deeds office where the property is located the appropriate number of signed mylar copies of the final plat, as specified on the Recorded Map application and Recorded Map checklist.d.	Plats presented to and approved for recordation by the City must be recorded on or before the 14th day following the certification of the Development Services Director. The expiration date shall be clearly indicated on the plat. By the end of the next business day following the recordation of the final plat, the subdivider shall provide to Development Services evidence of a recorded copy of the certified final plat and the recordation of all legal instruments required by the City in association with development approval. 5.	Revisions to an Approved and Signed Final Subdivision Plat Not Yet RecordedFollowing certification of the Development Services Director, in accordance with Sec. 10.2.5.F.4., no final plat shall be revised, except with the consent of Development Services: a.	When revisions are proposed to an approved final subdivision plat, the applicant shall submit a written request to Development Services delineating the revisions and requesting authorization for the revisions.b.	Revisions to an approved final subdivision plat may only be approved if still in conformance with the approved preliminary plan.c.	Changes to an approved final subdivision plat not in conformance with the approved preliminary plan must be resubmitted as a new preliminary plan application. d.	In addition to the written request for revising the final plat and the submittal of a revised final subdivision plat, in all instances the applicant shall submit the required fees to Development Services for processing and recording the revised final plat.Sec. 10.2.6. Non-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded InstrumentsA.	Applicability The provisions of this section apply to the following:1.		The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform with, or exceed, the standards of Sec. 8.3.3., but if the standards of Sec. 8.3.3. are not met, the recombination may still be approved if the recombined lots more closely conform to the minimum standards of Sec. 8.3.3. than do the existing conditions.2.	The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres where no right-of-way dedication is involved.3.	The public acquisition by purchase or dedication of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors.4.	City of Raleigh right-of-way or easement acquisition plats. 5.	All other plats or maps, other than subdivision plats, where the existing property boundaries or street rights-of-way are changed or new street rights-of-way are created.6.	All other maps or plats, other than subdivision plats, that are required by State Law to contain a City certification. 7.	Except as expressly exempted below, no map or plat shall be filed and recorded with the local register of deeds office for lands within the City or within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction unless and until it has been submitted and approved as provided in this section.B.	ExemptionsThe following are exempt and are not subject to this section and to the requirements of Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Standards unless otherwise provided.1.	A survey of an existing parcel or parcels of land that does not create a new street or change an existing street or property boundary.2.	A survey of an existing building or other structure or natural feature, such as a watercourse.3.		A control survey.4.	North Carolina Department of Transportation rights-of-way plans or roadway corridor official maps.5.		Easement plats prepared by utility companies granted the power of eminent domain by N.C. Gen. Stat. §40A-3(a)(1).6.	A map attached to a deed or other instrument submitted for recording in a form for illustrative purposes only that meets the requirements of N.C. Gen. Stat. §47-30(n) and does not convey fee simple property in violation of this UDO. C.	Pre-Application Conference	Before submitting an application for any division of land greater than 10 acres where no right-of-way dedication is involved, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Development Services Director to discuss the consequences for development of a tract without a road network. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Development Services Director.D.	Requirements for Recombinations 1.	Recombination by Recorded MapsThe requirements for recombination by recorded map include all of the following: a.	The resultant lots conform with, or exceed, the standards of Sec. 8.3.3., but if the standards are not met, the recombination may still be approved if the recombined lots more closely conform to the minimum standards of Sec. 8.3.3. than do the existing conditions;b.	The total number of lots is not increased; c.	The title block contains the word "Recombination";d.	Structures on the affected lots are shown and the requested recombination does not violate the setback requirements of this UDO and the North Carolina Building Code; e.	The amount of impervious surface per lot is indicated before and after the recombination. All impervious surfaces and lot areas within a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD, -MPOD or CM District shall be calculated from the adjoining street right-of-way; provided if an expansion of an existing right-of-way or new right-of-way has been established in the Comprehensive Plan, impervious surface and lot areas within the overlay district shall be calculated from the expanded or new right-of-way; f.	The recombination plat is certified by the Development Services Director and contains the appropriate authorization number to ensure the proper mapping of the resultant lots on the applicable county and City Geographic Information Systems;g.	The recombination indicates that all resultant lots have the same water and sewer utility access that existed prior to the recombination; h.	The recombination is certified by the county health department where the property is located that the recombination will not create a violation of setback standards or other standards of the county health department regarding private wells and septic systems; i.	The recombination does not create the potential of new access points on a Major Street, Mixed Use Street or Thoroughfare in violation of the of the UDO and the Raleigh Street Design Handbook or render any existing driveway access point nonconforming;j.	The recombination plat conforms to all laws and ordinances for the recordation of maps and includes all information listed in the Recorded Map Checklist form except for information that is uniquely necessary for subdivision plats; k.	The resultant lots, if located within floodway fringe areas as set forth in Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations, conform to the lot coverage limitations of Sec. 9.3.5.C.; andl.	The recombination plat will be processed in accordance with this section and Sec. 10.1.8. 2.	Recombination by Recorded InstrumentThe requirements for recombination by recorded instrument include all of the following: a.		The resultant lots conform with, or exceed, the standards of Sec. 8.3.3., but if the standards of Sec. 8.3.3. are not met, the recombination may still be approved if the recombined lots more closely conform to the minimum standards of Sec. 8.3.3. than do the existing conditions;b.		The total number of lots is not increased; c.	The instrument contains a metes and bounds description of the new recombined lots or reference is made to a recorded plat; d.	The instrument contains a statement as to the total acreage of the affected lots; e.	The title of the instrument contains the word "Recombination";f.	The instrument contains a certification that the recombination does not violate the setback requirements of this UDO and the North Carolina Building Code;g.	The amount of impervious surface per lot is indicated before and after the recombination. All impervious surfaces and lot areas within a -UWPOD, -FWPOD, -SWPOD, -MPOD or CM District shall be calculated from the adjoining street right-of-way; provided if an expansion of an existing right-of-way or new right-of-way has been established in the Comprehensive Plan, impervious surface and lot areas within the overlay district shall be calculated from the expanded or new right-of-way; h.	The recombination instrument is signed by all property owners;i.	If the number of lots is reduced, the instrument is to indicate which lots are eliminated; j.	The recombination instrument is certified by the Development Services Director and the appropriate authorization number is attached to ensure the proper mapping of the resultant lots on the applicable county and City Geographic Information Systems; k.	The instrument indicates that all resultant lots have the same water and sewer utility access that existed prior to the recombination; l.	The instrument contains a certification by the county health department where the property is located that the recombination will not create a violation of setback standards or other standards of the county health department regarding private wells and septic systems; m.	The recombination does not create the potential of new access points on a Major Street, Mixed Use Street or Thoroughfare in violation of the of the UDO and the Raleigh Street Design Manual or render any existing driveway access point nonconforming;n.	The resultant lots, if located within floodway fringe areas as set forth in Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations, conform to the lot coverage limitations of Sec. 9.3.5.C.; and o.	The recombination instrument will be processed in accordance with this section and Sec. 10.1.8. 
















































3.	
Limitations on Recombination Approval


No recombination of any property shall be approved pending any application for the rezoning of property unless the recombination is permitted under the existing zoning district of the property and also under the zoning district which is proposed for the property. 
E.	
Non-subdivision Maps, Plats and Instruments of Recombination Approval Process
1.	
Application Requirements
a.	
An application for approval of a non-subdivision final map, plat or recombination instrument shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.b.	The following forms and documents must be completed in order to process an application for non-subdivision final map, plat or recombination instrument recordation approval:i.	A Recorded Map Application (recorded plat only);ii.	One or more deeds of conveyance, when a recombination changes the boundaries of properties owned by different persons (recorded plat and recombination instrument); andiii.	A preliminary plat or an instrument of recombination (recorded plat and recombination instrument).2.	Development Services Director Action a.		After an application has been determined to be complete, Development Services shall review the proposed application for compliance with this UDO and the requirements of N.C. Gen. Stat. §47-30.b.		Upon completion of the review of the initial non-subdivision map, plat or recombination instrument, Development Services either shall approve or approve with conditions or reject the application depending on whether it conforms to the applicable UDO provisions and the requirements of N.C. Gen. Stat. §47-30.c.	An appeal of Development Services’ decision may be filed with the Board of Adjustment as set forth in Sec. 10.2.11.3.	Action Following Approvala.	After a non-subdivision final map, plat or recombination instrument is approved, the Development Services Director shall certify the final map, plat or recombination instrument as exempt from the subdivision regulations of the UDO.b.		The City may, as a precondition for recording non-subdivision maps, plats and recombination instruments, require the recording of legal instruments. c.	Non-subdivision plats and recombination instruments presented to and approved for recordation by the City must be recorded on or before the 14th day following the signature of the Development Services Director. The expiration date shall be clearly indicated on the recording plat and on the recombination instrument.d.	By the end of the next business day following the recordation of the non-subdivision final plat or recombination instrument, the applicant shall provide to Development Services evidence of a recorded copy of the recombination instrument or certified final plat and the recordation of all legal instruments required by the City in association with the approval. Sec. 10.2.7. Plot Plan ReviewA.	Applicability1.	No plot plan is required for ordinary maintenance or for any accessory building having an area less than 150 square feet and a roof span no greater than 12 feet. 2.	A plot plan is required for certain improvements, as listed below. a.	Construction of a fence, wall, gazebo, carport, home swimming pool, deck, porch or patio.b.	Construction of a telecommunications tower.c.	Installation of signage.d.	Temporary uses.e.	Food truck permits.f.	Construction, reconstruction, addition, repair or alteration of any building, structure, parking facility or a change in use when the amount of required parking as determined in Article 7.1. Parking, notwithstanding any variance, credit, nonconformity, exception, special vehicle parking provision, vehicular parking reduction or the existence of any surplus parking, does not increase by 10 spaces or 10%, whichever is less. g.	Demolition and replacement of a building, other than a detached house used for single-unit living when all of the following are met: i.	The amount of required parking as determined in Article 7.1. Parking, notwithstanding any variance, credit, nonconformity, exception, special vehicle parking provision, vehicular parking reduction or the existence of any surplus parking, does not increase by 10 spaces or 10%, whichever is less;ii.	The replacement building conforms to all City Code requirements; iii.	Building permits are issued and foundations are installed for the replacement within 1-year of the demolition permit; and iv.	All site improvements not limited to required parking, tree protection, landscaping, internal pedestrian walkways, driveways and closings are made in accordance with this UDO.h.	Construction of a detached house used for single-unit living located on any vacant lot that was lawfully established, including the lawful recombination of lots. Construction of a detached house on lots that were created in violation of this UDO or on recombined lots not approved by the City are not plot plans.3.	No approval of a plot plan shall be conditioned to require public street, open space, drainage or utility dedications or improvements.B.	Pre-Application ConferenceBefore submitting an application for plot plan approval, an applicant may schedule a pre-application conference with the Development Services Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval.C.	Application Requirements1.	An application for plot plan approval shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.2.	The following forms must be filled out completely in order to process an application for plot plan approval:a.		Plot Plan Submittal Checklist; b.		Administrative Alternate Request (see Sec. 10.2.18.); andc.	Plot Plan Permit ApplicationD.	Development Services Director Action1.	Development Services shall review the proposed application against the requirements of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City.2.	In reviewing the application, Development Services Department shall consult with the Public Utilities, Engineering Services, City Planning, Parks and Cultural Resources, Transportation and Fire Departments. 3.	Following review, the City shall approve, approve with conditions that bring the application into conformance with this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City or deny the application. 4.	If the application is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing and provided to the applicant, specifying the provisions of which the application does not comply. A revised application may be submitted to Development Services for further consideration.5.	Notice of a decision on an administratively reviewed plot plan shall be provided to the applicant within 3 days following the date of the final action as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.C.6.6.	Any appeal of this section shall be in accordance with Sec. 10.2.11.

























E.	
Notification Requirements
1.	
When a plot plan, excluding improvements described in Sec. 1.5.4 D. Setback Encroachments, meets both of the following criteria, site posting and mailed notice are required.
a.	
It involves the construction of or addition to a principal building or an accessory structure that is 7 or more feet in height.

b.	
The property meets the applicability standards for Residential Infill Compatibility in Sec. 2.2.7.



2.	
Unsealed, stamped and addressed envelopes shall be submitted with the plot plan application. Mailed notice must be provided in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.C.1.a. Letters shall be mailed as soon as the application is technically complete.

3.	
A sign shall be posted by the property owner on the property for 30 consecutive days, beginning the day of issuance or the next working day following the issuance of a zoning permit or site permit. Signage shall be posted on the property at a point visible from the nearest public street or streets if the property fronts on multiple streets. The sign shall not measure less than 18 inches x 24 inches. The sign shall include the following information:
a.	
The case number;

b.	
The address of the subject property;

c.	
The date the application was decided;

d.	
A description of the action requested;

e.	
The address for the City's web portal; and

f.	
A phone number and e-mail address to contact Development Services.





F.	
Expiration


An approved plot plan shall expire 6 months after the date of approval if a building permit application has not been filed.
Sec. 10.2.8. 
Site Plan Review

A.	
Applicability
1.	
Before any permit, not otherwise approved as a plot plan under Sec. 10.2.7., is issued for the construction, reconstruction, extension, repair, renovation or alteration of any building, structure, parking facility, change of use or use of land, whether for any property located within the City or within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, a site plan approved in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be submitted to and approved by Development Services.2.	Construction of a detached house on a lot that was created in violation of Sec. 10.2.5. or on recombined lots not approved by the City in accordance with Sec. 10.2.6. are site plans.B.	Pre-Application ConferenceBefore submitting an application for site plan review, an applicant may schedule a pre-application conference with the Development Services Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. C.	Approval Process1.	Site Review a.	An application for site review approval shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B. The following forms must be filled out completely in order to process an application for site review approval:i.	Site Review Application; andii.	Site Review Checklist; iii.	Administrative alternate requests (see Sec. 10.2.17.); andiv.	Administrative design adjustments (see Sec. 10.2.18.).b.	Development Services shall complete the site review and notify the applicant of nonconformities, omissions or required corrections. If the site review plan is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of the UDO with which the site review plan does not comply. A revised site review plan may be submitted to Development Services for further consideration.c.	Following site review, Development Services shall approve, approve with conditions that bring the site review plan into conformance with this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City or deny the site review plan. Development Services shall keep written records of any action taken.d.	Beginning the day of issuance of a zoning permit or site permit by the property owner or the next working day, mailed notice shall be required pursuant to Sec. 10.2.1.C.1.






 and a sign shall be posted by the property owner on the property for 30 consecutive days pursuant to Sec. 10.2.1.C.4. for the following administrative approvals:
i.	
Where the new building is 25,000 square feet or more in size or any addition that represents an increase of more than 10% of the building area or 25,000 square feet whichever is greater; and

ii.	
Where the property of the approved administrative site plan is located within 100 feet of a property that is zoned R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6 or R-10.



e.	
Notice of a decision on an administratively reviewed site plan shall be provided within 3 days following the date the application was decided, as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.C.6.f.	An appeal as set forth in Sec. 10.2.11. shall be filed by persons within 30 days of permit issuance or when a permit is not issued, the decision of approval or denial; this time period is applicable to all representatives of such persons, including without limitation their tenants and option holders. g.	Upon acceptance of a completed application, the Development Services Director will provide mailed notice to the State of North Carolina for any site plan located within the Metro-Park Overlay District.2.	Infrastructure Construction Plansa.	An application for construction drawing approval shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B. The following forms must be filled out completely in order to process an application for construction drawing approval:i.	Infrastructure Construction Plan Application; ii.	A Phasing plan in accordance with the standards of Sec. 10.2.5.E.7.; iii.	If applicable, a Waiver Request is filed; andiv.	If applicable, an Administrative Design Adjustment request is filed.b.	After an application has been determined complete, the City shall review the request in accordance with the provisions of this UDO.c.	No construction of development-related improvements shall commence until all required construction drawing plans, profiles and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the City or other governmental approving agency and all necessary permits issued.d.	In reviewing the infrastructure construction plan, Development Services shall consult with the Public Utilities, City Planning, Engineering Services, Parks and Cultural Resources, Transportation and Fire Departments to review the infrastructure construction plan against the requirements of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City. The collective review shall consider the adequacy of public facilities, as described in Article 8.2. Infrastructure Sufficiency.e.	Following review, Development Services shall approve, approve with conditions that bring the infrastructure construction plan into conformance with requirements of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City,or deny the infrastructure construction plan. Development Services Director shall keep written records of any action taken.3.	Building Reviewa.	An application for building or construction permit issuance shall be submitted to Development Services in accordance with Sec. 11.2.1.B. b.	A Permit Application must be filled out completely in order to process an application for building review.c.		No building or construction permit shall be issued for development requiring a site plan until the site review has been approved.d.	No review of building or construction plans shall occur until a copy of the approved site review plan conforming to all conditions of approval has been received by Development Services or the Board of Adjustment has granted a variance authorizing the use of a non-complying site plan element. e.	In reviewing the building permit application, the Development Services Department shall consult with the Public Utilities, City Planning, Engineering Services, Transportation, Parks and Cultural Resources and Fire Departments to check the proposed building plans against the requirements of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City. f.	The Development Services shall complete the review of the building plans and notify the applicant of nonconformities, omissions or required corrections. If the building plans are disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City with which the building plans do not comply. Revised building plans may be submitted to the Development Services for further consideration. g.	Following building review, the Development Services shall approve, approve with conditions that bring the building plans into conformance with this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City or deny the building plans. The Development Services shall keep written records of any action taken.h.	Prior to the issuance of any building or construction permit for the site, the applicant shall have installed all required improvements as specified in Chapter 8. Subdivision & Site Plan Standards or guaranteed their installation as provided in Sec. 8.1.3.i.	An issued building permit expires 6 months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not commenced. If after commencement, the work is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the permit shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any permit that has expired shall be performed until a new permit has been obtained.j.	The approval process for site plans of infrastructure construction plans, final site and building review may at the option of the applicant be done sequentially as listed or combined all in 1 review process or in 2 different review processes provided that order of these processes are not reversed.D.	Revisions to an Approved Site PlanMinor revisions to an approved site plan may be approved by the City without providing additional notice. The following revisions shall be considered minor:1.	Up to a 10% increase or any decrease in gross floor area of a single building;2.	Up to a 10% reduction in the approved setbacks from exterior property lines; and3.	Relocation of parking areas, internal driveways or structures where such relocation occurs more than 100 feet from exterior property lines.4.	All other changes to an approved site plan must be resubmitted as a new application.E.	Expiration of a Site PlanA building permit must be obtained from the Development Services within 3 years from the date of site plan approval. The site plan shall expire 3 years from the approval date of the site plan unless an applicant has been granted vested rights or unless a valid building permit has been issued by Development Services. One 2-year extension to submit a building permit shall be granted by the Development Services Director provided all of the following are met:1.	A written request for an extension has been made to the Development Services Director prior to the expiration period;2.	Unconstructed portions of the approved site plan conform to all ordinances, laws, City policies and provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and other City Council adopted plans in effect at the time of the requested extension;3.	Adjacent streets have not been reclassified the Comprehensive Plan;4.	The plan addresses the adequacy of public facilities and services such as stormwater, water and sewer lines, streets, fire, public safety and trash collection;5.	There shall only be 1 extension permitted, not to exceed a time period of 2 years from the date of receipt by the Development Services Director of the original written request for extension; and6.	Within 4 years after the issuance of the first building permit for the site plan, the construction of the entire site plan must be completed unless an applicant has been granted vested rights. Failure to complete construction within this specified time frame shall automatically void the approved site plan for which no building permits have been issued. Sec. 10.2.9. Special Use PermitA.	Applicability1.	Special uses within each zoning district are uses that may be appropriate in a particular zoning district, but because of the increased potential for incompatibility with adjacent uses, require individual review by the Board of Adjustment.2.	A special use permit is required for all special uses as set forth in Chapter 6. Use Regulations.B.	Pre-Application ConferenceBefore submitting an application for a special use permit, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director.C.	Application Requirements1.	An application for a special use permit shall be submitted with in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.2.	A Special Use Permit Application must be filled out to initiate a request for a special use permit.D.	Approval Process1.	Planning Director ActionPlanning Director shall review the application for a special use permit in light of the showings of Sec. 10.2.9.E. and applicable requirements of Chapter 6. Use Regulations and advise the applicant. 2.	Board of Adjustment ActionFollowing notice as required in Sec. 10.1.8. the Board of Adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial public hearing as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.D.1. E.	Showings Before a request for a special use permit is granted, the Board of Adjustment must show that all of the following are met:1.	The proposed use complies with all applicable provisions of this UDO unless otherwise expressly modified in accordance with this UDO;2.	The proposed use is allowed as a special use in the respective zoning district (see Chapter 6. Use Regulations); 3.	The proposed use complies with any specific use standard listed in Chapter 6. Use Regulations without the granting of any variance to the specific use standard;4.	The proposed use is compatible with adjacent uses in terms of location, scale, site design, hours of operation and operating characteristics;5.	Any adverse impacts resulting from the proposed use in the affected area will be effectively mitigated or offset or the special use is denied;  6.	Access with respect to pedestrian, bicycle and automotive safety, traffic flow and emergency service is adequate; 7.	Signage is suitable and appropriate; and8.	Any appropriate dedications of streets and utilities to the public will be made prior to the issuance of a building permit.F.	Limits on ApprovalWhenever the Board of Adjustment approves a special use permit, approval shall not change the zoning of the property or give the property status as a nonconformity as set forth in Article 10.3. Nonconformities.G.	Revisions to an Approved Special Use PermitAn approved special use permit shall not without prior approval of the Board of Adjustment: 1.	Change to another use for more than 30 days; 2.	Increase its density or intensity; 3.	Enlarge, expand or increase its size; 4.	Increase the requirements for off-street parking spaces;  5.	Substantially change the exterior appearance of buildings; or 6.	Add new outdoor equipment and machinery.H.	Expiration1.	A special use permit shall expire after 1 year from the date of approval by the Board of Adjustment unless a completed building permit application is submitted or a zoning permit is submitted when no building permit is required, including payment of all fees has been filed by the applicant and accepted by the City. 2.	Any appeal of the issuance of the special use permit to Superior Court shall freeze the running of this 1 year period from commencement of the legal challenge until the end of all appeals. Once the use is constructed, the special use permit runs with the land and does not expire except:a.	When the Board of Adjustment conditioned the special use permit to a limited defined time period; b.	 When the special use permit is revoked in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.D.1.; or c.	When the special use is changed to another use for more than 30 days, other than that for which the special use permit was issued or the special use is discontinued or ceased for a continuous period of 365 days or more without the re-approval of the Board of Adjustment. Without the re-approval of the Board of Adjustment, the special use permit is null and void and continuation of the special use is a violation of this UDO.Sec. 10.2.10. VarianceA.	ApplicabilityThe Board of Adjustment has the authority to authorize variances from the provisions of this UDO, subject to the requirements of this section. Provided, however, no variance shall be allowed to any provision of this UDO, which would result in an amendment to the 2030 Comprehensive Plan, the Street Plan, or any other adopted City plan. Any change or amendment to such plans or maps must be done in accordance with the process set forth in Sec. 10.2.2



































. for 2030 Comprehensive Plan amendments.
B.	
Pre-Application Conference


Before submitting an application for a variance, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning Director to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director.
C.	
Application Requirements
1.	
An application for a variance shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.2.	A Variance Application must be signed and notarized by the property owner in order to initiate a request for variance.D.	Approval Process1.	Planning Director ActionCity Planning shall review the application for a variance in light of the showings of Sec. 10.2.10.D.3. below and advise the applicant. 2.	Board of Adjustment ActionFollowing notice as required in Sec. 10.1.8. and Sec. 10.2.1.C., the Board of Adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial public hearing as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.D.1.. 3.	ShowingsBefore a variance request is granted, the Board of Adjustment shall show all of the following:a.	Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.b.	The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance.c.	The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.d.	The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved. E.	Approval Limitations and Conditions1.	Absent specific authority from this UDO, the Board of Adjustment may not grant a variance which would modify, alter, change or suspend any requirement of a use standard as set forth in Chapter 6. Use Regulations.2.	In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment is authorized to attach safeguards and conditions to the approved variance as is necessary and appropriate and reasonably related to the circumstances that gave rise for the need of the variance. F.	Expiration of VarianceA variance shall expire after 12 months from the date of approval by the Board of Adjustment unless: (i) a completed building permit application, including payment of all fees has been filed by the applicant and accepted by the City; or (ii) the use and structure were previously in existence prior to the requested variance. Any appeal of the issuance of the variance to Superior Court shall freeze the running of this 12-month period from commencement of the legal challenge until the end of all appeals. Once the use is constructed or established, the variance runs with the land and does not expire except:1.	When the Board of Adjustment conditioned the variance to a limited defined time period; or2.	When the variance is revoked in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.D.1. Sec. 10.2.11. Appeal of an Administrative Decision A.	ApplicabilityAny person with standing under N.C. Gen. Stat. § 160A-393(d), or the City of Raleigh, may file an appeal of any decision, order, requirement or determination relating to the interpretation, compliance or application of this UDO made by an administrative official charged with the administration and enforcement of these provisions of the UDO. All appeals shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this section.B.	Reviewing BodyAppeals of an administrative decision are heard by the Board of Adjustment except for Minor Work Certificates of Appropriateness, which are heard by the Raleigh Historic Development Commission.C.	Stay of ProceedingsAn appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of the action appealed from unless the official who made the decision certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent with the ordinance shall not stay the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such property; in these situations, the appellant may request and the Board may grant a stay of a final decision of permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being appealed.D.	Notice of Decision and Filing An Appeal1.	The official who made the decision shall give written notice of the decision to the owner of the property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.2.	The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.3.	An appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal along with an appeal application stating the grounds for appeal and containing all other required information with the City Clerk.4.	The Department of City Planning shall provide the notices required in Sec. 10.2.1.C.E.	Hearing and Board Action1.	The official who made the decision shall transmit to the Board all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.2.	Within 90 days after a completed application of an appeal of an administrative decision is filed, the reviewing body shall hold a quasi-judicial public hearing as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.D.1. and provide notice of the decision as required in Sec. 10.2.1.C.6.3.	The official who made the decision shall be present at the hearing as a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in the notice of appeal. If any party or the city would be unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board shall continue the hearing.4.	The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board shall have all the powers of the official who made the decision.F.	Appeals from Raleigh Historic Development Commission1.	The Board of Adjustment shall also hear appeals from Certificate of Appropriateness decisions of the Raleigh Historic Development Commission.2.	These appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari, pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. § 160A-388(b)(1)(9).G.	Appeals from the Board of Adjustment are to Wake County Superior Court pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. § 160A-393.Sec. 10.2.12. Common Signage PlanA.	ApplicabilityPrior to the issuance of a sign permit for one or more buildings or businesses in the same project, a common signage plan approved by the Development Services Director in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be required.B.	Application Requirements1.	An application for a common signage plan shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.2.	A Common Signage Plan Application must be filled out in order to process an application for a common signage plan.C.	Development Services Director Action1.	The Development Services Director shall check the proposed application against the requirements of Sec. 7.3.16.H. and other applicable technical requirements of the City.2.	In reviewing the application, the Development Services shall consult with the Public Utilities, City Planning, Engineering Services, Transportation, Parks and Cultural Resources and Fire Departments. 3.	Following review, the Development Services Director shall approve, approve with conditions that bring the application into conformance with this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City or deny the application. 4.	If the application is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing and provided to the applicant, specifying the provisions with which the application does not comply. A revised application may be submitted to the Development Services Director for further consideration.5.	The Development Services Director may allow modifications to the lettering style to accommodate state and federally registered trademarks (logos) if the Development Services Director feels that the intent of the common signage plan requirements is maintained. In allowing modifications, the Development Services Director may limit the logo size. The requirements of a common signage plan shall apply to all tenants within a related project, even if the properties have been subdivided.6.	Within 30 days after the date of the decision, an appeal of the Development Services Director's action may be filed with the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Sec. 10.2.11. D.	Revisions to an Approved Plan 1.	Revisions to an approved common signage plan shall require documentation from all tenants on the property prior to approval.2.	It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to enforce the terms of the common signage plan and a current copy of such plan, including any amendments, must be kept on file by the Development Services Director.E.	Existing Signs Not Conforming to Common Signage PlanAll signs not conforming to the proposed common signage plan shall be required to comply at the time of application for a new sign permit.F.	Binding EffectAfter approval of a common signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted or maintained, except in conformance with the common signage plan.Sec. 10.2.13. Temporary Use Permit A.	ApplicabilityAs listed in Article 6.8. Temporary Uses, temporary uses occurring on private property outside of the public right-of-way shall be allowed upon the issuance of a temporary use permit by the Development Services Director in accordance with requirements of this section.B.	Application Requirements1.	An application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.2.	A Temporary Use Permit Application must be filled out in order to process an application for temporary use permit.C.	Development Services Director Action1.	The Development Services Director shall check the proposed application against the requirements of this UDO, all other applicable technical requirements of the City and the approval criteria of Sec. 10.2.13.D.2.	In reviewing the application, the Development Services Director may consult with the heads of the departments of Public Utilities, Public Works, Transportation, Parks and Recreation, Inspections and the Fire Department. 3.	Following review, the Development Services Director shall approve, approve with conditions that bring the application into conformance with this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City or deny the application. 4.	If the application is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing and provided to the applicant, specifying the provisions with which the application does not comply. A revised application may be submitted to the Development Services Director for further consideration.5.	Within 30 days after the date of the decision, an appeal of the Development Services Director's action may be filed with the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Sec. 10.2.11. D.	Approval CriteriaBefore a request for temporary use permit is granted, the Development Services Director must find the following:1.	The temporary use complies with any specific standard listed in Article 6.8. Temporary Uses; 2.	No lighting or electrical service shall be provided without an electrical permit;3.	No structure associated with the temporary use shall be erected without a building permit;4.	All structures shall be cleared from the site within 5 days after the use is terminated;5.	No temporary use structure shall block fire lanes or pedestrian or vehicular access;6.	The site of the temporary use shall be cleared of all debris at the end of the use;7.	Written permission of the property owner for the temporary use shall be provided;8.	Adequate parking shall be provided;9.	Required parking for other uses shall remain available;10.	Evidence that adequate traffic control measures shall be provided;11.	Evidence that adequate provisions for trash disposal and sanitary facilities shall be provided; and12.	When appropriate, adequate provisions for crowd control shall be provided.E.	Revocation of Temporary Use PermitIf any conditions of a temporary use permit are violated, the temporary use permit may be revoked by the Development Services Director.Sec. 10.2.14. Written InterpretationA.	ApplicabilityThe Zoning Administrator is authorized to make interpretations concerning the provisions of this UDO.B.	Application Requirements1.	An application for an interpretation of this UDO shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.2.	A Written Interpretation Application must be completed in order to process a request for a written interpretation.C.	Zoning Administrator Action1.	The Zoning Administrator shall review and evaluate the request for written interpretation in light of the text of this UDO, the Official Zoning Map and any other relevant information.2.	Following review, the Zoning Administrator shall render a written opinion within 5 working days after a completed application for a written interpretation is filed. Pursuant to Sec. 10.2.1.C.6., the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant and the property owner (if the property owner is not the applicant and the question of interpretation relates to a specific tract of land) of the interpretation.3.	All appeals of the Zoning Administrator's written interpretation shall be made to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Sec. 10.2.11














































. 




D.	
Official Record


The Planning Director shall maintain an official record of all interpretations. The record of interpretations shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours.
Sec. 10.2.15. 
Certificate of Appropriateness

A.	
	Jurisdiction
1.	
	The Historic Development Commission has jurisdiction for certificates of appropriateness for the exterior of all properties within the -HOD-G and -HOD-S. 

2.	
	The Historic Development Commission has jurisdiction for certificates of appropriateness for the exterior of Historic Landmarks within Raleigh’s zoning jurisdiction. 

3.	
	The Historic Development Commission has jurisdiction for certificates of appropriateness for all designated interior spaces of Historic Landmarks within Raleigh’s zoning jurisdiction. 



B.	
	Expiration of Certificate of Appropriateness
1.	
A certificate of appropriateness shall expire 6 months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the certificate has not been commenced. 

2.	
If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the permit shall immediately expire. 

3.	
	A certificate of appropriateness authorizing demolition shall expire if the work has not been commenced within 6 months after the authorization date set by the Commission. If after commencement the demolition work is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the approval shall immediately expire. 

4.	
	No work authorized by any certificate that has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new certificate has been secured. 



C.	
	Application
1.	
	All applications for a certificate of appropriateness are to be filed in the location noted on the current application form provided by the City. 

2.	
The application shall be filed in accordance with the City's filing calendar on the form provided by the City. 

3.	
	The application must be accompanied by sketches, drawings, photographs, specifications, descriptions and other information of sufficient detail to clearly show the proposed exterior alterations, alterations to designated interior features of Historic Landmarks, additions, changes or new construction. The names and mailing addresses of property owners filing or subject to the application and the addresses of property within 100 feet on all sides of the property which is the subject of the application must also be filed. Multiple copies of the application shall be provided when so required by the instructions on the form provided by the City. No incomplete applications will be accepted. 

4.	
Staff may advise the applicant and make recommendations with regard to appropriateness based upon the adopted historic development standards. 



D.	
Action on Application for Certificate of Appropriateness
1.	
	Deadline




Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be acted upon within 90 days after the complete application is filed, otherwise the application shall be deemed to be approved and a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued; provided however, that the Commission may take the matter under advisement for a total period of up to 180 days to receive additional evidence or memoranda of authority requested by the Commission for its consideration. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit an extension of time where mutual consent is given. 
2.	
	Minor Works


Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Director may issue a certificate of appropriateness for minor works. 
a.	
	Defined


Minor works are defined as those changes that do not involve substantial alterations, additions or removals that could impair the integrity of the Landmark property or the Historic Overlay District as a whole. Minor works are limited to those listed in the “Bylaws and Rules of Procedure” of the Historic Development Commission.
b.	
	Procedure
i.	
	Applications for minor works shall be reviewed by the Planning Director according to the applicable historic development standards. 

ii.	
	A report describing all certificates of appropriateness for minor works shall be forwarded to the Historic Development Commission, for its information, at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 

iii.	
	Failure to approve the requested minor work by the Planning Director shall in no way interfere with the applicant’s right to be heard by the Historic Development Commission—no application for a certificate of appropriateness may be denied without formal action by the Historic Development Commission. 

iv.	
Appeals of administrative decisions to approval a Minor Work are heard by the Historic Development Commission. Notice of appeal shall be filed with the Department of City Planning within 30 days after the date the application for Minor Works was affirmatively decided. An appeal stays all work on the approved Minor Work during the review period of the Historic Development Commission.




3.	
	Notice
a.	
	Whenever a hearing on the application is to be heard by the Commission, City Planning shall make a reasonable attempt to identify and notify by mail the owners of property within 100 feet on all sides of the property that is the subject of the pending application. 

b.	
	Mailed notices are for the convenience of the property owners and occupants and any defect or their omission shall not impair the validity of issuing a certificate of appropriateness or any following action. 



4.	
	Hearing
a.	
City Planning shall transmit the application for a certificate of appropriateness, together with the supporting material, to the review body for its consideration. 

b.	
	Prior to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness by the Commission, the applicant and persons meeting the criteria of G.S. 160-A-393 shall be given the opportunity to be heard at the hearing. 

c.	
	All meetings of the Historic Development Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with the North Carolina open meetings law, N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 143, Article 33B. 

d.	
	Interior arrangement shall not be considered by the review body and no certificate of appropriateness is required for interior repairs or renovations, except for designated interior features of Historic Landmarks as allowed in Sec. 10.2.16.D.2.

e.	
	The review body shall not refuse to issue a certificate of appropriateness except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, outdoor advertising signs or other significant features in the –HOD-G, -HOD-S or for Historic Landmarks, which would be incongruous with the special character of the district or Landmark. 

f.	
	The Commission shall render its decision in written form, including its reasons for issuing or denying the certificate and a summary of any citation to the evidence, testimony, studies or other authority upon which it based its decision. 

g.	
	Without objection from any interested parties, the Historic Development Commission may hold summary proceedings on Certificates of Appropriateness. Such proceedings shall be a public meeting and the Commission’s decision shall be rendered in written form. 

h.	
	In all proceedings or public hearings before the Historic Development Commission with regard to an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the burden of producing substantial evidence or testimony is upon the applicant and if the applicant fails to do so, the Commission shall deny the certificate. 

i.	
	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this UDO, the Historic Development Commission may require additional evidence or memoranda of authority to be submitted and may take the matter under advisement until such evidence or memoranda have been submitted and considered up to the 180-day limit established above. 

j.	
	As part of its deliberation, the Commission may view the premises and seek the advice of the North Carolina Division of Archives and History or such other expert advice as it may deem necessary under the circumstances. 

k.	
	The Commission’s action on the application shall be approval, approval with conditions, deferral or denial.

l.	
Notice of decision shall be provided as required in Sec. 10.2.1.C.6. 




E.	
Demolition of Buildings, Structures and Sites
1.	
General




An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, structure or site within any Historic Overlay District or Historic Landmark may not be denied except as provided below for Statewide Significance. However, the authorization date of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to 365 days from the date of issuance. The maximum period of delay authorized by this section shall be reduced by the Commission where it finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During such period of delay the Commission may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building, structure or site. If the Commission finds that the building, structure or site has no particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the Historic Overlay District or Historic Landmark, it shall waive all or part of such period and authorize earlier demolition or removal. 
2.	
	Pending Historic Landmark and within a Pending -HOD-G or -HOD-S
a.	
	Where the Historic Development Commission has voted to recommend designation of a property as a Historic Landmark or an area as a -HOD-G or -HOD-S and final designation has not been made by the City Council, the demolition or destruction of any building, site or structure proposed as a Landmark or located in the proposed district may be delayed by the Commission for a period of up to 180 days or until the City Council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs first. 

b.	
	Should the Council approve the designation prior to the expiration of the 180-day delay period, an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition must then be filed; however, the maximum period of authorization date delay for such demolition certificate shall be reduced by the Commission equal to the period of delay while the designation was pending. 



3.	
Statewide Significance


An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, structure or site determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be denied except where the Commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. 
4.	
	Compliance with Other Law


Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant, contractor, tenant or property owner from obtaining any other permit required by this UDO or any law.
F.	
Appeals
1.	
In any action by the Historic Development Commission granting or denying any certificate of appropriateness issued as a summary proceeding or following a quasi-judicial public hearing, an appeal by an aggrieved party may be taken to the Board of Adjustment. To perfect such an appeal, written notice of intent to appeal must be provided to the Historic Development Commission, within 20 days following the effective date of decision. A completed application for appeal of a Raleigh Historic Development Commission decision, including all papers constituting the record, must then be filed with the Board of Adjustment within 35 days following the effective date of decision of the Commission. Effective date of decision occurs when the minutes of the proceeding are approved by the Commission. Appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari.

2.	
The State of North Carolina shall have a right of appeal to the North Carolina Historical Commission or any successor agency. Notice to the Historic Development Commission shall be served on the same day and in the same manner as for the North Carolina Historical Commission unless oral notice of appeal is given to the Historic Development Commission during the meeting at which the decision is rendered. The decision of the North Carolina Historical Commission shall be final and binding upon both the state and the Historic Development Commission. 



G.	
	Effect of Conflict with Other Ordinances


Whenever any ordinance adopted pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. Part 3C, Article 19, Chapter 160A requires a longer waiting period or imposes other higher standards with respect to a designated historic landmark or designated –HOD-G or –HOD-S than are established under any other statute, charter provision or regulation, Part 3C shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, charter provision, ordinance or regulation require a longer waiting period or impose other higher standards than are established under general statute such other statute, charter provision, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
 
Sec. 10.2.16. 
Historic Landmark Designation 

A.	
	Applicability
1.	
	The City Council shall designate Historic Landmarks.

2.	
	Designations and amendments shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. Removing the designation from a Historic Landmark shall also follow the provisions of this section.



B.	
Application Requirements
1.	
	Designation Reports




The Historic Development Commission shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation and report on the historical, prehistorical, architectural, archaeological and cultural significance of each building, structure, site, area or object proposed for designation. Applications prepared by owners will be judged by the same criteria as those prepared by the commission. Such reports shall contain the following information:
a.	
	The name of the property to be considered for designation—both common and historic names, if they can be determined; 

b.	
	The name and address of the current property owner; 

c.	
	The location of the property proposed to be designated historic, including the street address and County tax map and parcel numbers or the parcel identification number; 

d.	
	The date of construction and of any later alterations, if any; 

e.	
	An assessment of the significance of the site or structure based on the criteria for designation cited below;

f.	
	An architectural or archaeological description of the area of the site or structure proposed to be designated. If outbuildings or other appurtenant features are proposed to be designated, the report shall contain a description of those features;

g.	
	A historical discussion of the site or structure within its type, period and locality;

h.	
	Archival photographs and/or digital images that clearly depict the property proposed to be designated, including views of all facades, pertinent details and siting, as outlined in the supporting information requirements of the current form for Historic Landmark Designation provided by the City; and

i.	
	A map showing the location of the property, including any outbuildings and appurtenant features. 


2.	
Elements of Ordinances Designating Historic Landmarks:


Ordinances designating historic landmarks shall contain the following elements which shall: 
a.	
Describe each property designated in the ordinance, including the approximate area of the property so designated; 

b.	
List the name or names of the owner or owners of the property; 

c.	
Describe those elements of the property that are integral to its historical, prehistorical, architectural, archaeological and/or cultural significance; 

d.	
Describe the nature of the commission's jurisdiction over the interior, if any and those interior features of the property to be reviewed for certificates of appropriateness if they are to be changed; 

e.	
Require, for each building, structure, site, area or object designated as an historic landmark that the waiting period set forth in the general statutes be observed prior to its demolition;

f.	
Provide, for each designated historic landmark, a suitable sign or plaque indicating that the property has been so designated. If the owner consents, the sign or plaque shall be placed upon the property; if the owner objects, the sign or plaque shall be placed on a nearby public right-of-way; and

g.	
Recite any other information the governing body deems necessary within the authority conferred by the General Statutes. 


C.	
Approval Process


Ordinances designating Historic Landmarks shall be adopted and amended according to the following procedure.
1.	
Planning Director Action


The Planning Director shall review the designation report and ordinance for conformance to the Application Requirements and provide a report to the Historic Development Commission and City Council that the documents are in conformance with this UDO’s requirements. 
2.	
Historic Development Commission Recommendation


The Commission shall forward its recommendation on the report to the City Council. The Council shall refer the report to the State Department of Cultural Resources, Office of Archives and History.
3.	
	Department of Cultural Resources Action


The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the State Historic Preservation Officer or designee, may make an analysis of and recommendations concerning the report. If the Department does not submit its written comments or recommendations in connection with any proposed designation within 30 days following a written request for such analysis has been received by the department, the Commission and the City Council shall be relieved of any responsibility to consider such comments.
4.	
	Historic Development Commission and City Council Joint Public Hearing
a.	
	The Historic Development Commission and the City Council shall hold a joint public hearing on the report and proposed ordinance. 

b.	
	Notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper generally circulated within the City. Written notice of the hearing shall also be mailed by the Historic Development Commission to all owners and occupants of properties whose identity and current mailing address can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence. 

c.	
	All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than 10 nor more than 25 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 

d.	
	The mailed notices in this subsection are for the convenience of property owners and occupants and any defect or their omission therein shall not impair the validity of the public hearing or any action following therefrom.

e.	
	Following the Joint Public Hearing, the City Council shall refer the proposed ordinance to the Commission for final review and recommendation.



5.	
	Historic Development Commission Action
a.	
	Taking into consideration the written comments and recommendations of the Department of Cultural Resources and information received during the Public Hearing, if any, the commission shall make a final recommendation to City Council. The commission may recommend any amendments to the report or ordinance.

b.	
Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments, the commission shall give written notification of such designation to the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, insofar as reasonable diligence permits. 

c.	
One copy of the ordinance and each amendment shall be filed by the Historic Development Commission in the office of the County Register of Deeds. Each historic property designated as a historic landmark in the ordinance shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor indexes in the Register of Deeds office and the Historic Development Commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. A second copy of the ordinance and of each amendment shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office and shall be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A third copy of the ordinance and each amendment shall be given to the director of the Inspections Department.

d.	
	Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments, the Historic Development Commission shall give notice to the County tax assessor. The designation and any recorded restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes shall be considered by the assessor in appraising it for tax purposes. The fact that a building, structure, site, area or object has been designated a Historic Landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by the County or City for such period as the designation remains in effect.



6.	
	City Council Action


Following the joint public hearing and upon receipt of the Commission’s final recommendation, the City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary or reject the proposal. If the City Council rejects a designation report, a copy of the minutes of the meeting at which such a decision to reject the report was made shall be mailed to the owner of the property proposed for designation.
D.	
	Considerations for Approval 
1.	
Criteria for Designation




No building, structure, site, area or object shall be recommended for designation as a historic landmark unless it is deemed and found by the Historic Development Commission to be of special significance in terms of its historical, prehistorical, architectural, archaeological and cultural importance and to possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and association.
2.	
Limitations on Interior Designation and Review


Jurisdiction of the commission over interior spaces shall be limited to specific interior features of architectural, artistic or historical significance in publicly owned historic landmarks and of privately owned historic landmarks for which consent for interior review has been given by the owner. If an owner's consent has been filed in the office of the County Register of Deeds and indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor indexes, such consent shall bind future owners and/or successors in title. The ordinance establishing the historic designation shall specify the interior features to be reviewed and the specific nature of the commission's jurisdiction over those features. 
Sec. 10.2.17. 
Administrative Alternate  

A.	
Applicability


The Planning Director has the authority to approve a request for an administrative alternate as set forth in this UDO.  All administrative alternates shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this section and the applicable administrative alternate findings.  Administrative alternates are not available for anything set forth in a zoning condition. 
B.	
Application Requirements
1.	
 An application for an administrative alternate shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B. A request for an administrative alternate must be submitted at the time of application for a preliminary subdivision plan, plot plan or site plan or at such time the administrative alternate is proposed in conjunction with the review of infrastructure construction plans, a plot plan or site plan.  2.	An application for an administrative alternate must be signed and notarized by the property owner in order to initiate a request for an alternate. 3.	The applicant shall submit pertinent material necessary for review of the alternate; in addition to the submittal material required for a subdivision, plot plan or site plan. This may include architectural renderings, materials samples or other project-specific information.C.	Approval Process1.	Appearance Commission Review a.	In reviewing the administrative alternate, the Planning Director shall consult with the heads of the Public Utilities, Engineering Services, Transportation, Parks and Cultural Resources, Development Services and Fire Departments to check the proposed request against the requirements of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City. b.	Within 15 days of receipt of the completed application the Planning Director shall refer the request to the next scheduled Appearance Commission meeting. c.	Following the submission of a completed application, the Appearance Commission, shall hold a public meeting on the proposed amendment that shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 10.2.1.C.1. and Sec. 10.2.1.C.3.d.	The Appearance Commission shall review the request, giving consideration to the intent statements and findings listed for each alternate requested.  e.	Within 21 days of its initial public meeting when the matter was first discussed, the Appearance Commission shall recommend to the Planning Director approval, approval with conditions or denial of the requested administrative alternate. 2.	Planning Director Decision  a.	The Planning Director shall consider the applicable intent statements and the administrative alternate findings for the  requested administrative alternate and either  approve, approve with conditions or deny the request.b.	The reasons for such approval or disapproval shall be stated in writing. In accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.C.6., notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and the property owner (if the property owner is not the applicant) and to each person who has filed a written request for notice with the Planning Director prior to their decision. c.	Within 30 days from the date the application was decided, an appeal of the Planning Director’s action may be filed with the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Sec. 10.2.11.Sec. 10.2.18. Design AdjustmentA.	 ApplicabilityThe Board of Adjustment has the authority to approve a request for design adjustments to Articles 8.3










, 8.4 and 8.5. All design adjustments shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the UDO, including this section and the applicable design adjustment findings. Any design adjustment approved pursuant to this section shall be incorporated into its corresponding site plan or subdivision approval, and shall expire, if at all, upon expiration of such corresponding site plan or subdivision approval.
B.	
Application Requirements
1.	
An application for a design adjustment shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B. A request for an design adjustment must be submitted at the time of application for a preliminary subdivision plan, plot plan or site plan or at such time the design adjustment is proposed in conjunction with the review of infrastructure construction plans, a plot plan or site plan.  2.	An application for a design adjustment must be signed and notarized by the property owner in order to initiate a request for an adjustment. 3.	The applicant shall submit pertinent material necessary for review; in addition to the submittal material required for a subdivision, plot plan or site plan. This may include detailed landscape plans, roadway cross-sections, site or subdivision layout or other project-specific information.C.	Board of Adjustment Action 1.	The Board of Adjustment shall consider the applicable design adjustment findings for the request and either approve, approve with conditions or deny the request.2.	Following notice as required in Sec. 10.1.8



. and Sec. 10.2.1.C, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.D.



Sec. 10.2.19. 
Vested Rights

A.	
Applicability


Those landowners desiring the protections granted by N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-385.1 may, at their own option, request the City Council to hold a public hearing on an site plan.
B.	
Application Requirements


An application for a vested right determination shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 10.2.1.B.C.	City Council Action1.	Following notice as required in Sec. 10.1.8., the City Council shall hold a quasi-judicial public hearing as set forth in Sec. 10.2.1.D.1.2.	The City Council may impose conditions and terms on any site plan or plot plan for which a vested rights hearing has been requested by the landowner.3.	Before a request for a vested right is granted, the City Council must find that all of the following are met:a.	The approved site plan or plot plan complies with all applicable provisions of this UDO and other applicable technical requirements of the City.b.	If the approved site plan or plot plan was conditionally approved upon the obtaining of any governmental approval and or street closing, such governmental approvals and street closings were in fact obtained. c.	Access with respect to pedestrian, bicycle and automotive safety, traffic flow and emergency service is adequate.d.	The lot upon which the site plan or plot plan is located complies with approved subdivision plans for the site.e.	The site plan or plot plan coordinates with existing and planned public facilities, such as and without limitation: i.	Stormwater drainages structures;ii.	Public utilities;iii.	Street and sidewalk and on-street parking;iv.	Parks, greenways and governmental recreational facilities;v.	Fire stations and community service facilities;vi.	Trash collection; andvii.	Transit stops and facilities.4.	Approval of a vested rights site plan or plot plan with the condition that a variance or special use permit be obtained shall not confer a vested right unless and until the necessary variance or special use permit is obtained. In all other instances, the approved plan shall be deemed vested upon approval by the City Council. The City Council shall not require landowners to waive their vested rights as a condition of approval of the plan.D.	Action Following Approval 1.	Following the vesting of a site plan, the landowners and their successors shall be entitled to submit to Development Services, final plans, together with any valid building permit applications of the total area of any section or phase of the approved vested plan, within a period of not more than 2 years after the approval of the vested site plan or plot plan. 2.	If submissions were timely made and if within 3 years after approval of building permit applications, at least ½ of the total floor area gross shown on the vested plan is completed, building permit applications for the remaining portions of the vested site plan for which no previous valid building permit applications has been filed, shall be processed by the City for an additional period not exceeding 5 years from the approval date of the plan.3.	Following the approval or conditional approval of a vested site plan, nothing in this section shall exempt such plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval, the UDO existing at the time of approval and subsequent laws as permitted in Sec. 10.2.19.D.5. below. 4.	If noncompliance is discovered, revocation of the site plan or plot plan and remedies authorized by Article 10.4. Enforcement may be undertaken by the City, notwithstanding the vesting of the site plan. 5.	Site plans which are vested under this section shall be subject to new or amended zoning regulations as allowed by State law and such vested rights shall terminate for any of the reasons stated in N.C. Gen. Stat. 160A-385.1(e).Article 10.3. NonconformitiesSec. 10.3.1. In GeneralA.	Public SafetyRepairs required for public safety because of unsafe conditions or by either the Housing Code or North Carolina State Building Code may be made in any amount unless the repairs are caused by a casualty, in which case the provisions of Sec. 10.3.2.G. or Sec. 10.3.3.G.









 shall apply in lieu of this provision. 
B.	
Reservation of Authority


Notwithstanding the policies and provisions of this Article with respect to nonconformities, the City expressly reserves its authority to initiate criminal and civil proceedings against unlawful uses, buildings, structures and lots, including those which unlawfully existed here before and to control or abate noxious uses, to require the repair or demolition of unsafe buildings or structures or to control or eliminate public health nuisances through the exercise of any powers authorized by the City Code and the North Carolina General Statutes.
C.	
Right-of-Way Acquisition


Public acquisition of right-of-way shall not render a property nonconforming.
Sec. 10.3.2. 
Nonconforming Uses

A.	
Authority to Continue
1.	
Subject to the provisions of this Article or any amortization provision, any lawfully existing nonconforming use may continue in operation on the same land area and on the same floor area of the structure that was occupied by the nonconforming use on the date the use first became a nonconforming use. The continuation of a nonconforming use shall not be constructed to permit an increase in the number of dwelling units or a reduction of land area to the number of dwelling units.

2.	
Subject to the provisions of this Article or any amortization provision, any lawfully existing nonconforming structure may continue to occupy the same land area within the existing configuration and size of the structure which existed on the date the structure first became a nonconforming structure.



B.	
Ordinary Repair and Maintenance


Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, installation or relocation of non-bearing walls or non-bearing partitions, adding facilities to improve handicapped accessibility, painting, energy conservation, fencing and landscaping, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of Sec. 10.3.2.C. through Sec. 10.3.2.G. Expenditures in any amount may be to either bring the nonconformity into full compliance with this UDO or to amortize the nonconformity. C.	ExtensionsA nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in intensity, unless a special use permit is issued by the Board of Adjustment for such extension or expansion. Such prohibited activity shall include, without being limited to:1.	Extension of the use to any structure or land area other than that occupied by the nonconforming use on September 1, 2013, or any amendment to this UDO that causes a use of the property to become otherwise nonconforming.2.	Extension of the use within a building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by the nonconforming use on September 1, 2013, or when an amendment to this UDO causes the use to become otherwise nonconforming.3.	Operation of the nonconforming use in such a manner as to conflict with this UDO, or to further conflict with this UDO, if already conflicting as of September 1, 2013, or any amendments to this UDO is applied to the property, any use limitations established for the district in which the use is located.4.	New construction, reconstruction or structural alteration except those described as ordinary repair and maintenance in Sec. 10.3.2.B. above.5.	Extensions of the use to any new construction, enlargement or additions other than that occupied by the nonconforming use on September 1, 2013, or any amendment to this UDO that causes a use of the property to become otherwise nonconforming.D.	Relocation1.	No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be relocated in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other tract or lot unless the entire structure and the use of the structure shall conform to all the regulations of the district to which the structure and use are relocated. 2.	No nonconforming use of land shall be relocated in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other lot unless such use conforms to all the regulations of the district to which the use of land is relocated.E.	Change in UseA nonconforming use of land or of a structure shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which the land or structure is located. When a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall only be used thereafter for a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. For purposes of this paragraph, a use shall be deemed to have been changed when an existing nonconforming use has been terminated and the permitted use has commenced and continued for a period of 7 days.F.	Abandonment or Discontinuance1.	When a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of part or all of a structure is discontinued, vacated or abandoned for a period of 365 consecutive days or more, the use shall not be reestablished or resumed.2.	Operation of any nonconforming use without a license or permit required of the owner or operator, for 365 consecutive days, shall constitute a termination of the nonconforming use. 3.	Following the abandonment or discontinuation of a nonconforming use, any subsequent use or occupancy of land or structure shall comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which the land or structure is located.G.	Damage or Destruction1.	In the event that a conforming structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to such damage, such structure shall not be restored unless the structure and the use will conform to all regulations of the district in which the structure and use are located or unless a special use permit is issued by the Board of Adjustment for such restoration. 2.	In the event that a conforming structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or partially destroyed, by exercise of eminent domain riot, fire, accident explosion, flood, lightning, wind or other calamity or natural cause to the extent of 50% or less of the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to such damage, such structure may be repaired and reconstructed and used for the same purposes and degree as it was before the damage or destruction, provided that such repair or reconstruction is commenced with a valid building permit within 12 months of the date of such damage or destruction. 3.	If a nonconforming use is located within an Airport Overlay District, the following shall apply:a.	No renovation, maintenance or repair shall be made if the damage or destruction is more than 80% of its replacement cost immediately prior to such damage, unless the nonconformity is brought into compliance with this UDO; or b.	A special use permit is issued by the Board of Adjustment for such restoration and the restoration does not create a greater hazard to navigation than the previously existing nonconformity. 4.	Replacement cost shall be determined by either:  a.	The median value based Square Foot Costs established by the most recent edition of Building Construction Cost Data published by R.S. Means; or b.	The most recent tax value for building as reported in the county tax office where the property is located. The property owner shall decide which of the 2 methods for determining replacement cost is to be used.5.	The percent of damage shall be calculated by using the selected replacement value of the entire structure as the denominator and by using the selected replacement value of the damaged portion of the structure as the numerator. The same method used to determine replacement value for the denominator must be used. Sec. 10.3.3. Nonconforming Principal Structures A.	ApplicabilityThis section applies to all nonconforming principal structures and not to nonconforming accessory buildings, accessory structures, fences, signs, off-street parking, vehicular surface areas, private access points and outdoor lighting (see Sec. 10.3.4.).B.	Authority to ContinueSubject to the provisions of this Article or any amortization provision, any lawfully existing nonconforming structure may continue to occupy the same land area within the existing configuration and size of the structure which existed on the date the structure first became a nonconforming so long as it remains otherwise lawful.C.	Ordinary Repair and Maintenance1.	Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, installation or relocation of non-bearing walls or non-bearing partitions, adding facilities to improve handicapped accessibility, energy conservation, painting, fencing and landscaping, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any nonconforming structure; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of Sec. 10.3.3.C. through Sec. 10.3.3.F. Expenditures in any amount may be to either bring the nonconformity into full compliance with this UDO or to amortize the nonconformity.2.	Repairs maintenance and renovations to nonconforming residential buildings (detached house, attached house, townhouse and apartment) used exclusively for household living as set forth in Sec. 6.2.1. may be made in any amount and for any purpose except as restricted by Sec. 10.3.3.D. or Sec. 10.3.3.G.1. below. D.	EnlargementAny nonconforming structure used for a conforming use may be enlarged or altered in any amount; provided, however, that no enlargement, maintenance, repair or alteration shall either create an additional nonconformity or increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure, and the enlargement or alteration complies with all requirements and regulations of this UDO.E.	RelocationNo nonconforming structure shall be relocated in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure conforms to the regulations of the district to which such structure is relocated.F.	Voluntary DemolitionNothing shall be deemed to permit the reconstruction of any part of a nonconforming structure or building that has been voluntarily demolished except in full conformity with the provisions of the UDO.G.	Damage or Destruction1.	In the event that a nonconforming structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a conforming use is damaged or partially destroyed, by exercise of eminent domain, riot, fire, accident, explosion, flood, lightning, wind or other calamity or natural cause to the extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to such damage, such structure shall not be restored unless the structure and the use will conform to all regulations of the district in which the structure and use are located or unless a special use permit is issued by the Board of Adjustment for such restoration.2.	In the event that a nonconforming structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a conforming use is damaged or destroyed, by any means other than voluntary demolition, to the extent of 50% or less the replacement cost of the structure immediately prior to such damage, such structure may be repaired and reconstructed and used for the same purposes and degree as it was before the damage or destruction, provided that such repair or reconstruction is commenced with a valid building permit within 12 months of the date of such damage or destruction.3.	If the nonconforming structure is located within an Airport Overlay District, the following shall apply:a.	No renovation, maintenance or repair shall be made if the damage or destruction is more than 80% of its replacement cost immediately prior to such damage, unless the nonconformity is brought into compliance with this UDO; or b.	A special use permit is issued by the Board of Adjustment for such restoration and the restoration does not create a greater hazard to navigation than the previously existing nonconformity. 4.	Replacement cost shall be determined by either: a.	The most recent edition of Building Construction Cost Data published by R.S. Means; or b.	The most recent tax value for building as reported in the county tax office where the property is located. The property owner shall decide which of the 2 methods for determining replacement cost is to be used.5.	The percentage of damage shall be calculated by using the selected replacement value of the entire structure as the denominator and by using the selected replacement value of the damaged portion of the structure as the numerator. The same method used to determine replacement value for the denominator must be used. 6.	Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent the rebuilding, reconstruction or restoration of the same structure because such structure fails to conform to the standards of a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District. H.	Replacement of Manufactured HomesReplacement of nonconforming manufactured homes that fail to meet the minimum standards of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards shall be permitted, provided that all of the following are met: 1.	The replacement manufactured home meets the current minimum required standards as prescribed by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 2.	The newly installed manufactured home, if located in a flood prone area, complies with the provisions of Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations.3.	That the period of time between the time the nonconforming manufactured home is removed and the time it is replaced with a standard manufactured home is less than 365 days. 4.	The number of manufactured homes is not increased. 5.	The floor area gross of the new manufactured home does not exceed the floor area gross of the manufactured home it replaced by more than 25%. Sec. 10.3.4. Nonconforming Site ElementsSubject to the provisions contained in this section and all other applicable provi­
sions of this UDO, one or more of the following activities and improvements can be made to nonconforming accessory buildings, accessory structures, outdoor lighting, fences, walls, signs, off-street parking, vehicular surface areas and private access points. Improvements and activities that are not explicitly authorized by in this section are not allowed. The following allowed activities and improvements can be initiated without the issuance of a special use permit by the Board of Adjustment.A.	Renovation, Ordinary Maintenance and Repair1.	The cost of renovation and ordinary maintenance and repair to any nonconforming accessory building, accessory structure, fence, walls, vehicular surface area, private access point and outdoor lighting shall not during any 1 calendar year exceeds 15% of the tax value of the zoning nonconforming site element in the county where the property is located, or the original cost of the nonconforming site element if there is no listed tax value.2.	The limitation on expenditures established here does not apply to Sec. 10.3.4.B. through Sec. 10.3.4.G. below. 3.	Ordinary maintenance and repair shall be limited to work necessary to maintain and correct any damage, other than caused by casualty, or deterioration to the structural soundness or features of an accessory building, accessory structure, fence, vehicular surface area, private access point or outdoor lighting. 4.	For damage to any nonconformity that is caused by any casualty, the provisions of Sec. 10.3.4.B. below apply in lieu of this provision. 5.	The regulations for ordinary maintenance and repair of nonconforming signs are set forth in Sec. 7.3.17.B.		CasualtiesThe rebuilding, reconstruction or restoring of any nonconforming accessory building, accessory structure, fence, walls, vehicular surface area, private access point and outdoor lighting which was damaged or partially destroyed by a casualty, which includes the exercise of eminent domain, riot, fire, accident, explosion, lightning, flood, wind or other calamity or natural act, is allowed provided all of the following conditions are met: 1.	The cost of rebuilding, reconstructing and restoring the nonconforming site element is less than 50% of either its listed property tax value of the nonconforming site element in the county where the property is located or, if there is no listed property tax value, the original cost of the nonconforming site element. 2.	The nature and degree of the nonconformity is not expanded, extended or increased from that which existed prior to the damage or destruction, nor is it altered or changed except as otherwise allowed as a renovation in Sec. 10.3.4.A. above. a.	Reconstruction and repair is commenced with a valid building permit within 12 months of the date of such damage or destruction.b.	If the cost of the rebuilding, reconstruction or restoration will be 50% or more of either the listed property tax value of the nonconforming site element in the county where the property is located or if there is no listed property tax value the original cost of the nonconforming site element, the nonconforming accessory building, accessory structure, fence, vehicular surface area, private access point or outdoor lighting shall not be rebuilt, reconstructed or restored except in compliance with this UDO. C.	ExpansionsAdditions to the number of off-street parking spaces and expansions to vehicular surface areas shall be governed by Article 7.1. Parking. In addition, expansions to vehicular surface areas to serve any zoning nonconforming use shall in addition to these standards be subject to all the requirements of Sec. 10.3.6.A.3.D.	ResumptionsAny nonconforming accessory building, accessory structure, sign, vehicular surface area, private access point or outdoor lighting, which is discontinued, unused or unoccupied for a continuous period of 365 days or more may not be restarted, resumed or reoccupied.E.	Substitution of Impervious SurfacesSubstitution of impervious surfaces for 1 use, facility, building or structure, vehicular surface area or access point to another provided all of the following are met: 1.		The amount and extent of impervious surfaces is not increased. 2.		The placement of those new impervious surfaces conforms to the requirements of this UDO. 3.		The impervious surface is for a lawful activity. F.	Zoning Nonconformities Brought Into ComplianceExpenditures to bring any nonconforming accessory building, accessory structure, fence, wall, sign, off-street parking, vehicular surface areas, private access point or outdoor lighting into full compliance with the City Code are allowed in any amount. The owner may secure any permit or approval and make any alteration that will bring the zoning nonconformity into full compliance. G.	Amortizing a NonconformityExpenditures required by this UDO to remove a nonconforming site element or bring it into conformity with the UDO are permitted in any amount. Sec. 10.3.5. Nonconforming Lots of RecordA.	Authority to use For Single-Unit LivingIn any district in which a single-unit living detached house is allowed as a permitted use, notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any other provisions of this UDO, a single-unit living detached house which complies with the restrictions of Sec. 10.3.5.B. below may be erected on a nonconforming lot that:1.	Has less than the prescribed minimum lot area or width; and2.	Is shown by a recorded plan or deed to have been a lot of record owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot or tract of such area and depth at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning or other ordinance.B.	Regulations for Single-Family Use of Nonconforming LotsA nonconforming lot authorized to be used pursuant to Sec. 10.3.5.A. above may be used for a single-unit living detached house and permitted accessory uses and structures. Construction of the single-unit living detached house shall comply with all the regulations, except lot area or width, applicable to the detached house in the district in which the lot is located, unless a variance is granted pursuant to Sec. 10.2.10.Sec. 10.3.6. Special Use Permits for NonconformitiesA.	Special Use Permit RequiredAll special use permits authorized in this section shall be processed, noticed and heard in accordance with Sec. 10.2.9. After the issuance of a special use permit by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Sec. 10.3.6.B., one or more of the following activities can be made to a zoning nonconformity.1.		Repair and maintenance work not authorized by either Sec. 10.3.2.B. or Sec. 10.3.3.C.2.		Fixing and replacing damage and destruction authorized by Sec. 10.3.2.G.1. and Sec. 10.3.2.G.3. and by Sec. 10.3.3.G.1. and Sec. 10.3.3.G.3.b.3.		The expansion, extension or alteration of a nonconforming use or vehicular surfaces serving a nonconforming use (including nonconforming principal use parking facilities) when all of the following are met: a.	The expansion, extension or alteration complies with all requirements of this UDO including but not limited to: height, bulk, setback, off-street parking, impervious surface coverage and access. b.	The expansion, of a nonconforming use does not, singularly or collectively, exceed 25% of the total gross area occupied by the original nonconforming use. If the original nonconforming use occupied a portion of a building and that building has not been enlarged since the establishment of the nonconformity, that original nonconforming use may be extended beyond 25% within the interior portions of the building. 4.	The change of an existing nonconforming use to another nonconforming use provided that all of the following are met: a.	The use will have no greater adverse effect on the surrounding property in terms of automobile or truck traffic, on-street parking, noise, stormwater, vibration and hours of nighttime operation than the existing use. b.	Any change to a limited use or special use complies with applicable requirements of Chapter 6. Use Regulations.c.	The proposed substitute nonconforming use is allowed in the zoning district of the highest classification in which the existing nonconforming use would be a conforming use. The determination of the classification of the use shall be based on Planning Director. d.	Once a nonconforming use is changed to a higher classification, it may not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use of a lower classification, including a change back to the original nonconforming use. e.	The substitution of a nonconforming impervious surface for another, the replacement of a substandard nonconforming manufactured home and the change of use of a nonconforming use to a conforming use may all be done without a special use permit from the Board of Adjustment if the applicable provisions of Sec. 10.3.4.E., Sec 10.3.3.H., Sec. 10.3.3.C.1. and Sec. 10.3.2.B. are met.5.	The relocation onto its same premise of either a nonconformity or a nonconforming private access point, is allowed; provided the relocation reduces the extent of the nonconformity and more closely conforms to the standards contained in this UDO. 6.	The enlargement or alteration of any nonconforming structure used for a conforming use that creates an additional nonconformity or increases the degree of the existing nonconformity is allowed provided the enlargement or alteration of all or any part of such structure, does not exceed, singularly or collectively, 25% of the floor area gross of the original nonconforming structure, and the enlargement or alteration complies with all other requirements and regulations of this UDO.B.	Showings for Granting Special Use Permit for Nonconformities1.	Before a request for the special use permit is granted, the Board of Adjustment must show that all of the following are met: a.	The applicable standards of this section have been met;b.	 All of the showings of Sec. 10.2.9.E. have been met; and c.		The requested repair, reconstruction, expansion, change of use to a different nonconforming use or relocation will not be injurious to property or improvements in the affected area. 2.	In acting upon a petition for a special use permit, the Board cannot order the discontinuance or termination of the nonconformity. 3.	If a special use petition is denied, the continuation of the nonconformity and the activities allowed in Sec. 10.3.2. and Sec. 10.3.3. without a special use permit is still allowed unless otherwise prohibited by law. This policy is adopted to encourage the owners of nonconformities to apply for special use permits to improve and bring into conformance to the extent possible their property. Article 10.4. EnforcementSec. 10.4.1. Violations and ViolatorsA.	Each of the following are declared to be violations of the Raleigh City Code:1.	Any person owning, leasing, using, managing or occupying any building, sign, structure or land where there is placed, removed, altered, expanded or there now exists any thing contrary to Chapter 1. Introductory Provisions through Chapter 7. General Development Standards and Chapter 11. Building and Housing Code; any regulation, rule or order adopted pursuant to the applicable chapter; any certificate of appropriateness, conditional use, special use permit or variance issued pursuant to this UDO; or a lawful plan approved under this UDO. 2.	Any architect, designer, engineer, agent or any other person who acts in concert, participates, directs or assists in the creation or continuation of a violation of Chapter 1. Introductory Provisions through Chapter 7. General Development Standards and Chapter 11. Building and Housing Code; any regulation, rule or order adopted pursuant to this UDO; any certificate or appropriateness, conditional use, special use permit or variance issued pursuant to this UDO; or a lawful plan approved under this UDO. 3.	Any builder, contractor or any other person who shall erect, expand, relocate, reconstruct, alter or use any land, structure, sign, tree or building contrary to Chapter 1. Introductory Provisions through Chapter 7. General Development Standards and Chapter 11. Building and Housing Code; any regulation, rule or order adopted pursuant to this UDO; any certificate of appropriateness, conditional use, special use permit or variance issued pursuant to this UDO; or a lawful plan approved under this UDO. 4.	Any person, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to do any act as required by Chapter 1. Introductory Provisions through Chapter 7. General Development Standards and Chapter 11. Building and Housing Code; any regulation, rule or order adopted pursuant to this UDO; any certificate of appropriateness, conditional use, special use permit or variance issued pursuant to this UDO; or a lawful plan approved under this UDO. B.	The term “lawful plan” as used here shall mean a plot plan, site plan, Master Plan, Neighborhood Plan or Streetscape Plan.C.	The terms contrary to or violation of a lawful plan include the establishment, creation, expansion, alteration, relocation, occupancy or continuation of any use, building or structure for which a plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions and provisions of the approved lawful plan.D.	The enumeration of these declared violations shall not be deemed exclusive or all-inclusive. All persons who shall commit violations shall be held responsible and shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided in Sec. 1.1.10. and Sec. 10.4.2. Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct violation or offense. Sec. 10.4.2. Civil PenaltyA.	General1.	Any act constituting a violation of Chapter 1. Introductory Provisions through Chapter 7. General Development Standards and Chapter 11. Building and Housing Code shall subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the City in a civil action in the nature of a debt or as otherwise provided herein if the offended fails to pay the penalty within 48 hours from and after receipt of a citation of a violation. 2.	All violations shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 unless a higher amount is otherwise specified in this UDO; continuous violations shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount specified in subsection E., below.B.	Citation ContentsA zoning violation citation shall, among other things:1.	State upon its face the amount of the penalty for the specific violation if the penalty is paid within 48 hours from and after issuance of the citation.2.	Notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalty within the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature of debt for the stated penalty plus any additional penalties, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court.3.	Further provide that the offender may answer the City zoning citation by mailing the citation and the stated penalty to Post Office Box 590, Raleigh, North Carolina 27602 or may pay the amount at the cashier's window on the fourth floor, One Exchange Plaza.4.	That the penalty must be either paid or the failure to pay must be cleared with the City, within 48 hours of the issuance of the citation. The notice shall further state that if the zoning violation citation is not cleared within 48 hours, court action by the filing of a civil complaint for collection of the penalty may be taken. As used upon the zoning violation citation, the word "cleared" shall mean either:a.	Payment;b.	Arrangement for payment to be made; orc.	A prima facie showing to the City that the zoning citation was received as a result of mistake, inadvertence or excusable neglect.C.	Settlement of Civil Claim1.	The City is authorized to accept payment in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the City may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt.2.	 Acceptance of a penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all claims or right of action arising out of contended violations, only if the activities or non-activities which gave rise to the violations are abated or otherwise made lawful.D.	Additional PenaltyA penalty of $25, in addition to the one imposed for payment within 48 hours, shall apply in those cases in which the penalties prescribed in this section have not been paid within the prescribed 48 hour period and in which a civil action shall have been instituted.E.	Civil Penalties for Continuing Violations1.	No civil penalty shall be levied against the same person for the same continuing violation at the same location more than once unless and until the City shall provide to the person to be assessed continuing civil penalties a written notice containing the following:a.	The nature of the violation;b.	An order directing corrective action;c.	The date when corrective measures must be completed; andd.	A statement that failure to correct the violation by the specified date will result in the assessment of additional civil penalties and other enforcement action.2.	If after the allotted time period for corrective measures has expired and after the hearing of any appeal, if any, by the Board of Adjustment corrective action has not been completed, a civil penalty shall be assessed in the amount of $500 per day of continuing violation.3.	Written notices may be served by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail. Service by first class mail shall be deemed sufficient if:a.	The registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the first class mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing; andb.	The City has reasonable grounds to believe that the address used for the first class mailing is an address that will actually reach the person to be served.4.	If first class mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the violation exists.5.	If the identities or whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the City in the exercise of reasonable diligence, then the notice may be served by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City. The notice shall be published at least once and publication shall occur no less than 30 days prior to the deadline for corrective action contained in the notice. When the notice is served by publication, a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the violation exists.Sec. 10.4.3. Administrative FeeAny person who shall commit a violation of Chapter 1. Introductory Provisions through Chapter 7. General Development Standards and Chapter 11. Building and Housing Code, receives official notice from the City of the violation and fails to remedy the violation within the time period specified such that a zoning violation citation is issued shall be subject to an administrative fee of $100 in addition to any other charge.Article 10.1. Review Bodies	10 – 2










































































Sec. 10.1.1. City Council..........................................................................10 – 2
Sec. 10.1.2. Planning Commission...........................................................10 – 2
Sec. 10.1.3. Board of Adjustment.............................................................10 – 3
Sec. 10.1.4. Historic Development Commission......................................10 – 4
Sec. 10.1.5. Appearance Commission.......................................................10 – 7
Sec. 10.1.6.  Open Meeting Requirements ...............................................10 – 7
Sec. 10.1.7. Planning Director and Development Services Director.........10 – 8
Sec. 10.1.8. Summary of Review Authority.............................................10 – 10


Article 10.2. Review Procedures	10 – 11Sec. 10.2.1. Common Review Procedures...............................................10 – 11
Sec. 10.2.2. Comprehensive Plan Amendment ......................................10 – 16
Sec. 10.2.3. UDO Text Amendment .......................................................10 – 18
Sec. 10.2.4. Rezoning............................................................................10 – 20
Sec. 10.2.5. Subdivision Review.............................................................10 – 27
Sec. 10.2.6. Non-Subdivision Final Plat and Recorded Instruments........10 – 32
Sec. 10.2.7. Plot Plan Review.................................................................10 – 35
Sec. 10.2.8. Site Plan Review.................................................................10 – 37
Sec. 10.2.9. Special Use Permit..............................................................10 – 40
Sec. 10.2.10. Variance............................................................................10 – 42
Sec. 10.2.11. Appeal of an Administrative Decision ................................10 – 44
Sec. 10.2.12. Common Signage Plan.....................................................10 – 46
Sec. 10.2.13. Temporary Use Permit ......................................................10 – 47
Sec. 10.2.14. Written Interpretation.......................................................10 – 48
Sec. 10.2.15. Certificate of Appropriateness..........................................10 – 49
Sec. 10.2.16. Historic Landmark Designation ........................................10 – 53
Sec. 10.2.17. Administrative Alternate  ..................................................10 – 56
Sec. 10.2.18. Design Adjustment............................................................10 – 57
Sec. 10.2.19. Vested Rights....................................................................10 – 58


Article 10.3. Nonconformities	10 – 60Sec. 10.3.1. In General...........................................................................10 – 60
Sec. 10.3.2. Nonconforming Uses.........................................................10 – 60
Sec. 10.3.3. Nonconforming Principal Structures ...................................10 – 62
Sec. 10.3.4. Nonconforming Site Elements............................................10 – 63
Sec. 10.3.5. Nonconforming Lots of Record..........................................10 – 64
Sec. 10.3.6. Special Use Permits for Nonconformities............................10 – 65


Article 10.4. Enforcement	10 – 67Sec. 10.4.1. Violations and Violators.......................................................10 – 67
Sec. 10.4.2. Civil Penalty........................................................................10 – 67
Sec. 10.4.3. Administrative Fee.............................................................10 – 68




Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review & Recommend

Planning Commission

Public Meeting

Review & Recommend

City Council

Public Hearing

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

City Council
Authorization

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review & Recommend

Planning Commission

Public Meeting

Review & Recommend

City Council

Public Hearing

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Neighborhood
Meeting

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review

Planning Commission

Public Meeting

Review & Recommend

City Council

Public Hearing

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Preliminary Plan Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Final Plat 
Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Site Review 
Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Infrastructure Construction Drawings

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Building Review  Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review

Board of Adjustment

Public Hearing 

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Pre-Application
Conference

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review

Board of Adjustment

Public Hearing 

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

The City

Review & Advise

Reviewing Body

Public Hearing 

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Request

Zoning Administrator

Review & Evaluate

Render Opinion

Submit Application 

Planning Director

Review & Recommend

Minor Works

Planning Director

Review & Decide

Do Not 
Approve

Approve

Major Works

Historic Development 
Commission

Public Hearing

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review

Historic Development
Commission

Public Meeting

Review & Recommend

Joint Historic
Development Commission & City Council

Public Hearing

Review & Recommend

Historic Development
Commission

Public Meeting

Review & Recommend

City Council

Public Meeting

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

Planning Director

Review 

Appearance 
Commission

Public Meeting

Review & Recommend

Planning Director

Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

Development Services Director

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove

Submit Application

Development Services Director

Review

City Council

Public Hearing 

Review & Decide

Approve

Disapprove




CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE.
.

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.1. Adoption of Codes by Reference
Sec. 11.1.4. Compliance With Codes

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.2. Development Services Department
Sec. 11.2.1. Functions and Duties

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.3. Examining Boards & Licensing
Sec. 11.3.1. Registration of Contractors

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.4. Enforcement Provisions
Sec. 11.4.1. Permit Requirements

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.4. Enforcement Provisions
 Sec. 11.4.6. Limitation on Issuance of Permits for Construction in Floodprone Areas

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.4. Enforcement Provisions
Sec. 11.4.10. Civil Penalty

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.5. Enforcement Provisions
Sec. 11.5.10. Administrative Fee

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.5. Unsafe Buildings
Sec. 11.6.3. Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
 Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
Sec. 11.6.5. Powers of Department

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
Sec. 11.6.9. Methods of Service

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.6. ..Housing Code
Sec. 11.6.17. Administrative Fee

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.8. Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts
Sec. 11.8.1. Applicability

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.8. Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts
 Sec. 11.8.3.. Safeguards from Undue Economic Hardship

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.8. ..Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts
Sec. 11.8.4. Appeals

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code
Sec. 11.9.1. Title

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.9. ..Nonresidential Building or Structure Code
Sec. 11.9.6. Duties and Powers of Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code
Sec. 11.9.9. Limitations on Orders and Ordinances--Historic Landmark or Historic District

CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE   |   Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code
Sec. 11.9.16. Filing of Ordinances

.CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 .

Article 11.1. Adoption of Codes by Reference   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.1.1. Scope of Chapter and Codes

Article 11.1. Adoption of Codes by Reference   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.1.5. Copies of Codes Filed With City Clerk

Article 11.2. Development Services Department   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.2.3. Oversight Not to Legalize Violation

Article 11.3. Examining Boards & Licensing   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.3.2. Electrical

Article 11.4. Enforcement Provisions   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.4.6. Limitation on Issuance of Permits for Construction in Floodprone Areas

Article 11.4. Enforcement Provisions   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.4.9. Violations

Article 11.5. Unsafe Buildings|   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.5.1. Short Title

Article 11.6. Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.1. Preamble; Definitions

Article 11.6. Housing Code|   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
Sec. 11.6.3. Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

Article 11.6. ..Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

Article 11.6. ..Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

Article 11.6. ..Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

Article 11.6. ..Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.3. ..Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities

Article 11.6. ..Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.7. Abatement; Hearing on Charges; Filing; Petition and Charges; Investigation; Time and Conduct of Hearing

Article 11.6. ..Housing Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.6.15. Alternate Remedies

Article 11.7. Manufactured Homes   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.7.1. Inspection of Manufactured Homes Certificate Required

Article 11.8. Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts|   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.8.3.. Safeguards from Undue Economic Hardship

Article 11.8. ..Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.8.3. Safeguards from Undue Economic Hardship

Article 11.8. ..Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.8.4. Standards

Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.9.5.Maintenance Standards for Nonresidential Buildings and Structures

Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.9.8. Procedure for Enforcement

Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.9.13. In Rem Action by The Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer

Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code   |   CHAPTER 11. ..BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE  
 Sec. 11.9.21. Violations; Penalty

Chapter 11. 
Building and Housing Code

Article 11.1. 
Adoption of Codes by Reference

Sec. 11.1.1. 
Scope of Chapter and Codes


The provisions of this Chapter, technical codes and of the regulatory codes adopted here shall apply to the following: 
A.	
The location, design, materials, equipment, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal, use, and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected, attached, or used in connection with any such building or structure; 

B.	
The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of building sewers, building drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures and appurtenances; 

C.	
The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning or refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and appurtenances; and

D.	
The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances.

Sec. 11.1.2. 
Jurisdiction of Chapter and Codes

A.	
The provisions of this chapter, technical codes and of the regulatory codes adopted here shall be in effect and apply within the corporate limits of the City and beyond and surrounding the corporate limits within a line which constitutes the boundary of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as described on the map maintained in the office of the City Clerk, as the same may be amended from time to time, as provided by law. 

B.	
The provisions of the Fire Prevention Code as adopted in Part 5, Chapter 2, Article B, "Fire Prevention," of this UDO shall apply within the corporate limits of the City. The provisions that relate to the design, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, demolition or removal of buildings or structures or any appurtenances connected or attached, shall apply within the corporate limits and beyond and surrounding the corporate limits within a line which constitutes the boundary of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as described on the map maintained in the office of the City Clerk, as the same may be amended from time to time, as provided by law. 

Sec. 11.1.3. 
Technical Codes


The term technical codes as used here shall mean the collective provisions of the North Carolina: Building, Accessibility, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire Prevention, Fuel Gas, Energy, Existing Buildings and Residential codes as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and the North Carolina Rehabilitation Code. The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Building Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council is adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here to the extent such code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards, and use of materials in building or structures erected, enlarged, altered, repaired, or otherwise constructed or reconstructed after adoption of this chapter. 
A.	
In addition, Appendix D-Fire Districts, of the North Carolina Building Code is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here and shall be enforced as part of this UDO.  

B.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of Volume I-C, "Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to and Usable by Persons with Disabilities," the Accessibility Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

C.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of "State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes" as adopted by the North Carolina Commissioner of Insurance is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

D.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by the North Carolina State Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

E.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of "Floodproofing Regulations" as prepared and published by the office of the Chief of engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C. is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here to the extent said regulations are applicable for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards, and use of materials n buildings or structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired, or otherwise constructed or reconstructed in flood hazard areas. 

F.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IX, Existing Buildings, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

G.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of North Carolina Energy Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

H.	
The most recent Edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Residential Code, as adopted by the North Carolina State Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here.

I.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Rehabilitation Code (NCRC) is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here.

J.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Plumbing Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

K.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Mechanical Code, as adopted by the North Carolina State Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

L.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Electrical Code, as adopted by the North Carolina State Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

M.	
The National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 U.S.C. §5401 et seq. and the regulations in 24 CFR Part 3280 adopted pursuant thereto, including all their subsequent amendments, are hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

N.	
The most recent edition, including all subsequent amendments, of the North Carolina Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth here. 

Sec. 11.1.4. 
Compliance With Codes 

A.	
All buildings or structures and connected appurtenances which are constructed, reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, altered, occupied, used, demolished, or moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other provisions of either the North Carolina Building Code, or the North Carolina Residential Code, whichever is applicable, or both if both are applicable. Where the provisions of this UDO conflict with any of the technical codes listed above, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.

B.	
Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the North Carolina Plumbing Code. 

C.	
All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning or refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, their fittings, appliances, fixtures, and appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, replaced, repaired, used, and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the North Carolina State Mechanical Code. 

D.	
All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be erected, altered, repaired, used, and maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the North Carolina Electrical Code. 

E.	
All construction, alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances made or installed to any building or structure, other than one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Accessibility Code. 

F.	
The installation of gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of equipment served, and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Fuel Gas Code. 

G.	
All manufactured housing shall be constructed, repaired, altered, installed, erected, replaced, or moved to another site in conformance with the provisions of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act and the State of North Carolina procedural and reference codes for mobile homes, modular dwelling units, and other factory building structures, and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 

H.	
All construction, alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, and maintenance hereinafter made or installed to any building or structure, other than one- and two-family dwelling and townhouses, shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code. 

I.	
The thermal envelope of the building and installation of energy systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, ventilation, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Energy Code. 

J.	
All alterations, repairs, replacement, rehabilitation or change of occupancy of any existing building shall conform to applicable provisions of the North Carolina Building Code Volume IX - Existing Buildings or other applicable technical codes. 

Sec. 11.1.5. 
Copies of Codes Filed With City Clerk


An official copy of each regulatory code, and technical codes adopted in this chapter, and official copies of all amendments, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and amendments. 
Article 11.2. 
Development Services Department

Sec. 11.2.1. 
Functions and Duties

A.	
It shall be the duty of the Development Services Department to enforce all the provisions of this Chapter; any regulatory and technical codes adopted in this Chapter; Part 12, Chapter 7. Removal and Disposal of Junked and Abandoned Motor Vehicles; Part 12, Chapter 2. Probationary Rental Occupancy Permit and Rental Dwelling Registration and PROP Notification; and Part 12, Chapter 6. Health, Sanitation and Public Nuisances; and to make all inspections necessary to determine the compliance with the provisions and to exercise all duties and powers imposed or given by applicable General Statutes or any other applicable act of the General Assembly of the State of North Carolina. 

B.	
All inspectors shall give such bond for the faithful performance of their duties as may be required by the Council. 

C.	
The administration and enforcement of this Chapter shall be the duty of the Development Services Department unless otherwise stated, which department is hereby authorized and directed to take such lawful action as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this UDO. 

D.	
The Development Services Department, through the appointment of inspectors, shall have the full power, authority and duties prescribed by the general laws and ordinances applicable to the City to make inspections and to perform all other functions which are authorized or directed by law. 

E.	
Members of the Development Services Department shall have the right to enter public or private property at such reasonable times as may be necessary for the performance of their duties. Should the owner or occupant of any property refuse to permit such reasonable access, the Development Services Department shall proceed to obtain an administrative search warrant pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2. No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his lawful duties. 

F.	
The City shall also have the power to require written statements, or the filing of reports under oath, with respect to pertinent questions relating to land-disturbing activity. 

Sec. 11.2.2. 
Inspection Procedure

A.	
Inspections


The Development Services Department shall inspect all buildings and structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with the Code of the City of Raleigh and the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
1.	
When deemed necessary by the Development Services Department, it may require the permit holder to have materials and assemblies inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or inspections or tests to be made by approved and recognized inspection organizations; provided, no approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such organization. 

2.	
When deemed necessary by the Development Services Department, it may require the permit holder to submit to the Development Services Department surveys by a registered land surveyor; the survey shall show the location of the structure including projections with reference to: property lines, flood hazard and flood-storage areas on the property, rights-of-way, easements on the property, such as greenway, drainage, utility, slope easements along rights-of-way, and when applicable by other Code requirements: minimum distances between buildings, minimum distances between buildings and parking spaces and drives, minimum distances between any outdoor living areas and parking or drives, and minimum distances of parking and drives from any public right-of-way line. No further inspections nor permits will be undertaken or issued by the City for that structure until the requested survey is submitted to and approved by the City.

3.	
All holders of permits, or their agents, shall notify the Development Services Department at each stage of construction and shall give inspectors free access to the premises for the purpose of making inspections. Approval shall be obtained from the Development Services Department before subsequent work can be continued. The inspections required shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirements Code and technical codes. 


B.	
Calls for Inspection
1.	
When work is ready for inspection, requests for inspections shall be made to the office of the Development Services Department. The Development Services Department shall give priority to those requests where delays would possibly create or prolong hazardous situations or would possibly be detrimental to the work, including but not limited to foundations, poured-in-place concrete structural elements, and electrical inspections necessary before accidentally disconnected electrical installations can be reenergized. It is the intent of this section that inspections be made as soon as practicable after requests are received, with standing priority inspections, an obligation to honor the chronological order of requests received, and the necessity for scheduling an efficient route and sequence of inspections. 

2.	
Reinspections shall be made as soon as practicable subject to the completion of inspections for which requests had theretofore been received. No work shall be inspected or approved until it is in a proper and completed condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the City, at no expense to an inspector or the City, and shall be placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be furnished by the department of inspection in the form of a notice posted at the site or written notice given to the permit holder or to his agent. Failure to call for inspections or proceedings without approval of each stage of construction shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 

3.	
The provisions of this subsection relating to requests for inspections shall apply to the administration of all of the technical codes adopted in this chapter. 



Sec. 11.2.3. 
Oversight Not to Legalize Violation


No oversight or dereliction of duty or issuance of a permit on the part of any inspector or other official or employee of the City shall be deemed to legalize or waive the violation of any provisions of the Code of the City of Raleigh or the laws of the State of North Carolina. 
Sec. 11.2.4. 
Administrative Liability


No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. 
Sec. 11.2.5. 
City Liability


This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection or the examination authorized herein or the certificate therefor issued as provided here, or by reason of the approval of any materials, devices, appliances or equipment authorized here. 
Article 11.3. 
Examining Boards & Licensing

Sec. 11.3.1. 
Registration of Contractors


The registration of contractors shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirement Code, North Carolina General Statutes, and City privilege license regulations. 
Sec. 11.3.2. 
Electrical

A.	
Board Established; Personnel


There is hereby established an electrical examining board (hereinafter referred to as the board) to consist of a North Carolina registered professional engineer specializing in electrical work, 2 electrical contractors, 1 journeyman electrician, and 1 representative of the public electrical utility, all of whom must reside within the territorial jurisdiction of this UDO. The Development Services Director shall serve as ex officio secretary to the board. The members of the board shall be appointed for 2-year terms by the City Council as provided in §1-4002 of the City Code. The board shall elect from its membership a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The members shall serve without compensation. 
B.	
Purpose of the Board
1.	
It shall be the duty of the board to examine applicants for certificates as to their knowledge of the rules and regulations for the installation and operation of electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment as set forth in the statutes of the State of North Carolina, the ordinances of the City, and the North Carolina Electrical Code; and to determine the general qualifications and fitness of each applicant for performing the class of work covered by a journeyman's certificate. 

2.	
The board shall perform other duties relating to electrical wiring, contracting, electrical installations, or advise on any electrical questions referred to them by the Council. 



C.	
Meetings of the Board


The board shall meet at such intervals as may be necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but in no case less than twice each year. All meetings shall be called by the Chairman. 
D.	
Standards and Procedures for Certifying Electricians


The board shall establish standards and procedures for the qualifications, examinations and licensing of journeyman electricians, and shall issue an appropriate license with no expiration date to each person who meets the qualifications thereof and successfully passes the examination given by the board. 
E.	
Examinations


Examinations for journeyman certificates shall be by written form and a complete record of each shall be maintained by the secretary for a period of 2 years. Examinations are to be held the last Tuesday in each of the following months: March, June, September and December. A grade of 75 percent is required for passage of the examination. 
F.	
Reexamination


Any applicant failing an examination may, upon payment of the regular examination fee, be reexamined after 90 days or more shall have elapsed. After 3 successive failures, an applicant shall not be reexamined for a period of 12 months following. 
G.	
Examination Fee


Any person desiring to be licensed as a journeyman electrician shall make written application to the board and include a fee in the amount of $35.00. Such fees shall be made payable to the City of Raleigh and are not refundable. All fees shall be collected by the secretary and promptly remitted to the Revenue Collector. The secretary shall be approved by the Revenue Collector to collect the fees for the examinations. 
H.	
Temporary Journeyman Working Card


Between the regular periods of required examinations given by the board, any journeyman electrician, if the board secretary deems it an emergency or hardship, who first presents himself to the secretary and indicates he is employed by an electrical contractor licensed by the City, may have a temporary journeyman electrician working permit issued to him for that period before the next regular examination and upon payment of a fee of $10.00, provided he can satisfy the secretary that he is duly qualified to perform such work. Temporary journeyman electrician working permits so issued may be canceled and recalled by the secretary if the holder thereof fails to conduct his work consistent with the applicable laws and codes. The recall of the temporary permit shall not exclude the holder from taking an examination at the regular period as required by this UDO. 
I.	
Revocation of Certificate


Any certificate issued by the board may, after a hearing, be suspended or revoked if the person holding such certificate repeatedly violates any provision of this chapter relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of electrical wiring devices and equipment. 
J.	
Certificate Required to Perform Electrical Work


No person shall install, alter, repair or extend any electrical system or part thereof or connect any current-consuming device, appliance or equipment (except lamps, fuse renewals and other appliances connected by means of attachment plugging devices, maintenance on small motors and on controls for heating/air conditioning equipment), on any electrical wiring used for light, heat or power within or without any building or structure whether employed by a licensed contractor or not until he shall have first passed an examination to be conducted by the City of Raleigh electrical examining board or by the electrical examining or advisory board of any City or County which is a member of the North Carolina Committee for Journeyman Electricians and until he shall have secured a certificate of competency as a certified electrician from any such examining or advisory board; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as to require the Chief electrical inspector to permit any person who may have a journeyman electrician certificate of competency issued by the advisory or examining board of any City, town or County who is a member of the North Carolina Committee for Journeyman Electricians to start or remain on any job as the qualified electrician when, in the opinion of the Chief electrical inspector, by past experience said person is not qualified under local standards to do the necessary work or when by past experience it is the opinion of the Chief electrical inspector that the person will not cooperate with the Development Services Department by not calling for inspections at the proper time, or by making or supervising installations not in conformity with applicable state and local codes.
Article 11.4. 
Enforcement Provisions

Sec. 11.4.1. 
Permit Requirements

A.	
Building Permit


The permit required shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirement Code. 
B.	
Plumbing Permit


The permit required shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirement Code and requirements of the City of Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook. 
C.	
Mechanical Permit


The permit required shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirement Code. 
D.	
Electrical Permit


The permit required shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirement Code. 
E.	
Fire Protection Permit


The permit required shall conform to the provisions of the North Carolina Administration and Enforcement Requirement Code. 
F.	
Flood Permit
1.	
No person within floodprone areas shall change the existing condition of any land or part thereof, or place, erect, construct, enlarge, reconstruct, move or alter any building or structure or driveway, manufactured home pad, or dike, levee, or fence wall or automobile parking area, or outdoor play equipment, or pole (lighting, etc.) or storage facility (above or below ground), or part thereof without a flood permit. Excavating, filling, drilling, dredging, grading, quarrying, paving, or improving the land is a change in the existing condition of land. 

2.	
No permit will be issued until the applicant certifies that all necessary permits required by Federal or state law have been received; provided nothing herein shall be deemed to require a permit for agricultural land production of plants and fibers, forestland production and harvesting, and activities undertaken by the State, railroads, and utility companies allowed in N.C.G.S. 143-215.54. 

3.	
Three sets of detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for a flood permit or building permit when the fill, building or structure is located within floodprone areas, or when the estimated reasonable cost of the building or structure is in excess of $20,000.00, or for any other building or structure when plans and specifications are deemed necessary by the Development Services Department in order for it to determine whether the proposed work complies with the City Code and the laws of the State. 

4.	
Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed; and the plans and specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter, the appropriate regulatory and technical codes, the City Code, and the laws of the State. 



G.	
Stub Permit


The permit shall conform to the provisions of the City of Raleigh Public Utilities Handbook. 
H.	
Zoning Permit


A zoning permit is required for all plot plans and site plans. 
I.	
Permit Expiration


Any permit issued pursuant to Sec. 11.4.1., unless otherwise provided, shall expire 6 months after the day of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not commenced. If after commencement, the work is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the permit shall, therefore, immediately expire. A permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a vested right under Sec. 10.2.19. is outstanding. The duration of a land-disturbing activity permit shall be exempt from this section.Sec. 11.4.2. Application for PermitWritten application shall be made for all permits required by this Chapter and shall be made on forms provided by the City of Raleigh. Such application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected or by his authorized agent or representative. The owner shall authorize any work for which a building permit is required. Sec. 11.4.3. Plans and SpecificationsWhere plans and specifications are required, a permittee's copy of the same marked "approved" by the Development Services Department shall be available at the work site for all inspections requested by the permittee and shall be made available for any inspection upon request by the Development Services Department. Sec. 11.4.4. Limitations on Issuance of PermitsNo building permit shall be issued for work on any new or existing dwelling unless the plans and specifications thereof contain information sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of Article 11.6. Housing Code. A.	No building permit shall be issued for new construction where City water or sewer mains are not available without written approval by the Wake County Health Department of the required water supply or waste disposal systems. B.	No permit shall be issued to any person who has failed after notice to remedy defective work, or has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to this UDO which is due and for which no appeal is pending, or to otherwise comply with the Code of the City of Raleigh, the regulatory codes adopted therein, or the laws of the State of North Carolina. C.	No licensed contractor shall secure a permit from the Development Services Department for any other person or persons not qualified in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes to do any work covered by the regulatory codes. D.	No building or flood permit shall be issued during the pendency of an application for the revision of a floodprone area boundary of such property unless the proposed construction or filling is permitted under the existing floodprone area regulations and also under the revision proposed for the property. E.	No permit authorized by this UDO shall be issued until the boundaries of any natural resource buffer yard, any open space area, any riparian surface water buffers, and any tree protection adjacent to or encompassing a work site are clearly and accurately demarked by a protective fence in the field. The location and extent of all authorized land-disturbing activities shall be similarly demarcated for so long as any land-disturbing activity continues. F.	Reserved for future use.G.	If the Raleigh Historic Development Commission has voted to recommend designation of an area as an Historic Overlay District, or if the Wake County Historic Preservation Commission has voted to recommend designation of a property as an historic landmark (or, to the extent that the Wake County Historic Preservation Commission does not have jurisdiction, if the Raleigh Historic Development Commission has voted to recommend designation of a property as an historic landmark), the demolition or destruction of any building, site, or structure located in the proposed district or on the property of the proposed historic landmark may be delayed by the commission with jurisdiction for a period of up to 180 days or until the City Council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs first. Should the Council approve the designation prior to the expiration of the 180-day delay period, an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition must then be requested. H.	No building permit will be issued on any parcel of a parent tract when forestry has occurred on the parent tract within the last 5 years and the 32-foot and 65-foot wide perimeter buffers set forth in Article 9.1. Tree Conservation, were not preserved. Sec. 11.4.5. Reserved for Future UseSec. 11.4.6. Limitation on Issuance of Permits for Construction in Floodprone AreasA.	No building permit shall be issued for any and all new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures located or to be located in floodprone areas, delineated as provided in Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations, unless the lowest floor (including basement) and attendant mechanical, electrical, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment, and any other service facility is elevated at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify on the building plans that all parts of the structure below the regulatory flood protection elevation are designed to withstand the flood depths, pressure, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the one-hundred-year flood at the location of the structure. All new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclose areas below the regulatory flood protection elevation which are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. Prior to the use or occupancy of the structure, a registered land surveyor shall certify to the nearest 1/10 of 1 foot in mean sea level datum the elevation of the lowest floor. B.	No building permit shall be issued for any and all new construction or substantial improvement of nonresidential structures or residential accessory structures located or to be located in floodprone areas, delineated as provided in Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations, unless: 1.	The provisions of subsection A. above are met and attendant utility and sanitary facilities are floodproofed. Except in the case of accessory uses to dwellings with a cost of less than $5,000.00, prior to the use or occupancy of a structure, a registered land surveyor shall certify to the nearest  1/10 of 1 foot in mean sea level datum the elevations of the lowest floor; or 2.	The provisions for an essentially dry floodproof class (W2) contained in "Floodproofing Regulations," most recent edition, published by the Office of the Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C., are met. Except in the case of accessory uses to dwellings with a cost of less than $5,000.00, prior to the use or occupancy of a structure, a registered land surveyor shall certify to the nearest  1/10 of 1 foot in mean sea level datum the elevations of the lowest floor; or 3.	A registered professional engineer or architect certifies on the building plans that the walls and any parts of the structure below the regulatory flood protection elevation are substantially impermeable to the passage of water and that floodproofing methods used for a specified elevation in relation to mean sea level are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the 100-year flood at the location of the structure and that the structure is watertight, and attendant utility and sanitary facilities are floodproofed. Except in the case of accessory uses to dwellings with a cost of less than $5,000.00, prior to the use or occupancy of a structure, a registered land surveyor shall certify to the nearest  1/10 of 1 foot in mean sea level datum the elevations of the lowest floor; or 4.	For nonresidential structures only, a registered professional engineer or architect certifies on the building plans that the portions of any structure below the regulatory flood protection elevation comply with alternate wet floodproofing methods that are acceptable to FEMA as variances to the essentially dry floodproofing measures required in subsection B.2. above provided said alternate methods comply with the standards set forth in the FEMA Technical Standards Bulletin 85-1, and that such measures are adequate to withstand the flood depths pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the one-hundred-year flood at the location of the structures and that the attendant utility and sanitary facilities are floodproofed and that the requirements for the issuance of the variance comply with the provisions of §44 CFR 60.6 of the FEMA National Flood Insurance Program and related regulations. C.	The provisions of subsections A. and B. above shall be inapplicable to the following: 1.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 2.	Any reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State inventory of historic places or certified by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district; provided that, the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. D.	No permit authorized in this chapter shall be issued for new construction or substantial improvements located in floodprone areas, delineated as provided in Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations, unless all utility, water and sanitary facilities, mechanical, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service systems are designed, located or both to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 1.	All backflow preventers or devices must be installed on potable water service lines at all building entry locations to protect the system from backflow or back siphonage of floodwaters or other contaminants; such devices shall be installed within floodproofed structures or at an elevation 1 foot above the regulatory flood protection elevation; 2.	All sanitary sewer systems that have openings below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be equipped with automatic backwater valves or other automatic backflow devices which are installed in each discharge line passing through a building exterior wall. Devices shall be installed at locations accessible for maintenance; and 3.	All sewer system vents, and nonwatertight manholes, shall be constructed to a height at least 1  foot above the regulatory flood protection elevation; provided nothing herein shall prevent the construction of watertight manholes below the regulatory flood protection elevation. Sec. 11.4.7. Issuance of PermitWhen proper application for a permit has been made, and the City has determined that the application and the proposed work comply with the provisions of the code, the appropriate regulatory and technical codes adopted herein, and the laws of the State of North Carolina, it shall issue such permit, upon receipt of the proper fees. Sec. 11.4.8. Permit FeesA.	Working Without a Permit1.	Any person who performs work without a permit when a permit is required shall be subject to an administrative fee equal to the amount of the fee specified for the work. This administrative fee shall be paid in addition to the fee specified for the work. The administrative fee shall not be construed as a penalty, but as a charge for additional administrative expense. 2.	If a person performs work without a permit twice in a 12 -month period, then for the second violation, that person shall pay both the administrative fee specified in Sec. 11.4.8.A.1. above and a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00 per trade. 3.	If a person performs work without a permit 3 or more times in a 12-month period, then for the third and for each subsequent violation, that person shall pay both the administrative fee specified in Sec. 11.4.8.A.1.  above and a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00 per trade. B.	Extra InspectionThe fees in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule entitle the permittee to the appropriate number of inspections for the work performed. For each inspection in excess of these, there shall be an additional charge. C.	Specific Fees EnumeratedThe specific fees due for any permit are listed in the City of Raleigh Fee Schedule.D.	Voiding of Permit1.	Upon a request by a property owner, any type permit may be voided; however, refunds will be made only when the permit is valid. An administrative fee in the amount equal to a minimum fee shall be deducted from the refund payment. In the event the cost of the permit to be voided was a minimum fee or less, no refund shall be made. 2.	Revisions to a construction project which require permits to be voided and reissued will be charged an administrative fee per permit when the cost of the permit is other than a minimum fee. The administrative fee charged for minimum fee permits will equal the minimum fee. Single application projects that have been reviewed and are pending pick up but are abandoned prior to permit issuance will be charged an administrative fee equal to the minimum fee for each permit approved. Projects with multiple applications will be charged an administrative fee per application. This fee will equal the cost of a minimum fee per permit. E.	ComputationsAll permit fees derived in this schedule will be rounded to the nearest dollar. F.	Re-Review FeeWhen, in the processing of a permit, it becomes necessary to review the plans for a project on more than 2 occasions for items previously identified or when the plan documents are poorly conceived and prepared, a re-review fee shall be issued for each review beyond 2.Sec. 11.4.9. ViolationsIt shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, standard, occupancy content, or other requirement of this chapter or the regulatory and technical codes herein adopted or to refuse or fail to comply with any order of the City or of any inspector made in accordance with this chapter or the regulatory codes herein adopted. Each day shall be a subsequent violation. Sec. 11.4.10. Civil PenaltyA.	GenerallyUnless otherwise stated in this UDO, any act constituting a violation of the building code as adopted herein shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 to be recovered by the City in a civil action in the nature of a debt or as otherwise provided herein if the offender fails to pay the penalty within 48 hours from and after receipt of a citation of a violation. B.	Additional PenaltyUnless otherwise stated in this UDO, a penalty of $25.00, in addition to the 1 imposed for payment within 48 hours, shall apply in those cases in which the penalties prescribed in this section have not been paid within the prescribed 48-hour period and in which a civil action shall have been instituted. C.	Settlement of Civil ClaimThe City is authorized to accept full payment of all monies owed in full and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the City may have to enforce such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt. Acceptance of any and all claims, or right of action arising out of contended violations only if the activities or non-activities which gave rise to the violations are abated or otherwise made lawful. D.	Continuing ViolationsEach day's continuing violation shall be a separate offense. No civil penalty for continuing violations shall be levied against the same person for the same continuing violation at the same location more than once unless and until the City shall deliver a written notice by personal service, registered mail or certified mail — return receipt requested or as otherwise permitted by law— to the property owner or other person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action. The notice shall also set forth the time period when corrective measures must be completed. The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the assessment of additional civil penalties and other enforcement action. If after the allotted time period has expired and after the hearing of any appeal, if any, the corrective action has not been completed, a civil penalty shall be assessed in the amount of $100.00 per day of continuing violation unless otherwise stated in this UDO. E.	Additional Civil Penalty for Occupancy Without CertificateAny person who occupies or allows the occupancy of a building or space without first receiving a Certificate of Occupancy or a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be subject to an initial civil penalty of $250.00 and to continuing penalties of $100.00 for each day's violation thereafter. This penalty shall be in addition to other civil penalties or remedies available under the City Code. Article 11.5. Unsafe BuildingsSec. 11.5.1. Short TitleThis Article is adopted and shall be known as the "Unsafe Building Code of the City of Raleigh." Sec. 11.5.2. DefinedAll buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "unsafe buildings" within the definition of and in addition to G.S. 160A-426: A.	Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or damage public or private property. B.	Those buildings which because of their condition are unsanitary or unsafe to the public.C.	Those buildings which are especially liable to fire including, but not limited to, those which are unoccupied and are not adequately secured against entry by unauthorized persons. Sec. 11.5.3. Remedy; No Action or AppealA.	If an appeal is not taken pursuant to G.S. 160A-430 and the owner fails to comply with the orders issued pursuant to G.S. 160A-429, the Development Services Director or his designee shall report such facts and conditions of the building or structure to the Council for action at a meeting at which time the owner and other interested parties may be heard. The Council may direct by ordinance the Development Services Department to repair or demolish the building or structure, the cost of which shall become a lien against the premises upon confirmation of the cost thereof by the City Council. The confirmation shall take place only after 10 days' written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance existed. B.	The provisions herein shall be in addition to any remedy provided for in G.S. 160A-411 et seq. Sec. 11.5.4. Nuisances DeclaredAll unsafe buildings within the terms of Sec. 11.5.2. are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided in this UDO and as set forth in G.S. 160A-193. Sec. 11.5.5. Emergency CasesIn cases where it appears that there is an imminent danger to life or safety of any person unless an unsafe building as defined in Sec. 11.5.2. is immediately repaired, vacated, closed or demolished, the Development Services Director shall order its immediate repair, evacuation, closing or demolition as he may deem necessary, notwithstanding the other provisions of this Article. The Development Services Director may take the temporary measures necessary to safeguard persons from immediate danger of collapse of such building and is authorized to close temporarily sidewalks, streets, buildings and structures in places adjacent to such unsafe building and prohibit the same from being used, pending the removal of the danger. The cost of the emergency measures taken shall become a lien against the premises upon which the emergency condition existed upon confirmation of the cost thereof by the Council. The confirmation shall take place only after 10 days' written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance existed. Sec. 11.5.6. Administrative LiabilityNo officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Article. Sec. 11.5.7. Violations; Unlawful to Disregard Notices or OrdersIt shall be unlawful for an occupant to fail to vacate an unsafe building or structure after being given an order pursuant to G.S. 160A-429. Sec. 11.5.8. EnforcementA.	If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as allowed by law. B.	Any owner of a building or structure who fails to comply with an order to repair, vacate and close or demolish any building or structure declared unsafe as determined pursuant to the provisions contained in sections in this Article, or by state law, or who permits the reoccupancy of an unsafe building once vacated shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.00 for the first day following the expiration of an order to repair, vacate and close or demolish any building or structure or following a determination that an unsafe building has been reoccupied in violation of this UDO. In each instance, a penalty of $100.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that the unsafe building remains in violation of an order issued pursuant to Sec. 11.5.4. and Sec. 11.5.5. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after being notified of the amount due, the City may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. Sec. 11.5.9. Lis PendensA.	At any time after an inspector issues a complaint containing a notice of hearing or issues an order pursuant thereto, any inspector may file a notice of lis pendens with the clerk of Superior Court of the county where the property is located. A copy of the complaint containing a notice of hearing or a copy of the order shall be attached to the lis pendens. When the lis pendens is filed with the Clerk, it shall also be served on the owners and parties in interest in the building or dwelling, including any lienholders and tenants who may be determined by the exercise of reasonable diligence. B.	Any inspector may cancel the lis pendens upon a determination by that inspector that the property is no longer unsafe and that the owner has fully complied with the inspector's order. Cancellation must be made in a writing signed by the inspector and provided to the Clerk of Court. Sec. 11.5.10. Administrative FeeIn addition to any other charge, any owner of a building located within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be subject to an administrative fee of $325.00 upon an inspection hearing disclosing the building to be unsafe due to any defects defined within Sec. 11.5.2. or G.S. 160A-426. In addition to any other charge, any owner of a building located within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be subject to an administrative fee of $650.00 upon any additional inspection hearing disclosing the building to be unsafe due to any defects defined within Sec. 11.5.2. or G.S. 160A-426 within the same 12-month period. The property owner may also be assessed any costs incurred in obtaining service including legal publication of notice of complaint charges, hearing notice and findings of fact and orders related to the building. Article 11.6. Housing CodeSec. 11.6.1. Preamble; DefinitionsA.	Pursuant to G.S. 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the City of Raleigh and its extraterritorial jurisdiction dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or insanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. B.	This Article establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in this Article. C.	All building construction and residential properties shall comply with the North Carolina Building Code, North Carolina Residential Code and all applicable technical codes.Sec. 11.6.2. Conflict With Other ProvisionsIn any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health provision of this UDO or ordinances or codes of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. Sec. 11.6.3. Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and FacilitiesNo person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of human habitation which does not comply with the following minimum requirements: A.	Basic Equipment and Facilities1.	Kitchen SinkEvery dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink, free from corrosion and leaks, in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the City. The kitchen sink shall have hot and cold running water. 2.	Toilet and SinkEvery dwelling unit shall contain a room separate from the habitable rooms which affords privacy with a door and operable lockable door hardware,  and which is equipped with a flush toilet and a sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the City. The sink shall have hot and cold running water, and be free from corrosion and leaks. Access to such room shall be through a weathertight area. 3.	Bathtub and ShowersEvery dwelling unit shall contain a room separate from the habitable rooms which affords privacy with a door and operable lockable door hardware, and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the City. The bathtub or shower shall have hot and cold running water, and be free from corrosion and leaks.4.	Hot Water FacilitiesWater heating facilities shall be properly  installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of hot water to be drawn at every required sink, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature between 110 and 140 degrees.5.	HeatingEvery dwelling unit shall have heating facilities installed and maintained according to Sec. 11.6.3.C.15.








































B.	
Light and Ventilation
1.	
Every existing habitable room shall be provided with a window with a minimum of 6 square feet or a gravity or mechanical ventilation system capable of providing one air change every 30 minutes approved by the City. 

2.	
Basements and cellars with habitable space and every sleeping room shall have at least 1 operable emergency escape and rescue window or an exterior door opening for escape and rescue.

3.	
Every habitable room shall have at least 1 window or skylight which can easily be opened directly to the outside, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of operable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required in Sec. 11.6.3.B.1. above, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the City. 4.	Every habitable room of every building shall contain at least 2 separate floor and/or wall-type electric convenience outlets and every toilet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, entrance, exitway, and public hall shall contain at least 1 supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. The electrical service serving a dwelling unit shall be of sufficient capacity to carry the demand load as determined by the State adopted Electrical Code. 5.	Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling serving 5 or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than 4 dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 6.	Bathrooms, toilet compartments and similar rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area in windows of not less than 3 square feet, one-half of which must be operable, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be re-circulated.C.	Sanitary Maintenance, Safety and Structural StandardsNo person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:1.	Screening for Insects and Rodents a.	For protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling or dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have a screened door with a self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to outdoor space used, designed or intended to be used for ventilation shall be likewise provided with screens. Screens shall be not less than 16 mesh per inch. Dwelling units containing central air conditioning equipment or window-type air conditioning units which will satisfactorily cool and ventilate the dwelling unit are not required to have screens in door and window openings.b.	Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. c.	Screens shall be provided for all enclosed crawl space vents. d.	Screens shall fit openings snugly and shall not be torn or otherwise defective. e.	Screens shall not be permanently fixed to the window frame or sash by nail, staples, screws or any other permanently fixed means. Screens shall be attached so as to be easily removed. 2.	Foundationsa.	A foundation wall shall support the building at all points and shall be free of holes and cracks which would admit rodents, water or dampness to the interior of the building or which lessen the capability of the foundation to support the building. b.	Crawl space shall be graded so as to prevent any standing water. c.	Footings shall be sound and have adequate bearing capacity. d.	Piers shall be sound with no loose mortar or masonry. e.	No pier in which the plumb line from top center falls outside the middle 1/3 of the pier base shall be allowed. f.	No stiff knees shall be used in place of footing and pier requirements in paragraphs c. and d. above.3.	Floorsa.	There shall be no decayed, insect-damaged, termite-damaged, fire-damaged, broken, overloaded or sagging girders, floor joists or sills that adversely affect the structural integrity of the building framing system. b.	Girders, floor joists and sills shall be properly supported and reasonably level. c.	Girders, floor joists and sills shall not be decayed, overloaded, sagging or broken so as to adversely affect the structural integrity of the floor framing system. d.	Flooring shall be weathertight without holes or cracks which permit excessive air to penetrate rooms. e.	Flooring shall be reasonably smooth. There shall be no decayed or fire damaged material so as to adversely affect the structural integrity of the flooring system. f.	There shall be no loose flooring. g.	Floors shall be reasonably level. h.	Every toilet compartment, bathroom, kitchen and other similar floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The floor surfaces shall be covered with a non-absorbent material and be made watertight. 4.	Walls, Exteriora.	There shall be no wall in which the plumb line from the top to the floor exceeds 3 inches out of plumb. b.	Walls shall be structurally sound. c.	There shall be no broken, cracked or fire damaged structural members.d.	There shall be no decayed, insect-damaged or termite-damaged studs. e.	All siding shall be weathertight, with no holes or excessive cracks or decayed boards which permit excessive air or moisture to penetrate rooms. f.	There shall be no loose siding. g.	All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks, and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating or covering and maintained in good repair to prevent deterioration. Exterior wood surfaces other than decay-resistant woods shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from any exterior surfaces, except for surfaces designed to be stabilized by oxidation. h.	Approved corrosion-resistant flashing shall be provided in the exterior wall envelope in such a manner to prevent entry of water into the wall cavity or penetration of water to the building structural framing components. Aluminum flashing may not be used in contact with cementitious material or treated woods.i.	Only standard building materials deemed acceptable by general building standards as set forth by this UDO, the North Carolina Building Code, the North Carolina Residential Code, and as confirmed by the Inspector, shall be used to repair exterior walls.5.	Walls, Interiora.	The interior finish shall be free of holes and cracks which permit excessive air or moisture to penetrate rooms. b.	No loose plaster, loose boards or other loose wall materials shall be allowed. c.	Only standard building materials deemed acceptable by general building standards as set forth by this UDO, the North Carolina Building Code, the North Carolina Residential Code, and as confirmed by the Inspector, shall be used on a wall to prevent air or moisture intrusion. d.	There shall be no decayed, insect-damaged or termite-damaged studs. e.	There shall be no broken or cracked studs or other broken or cracked structural members allowed. f.	Only standard building materials deemed acceptable by general building standards as set forth by this UDO, the North Carolina Building Code, the North Carolina Residential Code, and as confirmed by the Inspector, shall be used to repair interior walls.6.	Ceilingsa.	There shall be no joists which are decayed, broken, sagging, or improperly supported. b.	There shall be no holes or excessive cracks which permit air or moisture to penetrate rooms. c.	There shall be no loose plaster, boards, gypsum wall board, or other ceiling finish. d.	Ceiling joists shall be structurally sound. e.	Only standard building materials deemed acceptable by general building standards as set forth by this UDO, the North Carolina Building Code, the North Carolina Residential Code, and as confirmed by the Inspector, shall be used on a ceiling to prevent air  or moisture intrusion. 7.	Roofsa.	There shall be no rafters which are decayed, broken, or improperly supported. b.	No rafters shall be damaged by fire. c.	Sheathing shall not be loose and shall be structurally sound. d.	No loose roof covering shall be allowed, nor shall there be any holes or leaks which could cause damage to the structure. e.	There shall be proper flashing at walls and roof penetrations. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and have no defects that admit rain. f.	Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.g.	Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.h.	No live or dead vegetation, tree branches or other debris that affects roof drainage or future roof degradation shall be allowed to remain on the roof structure.i.	New roof coverings shall not be installed without first removing existing roof covering where any of the following conditions exist:i.	The existing roof  or roof covering is water-soaked or has deteriorated  to the point that the existing roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional roofing;ii.	The existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay tile, cement tile or asbestos-cement tile; oriii.	The existing roof has 2 or more applications of any type of roof covering.8.	Exterior and Interior Windows and Doorsa.	All exterior windows and doors shall be reasonably weathertight, shall have no broken glass, and shall have adequate operable locks and hardware. Clasp locks and hasp locks are not acceptable locks and hardware.b.	All interior doors and hardware shall be in good repair.  c.	Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.  All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.  Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily operable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.d.	Plastics (plexiglass) shall not be used as glazing unless in compliance with ASTM requirements ASTM 84, ASTM D 2843 and combustibility classifications CC1 and CC2.e.	Covers, screens or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings, bulkhead enclosures, or window wells that serve such openings, provided such devices are capable of being released or removed from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that required for normal operation of the opening. f.	Bars, grills or similar devices are not permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings, bulkhead enclosures or window wells that serve such openings.9.	Means of Egressa.	There shall be a minimum of 1 exit from each dwelling unit for one or two family dwellings or townhomes, in accordance with the North Carolina State Building Code.b.	The exit provisions shall conform to the requirements established for multi-family dwellings, excluding one or two family dwellings or townhomes, in accordance with the North Carolina Residential Building Code.c.	Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, exits, and all attached appurtenances, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.d.	Platforms, steps, and/or handrails provided to serve exits shall be structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting any imposed loads. e.	There shall be a safe, continuous and unobstructed exitway from the interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level. 10.	Porches and Decksa.	Foundation, floor, ceiling and roof shall be equal to standards set forth above, except sills, girders and joists need not be level if providing drainage of floors; floors need not be weathertight; ceiling height shall be not less than 7 feet. b.	Roof post and attached railings if provided, shall be structurally sound. c.	Every porch, terrace or entrance platform located at least 30 inches above the adjacent finished grade shall be equipped with guardrails not less than 36 inches high. Required guardrails on open sides of stairways, raised floor areas, balconies and porches shall have intermediate rails or ornamental closures that do not allow passage of an object 6 inches or more in diameter.  Horizontal spacing between the vertical members in required guardrails shall be a maximum of 4 inches at the nearest point between members. Triangular openings formed by the riser, tread and bottom rail of a guard at the open side of a stairway may be of such a size that a 6-inch sphere cannot pass through.11.	Stairs and Stepsa.	Stairs and steps shall not be decayed and shall be in good repair. Exterior repairs shall be made with materials for exterior use application, no interior building materials shall be allowed for exterior stairs, steps, decks, rails, treads or similar exterior appurtenances.b.	Every rail shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. c.	No flight of stairs more than 1 inch out of its intended position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures shall be allowed. d.	Supports shall not sag and shall be structurally sound. e.	Every stair tread shall be sound and securely fastened. f.	Open sides of stairs with a total rise of more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails not less than 34 inches in height measured vertically from the nosing of the treads. Required guards on open sides of stairways, raised floor areas, balconies and porches shall have intermediate rails or ornamental closures that do not allow passage of an object 6 inches or more in diameter.  Horizontal spacing between the vertical members in required guardrails shall be a maximum of 4 inches at the nearest point between members. Triangular openings formed by the riser, tread and bottom rail of a guard at the open side of a stairway may be of such a size that a 6-inch sphere cannot pass through.12.	Electricala.	No outlets, receptacles, luminaries, smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, switches or other fixtures shall be broken or hanging loose. b.	All outlets, receptacles, luminaries, smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, switches and other fixtures shall be safely operable. c.	Receptacle replacements for existing dwellings shall comply with the State adpoted National Electrical Code.d.	Every habitable room of every building shall contain not less than 2 separate floor or wall-type electric convenience outlets and every toilet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, entrance, exitway, and public hall shall contain at least 1 supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture as required by Sec. 11.6.3.B.4. Every such outlet and fixture shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. e.	There shall be installed in every habitable room, bathroom, laundry room, hallway, stairway and furnace room at least 1 supplied ceiling or wall type electrical light fixture provided, further, that the ceiling light fixture may be omitted in living room and bedrooms, provided 3 electrical convenience receptacles are installed, one of which is controlled from a wall switch. f.	All new wiring shall comply with manufacturer's installation requirements and the NEC requirements as approved by State of North Carolina.g.	Luminaries (light fixtures) shall be of such construction or installed in such a way that the conductors in outlet boxes shall not be subjected to temperatures greater than that for which the conductors are rated.h.	All wiring shall be safe.  No circuits shall be overloaded.  All circuits shall be provided with proper over-current protection; no over-current protection shall be bridged; there shall be no bare wires, open joints or open spliced cables; there shall be no open spaces in the panel box.i.	The electric service, including the wiring serving every dwelling, shall be of sufficient capacity to carry the demand load as determined by the current adopted electrical code.j.	All wiring shall be properly protected from physical damage.k.	All metal components of the electrical system shall be properly bonded and grounded.l.	Main or distribution panel boxes shall not be double lugged, shall have no open unused openings, shall utilize proper connectors, be properly labeled, utilize only approved over-current devices and be properly grounded and bonded.m.	Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for other similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.n.	All appliances shall be properly installed and function for the purpose intendedo.	A 20-amp branch circuit and receptacle shall be provided as a laundry circuit.p.	Extension cords shall not be used to replace permanent wiring methods.q.	Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this Section.13.	Plumbinga.	All plumbing fixtures and waste pipes shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working order, and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects, and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. b.	Every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower, water closet or plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system.c.	The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture.d.	Fixtures, including water closets, shall not be cracked, broken, leaking or loose from the floor or wall, as applicable.e.	Tub and shower stall floors and walls shall be watertight. f.	The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from leaks and defects.g.	There shall be adequate facilities for furnishing hot and cold water to each tub or shower, lavatory, and kitchen sink. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature between 110 and 140 degrees Fahrenheit. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. New installations shall also require a means of disconnection in accordance with the  Electrical Code.h.	There shall be installed a toilet, tub or shower, lavatory and kitchen sink for each dwelling unit. i.	There shall be separate toilet facilities for each dwelling except as provided in Sec. 11.6.3.D.1. for room units or bed and breakfast inns. j.	Toilet and bathing facilities shall be protected from the weather. k.	All water piping shall be protected from freezing by proper installation in protected space. l.	Sewer and water lines shall be properly supported, with no broken or leaking lines. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept from obstructions, leaks and defects.m.	 Every supplied facility required under this UDO shall be so constructed, installed or connected that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in a satisfactory working condition. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deposit any material in any toilet, bathtub or other plumbing fixture which may result in the obstruction of any sanitary sewer. Any liability on the part of the occupant shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility of cleaning any resulting blockage.14.	Heatinga.	All occupied dwelling units shall have heating facilities, central or as otherwise deemed acceptable by the North Carolina Building Code. b.	Heating facilities shall be properly installed and maintained in good and safe working condition and capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet compartments. c.	Every occupied dwelling unit shall have a heating appliance with a minimum capacity of 12,000 BTU output so as to heat all habitable rooms to a minimum temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit, measured 3 feet above the floor with an outside temperature of 25 degrees Fahrenheit. As an alternative, a professional engineer or a North Carolina licensed HVAC contractor may provide calculations that the room designated can be heated accordingly by a heating unit with lesser capacity. d.	Every bathroom or toilet compartment which does not open directly from a room having a source of heat shall be provided with a heating source deemed acceptable by this UDO, the North Carolina Building Code, the North Carolina Residential Code and as confirmed by the Inspector.e.	All electric, gas and oil burning equipment installed on the premises shall be of a type approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or by American Gas Association and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the manufacturers' recommendations or listing. f.	Chimneys shall have no loose bricks or mortar; flues shall have no holes. g.	Gas appliances shall not be located in, or obtain combustion air from, sleeping rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms or storage closets.  This shall not apply to:i.	Direct vent appliances that obtain all combustion air directly from the outdoors;ii.	Vented room heaters, wall furnaces, vented decorative appliances and decorative appliances for installation in vented solid fuel-burning fireplaces; provided that the room is not a confined space and the building is not of unusually tight construction;iii.	A single wall-mounted unvented room heater equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shutoff system and installed in a bathroom, provided that the input rating does not exceed 6,000 BTU per hour and the bathroom is not a confined space; andiv.	Appliances installed in a dedicated enclosure in which all combustion air is taken directly from the outdoors.  Access to such enclosures shall be through a solid door that is weather-stripped and equipped with an approved self-closing device.h.	There shall be no hanging masonry chimneys. i.	Thimbles shall be grouted in tight. j.	Thimbles shall be installed high enough for the stovepipe to rise 

¼ inch per foot minimum. k.	Fireplaces shall be used only for supplemental heat and not for basic heating. l.	Hearth extension shall be at least 16 inches deep and 8 inches beyond each side of the fireplace opening. m.	Combustible materials shall not be within 6 inches of either side of the fireplace opening or within 12 inches above the fireplace opening. n.	If the fireplace opening is closed, the closure shall be of noncombustible material and airtight.  o.	Any stove shall be within 6 feet of the thimble serving it. p.	No stovepipe shall be routed through combustible walls unless specifically approved for installation in combustible walls.q.	No combustible materials shall be within 12 inches of the stovepipe.r.	All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid-fuel burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.s.	A supply of air for complete combustion of fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.t.	Dryer exhaust ducts for clothes dryers shall terminate on the outside of the building and shall be equipped with a back-draft damper.  Screens shall not be installed at the duct termination.  Ducts shall not be connected or installed with sheet metal screws or other fasteners that will obstruct the exhaust flow.  Clothes dryer ducts shall not be connected to a vent connector, vent or chimney.u.	Portable heaters are not acceptable as a permanent source of heat but they may be used as a supplementary unit in one- and two-family dwelling units. No owner shall be held to be in violation of this UDO when an occupant is using a portable heater as a source of heat as long as the owner has complied with paragraph c. above. 15.	Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectorsa.	Every owner of a rental residential dwelling unit shall comply with G.S. 42-42 for smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors and shall install a smoke detector mounted on the ceiling or wall on every level, at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to each group of rooms used for sleeping purposes and in common stairwells in each dwelling unit as provided in §5-2041 of the Raleigh City Code. b.	 Every owner of an existing residential dwelling shall comply with North Carolina Residential Code Section 313. In existing dwellings, where interior alterations, repairs, fuel-fired appliance replacements, or additions requiring a permit occurs, or where one or more sleeping rooms are added or created, carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms as directed by the alarm manufacturer.c.	The owner of every residential dwelling unit where a smoke detector is installed pursuant to §5-2041 shall maintain and insure that the smoke detector is kept in good working order at all times. If a battery-operated smoke detector is used, the batteries shall be replaced at least once per year. 16.	Kitchens and Bathroomsa.	Kitchen and bathroom counter tops and cabinets shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit the counter top and cabinets to be easily kept clean and in a sanitary condition.  b.	Counter tops and cabinets shall be made or covered by a non-absorbent material and shall be free from rot, water damaged wood, and broken or decayed materials which would affect the integrity of the counter top or cabinet.  c.	All cabinet doors and drawers shall be operable and have functional hardware to allowed proper operation.d.	Kitchen and bathroom sinks shall be properly secured and sealed to prevent leakage.17.	Temporary Interruption of ServiceNo owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed, shut off or disconnected from any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repair or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies when discontinuances of services are approved by the City. D.	Space, Use and LocationNo person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 1.	Required Space in Dwelling Unitsa.	Every dwelling unit shall comply with the following Schedule of Required Minimum Habitable Room Floor Area. 













































Schedule of Required Minimum 
Habitable Room Floor Area
 
Number
of Persons
 Required Minimum 
Floor Area in Square Feet
 
1
 150
 
2
 260
 
3
 370
 
4
 480
 
5
 590
 
6
 700
 
7
 780
 
8
 850
 
9
 950
 
10
 1,050
 
11
 1,560
 
12
 1,670
 
13
 1,780
 
14
 1,890
 
15
 2,000
 
16 and greater
 an additional 150 for each additional occupant
 


b.	
A living or principal room is required and shall contain not less than 120 square feet, and any bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet each. The above floor areas shall be calculated only for habitable rooms. 

c.	
Each habitable room shall have at least 70 square feet, with the exception of kitchens. 


2.	
Height of Ceiling


At least ½ of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least 7 feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than 5 feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
3.	
Access to Bath and Bedrooms


No dwelling or dwelling unit constructed after adoption of this chapter, containing 2 or more sleeping rooms, shall have such room arrangements that access to bathroom or toilet compartment intended for use by occupant of more than 1 sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or toilet compartment. 
4.	
Cellars


No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit, except in compliance with the requirements of Sec. 11.6.3.D.2. above and all of the requirements for basements set forth in Sec. 11.6.3.D.5. below. 5.	BasementNo basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit, unless: a.	The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water.b.	The total window area in each room is equivalent to the minimum window area size as identified in Sec. 11.6.3.B.3.c.	Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area.d.	The total of operable window area in such habitable room is equivalent to at least the minimum required under Sec. 11.6.3.B.3.e.	Basements with habitable space and every sleeping room shall have at least 1 operable emergency escape and rescue window or exterior door opening for emergency escape and rescue.6.	Access Limitation of Dwelling Units to Commercial UsesNo habitable rooms, bathroom or toilet compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction with any room used for commercial or public purposes. 7.	Rubbish Storage FacilitiesEvery dwelling, multi-family dwelling and dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by Chapter 2, "Solid Waste Collection" of Part 7 of the Raleigh City Code, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish. 8.	Garbage Storage or Disposal FacilitiesEvery dwelling or multi-family dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility as required by Chapter 2, "Solid Waste Collection," Part 7 of the Raleigh City Code. E.	Minimum Standards for Rooming Houses or Bed and Breakfast Inns Every person who operates a rooming house or bed and breakfast inn or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house or bed and breakfast inn shall comply with all the provisions set forth within this Article, except as otherwise provided in this section. 1.	At least 1 toilet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition shall be supplied for each 3 rooms within a rooming house or bed and breakfast inn wherever the facilities are shared. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar. 2.	Every toilet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by paragraph 1. shall be located within the rooming house or bed and breakfast inn and within a room or rooms which afford privacy, with a door and lockable hardware, and are separate from the habitable rooms. 3.	Access for every toilet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by paragraph 1. shall be not more than 1 story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities and from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or bed and breakfast inn. Access to every toilet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall comply with Sec. 11.6.3.D.3






.

4.	
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than 1 person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. Access to every sleeping room shall comply with Sec. 11.6.3.D.3.5.	The operator of every rooming house or bed and breakfast inn shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house or bed and breakfast inn; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house or bed and breakfast inn is contained is leased or occupied by the operator. 6.	Every rooming house or bed and breakfast inn owner shall provide a resident management. The resident manager's name and room number shall be placed on the primary entrance of the dwelling. The resident manager shall be required to maintain an up-to-date floor plan of the rooming house or bed and breakfast inn. This floor plan shall be posted in a conspicuous location. 7.	Every rooming house or bed and breakfast inn shall have a public telephone located within a central area of the dwelling. 8.	Every rooming house shall have a kitchen facility in compliance with Sec. 11.6.3.C.17.

9.	
There shall be no living or principal room required. 

10.	
Every rooming house operator shall conform to the license requirements set forth in §12-2156 of the Raleigh City Code. 


Sec. 11.6.4. 
Responsibilities of Persons


Occupants of dwellings, multi-family dwellings, and dwelling units, and owners or operators of rooming houses shall be responsible for maintenance thereof as provided in this section. 
A.	
Responsibilities of Occupants
1.	
Disposal of Rubbish




Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner as required by this UDO and Chapter 2, Part 7 of the Raleigh City Code. 
2.	
Disposal of Garbage


Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of  garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities as required by Sec. 11.6.3.D. and Chapter 2, Part 7 of the Raleigh City Code. 3.	Use and Operation of Supplied Plumbing FixturesEvery occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep the supplied plumbing fixtures therein clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation. 4.	Installation and Care of Plumbing Fixtures Furnished by OccupantEvery plumbing fixture furnished by the occupant of a dwelling unit shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks or obstructions. 5.	Extermination of Dwelling UnitsThe occupants of a dwelling unit in a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for such extermination as when required by Sec. 11.6.4.B.2.d.B.	Responsibilities of Property Owners1.	Exterior Property AreasNo person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, or premises, which does not comply with the following requirements:a.	SanitationAll exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. b.	Grading and DrainageAll premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon. c.	Noxious WeedsAll exterior property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public health. d.	Insect and Rodent HarborageEvery owner of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in all exterior areas of the premises; except that the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of the premises of the other than a single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. e.	Accessory StructuresAll accessory structures including detached garages shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 2.	Interior AreasNo person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or portion thereof, for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following requirements: a.	SanitationThe interior of every dwelling and multi-family dwelling used for human habitation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under Sec. 11.6.3.E.6. and Sec. 11.6.3.E.7.b.	Insect and Rodent HarborageBuildings used for human habitation shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human health. c.	Extermination from BuildingsEvery owner of a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, or in the shared or public parts of the structure. d.	Extermination of Dwelling UnitsThe occupants of a dwelling unit in a dwelling or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied by him whenever the occupants dwelling unit is the only unit in the building that is infested. e.	Responsibility of OwnerNotwithstanding the foregoing provisions, whenever infestation of rodents is caused by failure of the owner to maintain any dwelling or multi-family dwelling in a rodent-proof condition, extermination of such rodents shall be the responsibility of the owner. Sec. 11.6.5. Powers of DepartmentA.	The City is hereby designated to exercise the powers.B.	The City is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this Article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 1.	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation; 2.	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City in order to determine which dwellings therein are unsafe;3.	To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 4.	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, provided such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and 5.	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article, or to impose such duties upon the regularly appointed plumbing, environmental, heating and air conditioning, and electrical inspectors, as approved by the City. Sec. 11.6.6. InspectionsA.	The inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction in order that the inspector may perform the duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. Should the owner or occupant of any dwelling refuse to permit the inspector reasonable access, such inspector shall proceed to obtain a search warrant pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2. B.	It shall be unlawful for any owner or the agent of any owner to occupy, rent or offer for occupancy or rent as a dwelling any structure or part thereof, upon which an order to repair, alter or improve, or to vacate and close, or to demolish, has been issued without said owner or agent receiving the authority to do so by the City after confirmation of the dwelling compliance with the Housing Code. If the dwelling is vacant as a result of prior inspector orders, the owner or agent must first file application for and secure a certificate of housing code compliance from the City. The City shall issue a certificate of housing code compliance when, after examination and inspection, it is found that the structure conforms to the provisions of this chapter. No fee shall be charged for the first inspection following the expiration of an order to repair, alter or improve, or to vacate and close, or to demolish a dwelling in order to ascertain compliance with inspection orders or for one inspection request following the issuance of an order to repair, alter or improve, or one inspection due to a request for inspection in order to obtain a certificate of housing compliance. For each inspection in excess of this, there shall be a charge of $60.00. C.	The following conditions are necessary for the issuance of a certificate of housing code compliance: 1.	The owner or authorized agent of any dwelling unit vacated after an order to repair or vacate and close has been issued shall apply to the City for a certificate of housing code compliance prior to the dwelling unit being reoccupied. 2.	After the repairs have been completed the property owner or agent shall make application for a certificate of housing code compliance. The City shall cause an inspection to be made of the dwelling unit specified in the application. 3.	If after examination and inspection the dwelling unit is found to conform to the provisions of this Chapter 11, a certificate of housing code compliance shall be issued to the owner of the dwelling unit. 4.	If after examination and inspection the dwelling is not found to conform to the provisions of this Chapter 11, the owner of the dwelling unit shall be provided a list of violations that must be corrected before a certificate of housing code compliance may be issued or the dwelling unit occupied. 5.	The certificate of housing code compliance shall state: a.	The date of issue.b.	The address of the dwelling or dwelling unit. c.	The name of the person to whom it is issued. d.	The certification that the dwelling or dwelling unit complies with all applicable provisions of this Chapter 11. Sec. 11.6.7. Abatement; Hearing on Charges; Filing; Petition and Charges; Investigation; Time and Conduct of HearingWhenever a petition is filed with the inspector charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the inspector (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the inspector shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties having an interest in such dwelling including lien holders and tenants, if any, as the same may be determined by reasonable diligence, a complaint setting forth the charges, The complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector (or his designated agent) at a place within the County in which the property is located therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given a right to file an answer and to give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector. Sec. 11.6.8. Service of Order, ContentsIf after notice and hearing, the inspector determines that the dwelling is unfit for human habitation pursuant to the minimum housing code standards of Sec. 11.6.3., he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner other parties having an interest in the dwelling, an order stating the following: A.	If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, not to exceed 50 percent of the value, requiring the owner within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling to render it fit for human habitation or vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation; or B.	If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, not to exceed 50 percent of the value, requiring the owner, within the time specified in any event and not less than 90 days, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling to render it fit for human habitation, or remove or demolish such dwelling. C.	Dwellings ordered vacated and closed shall have all outer doors firmly locked and basement, cellar and first-story windows barred or boarded to prevent entry, and shall not again be used for human habitation until a Certificate of Housing Code Compliance has been issued pursuant to Sec. 11.6.6.C.D.	If the owner has vacated and closed a dwelling pursuant to an order issued by the inspector as provided in Sec. 11.6.8.A., or if a dwelling is vacated and closed by the owner by the order of an ordinance adopted by Council and remains vacated and closed for a period of 1 year pursuant to the order or ordinance; and if the Council shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the municipality in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in this State; then in such circumstances, after the expiration of such 1-year period, the Council may enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance upon the owner, requiring that the owner either: 1.	Repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days, if the repair necessary to render the dwelling fit for human habitation would cost less than 50 percent of the present value of the dwelling; or 2.	Demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days if the repair necessary to render the dwelling fit for human habitation would cost in excess of 50 percent of the present value of the dwelling. Such order shall be recorded in the Register of Deeds of Wake County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with this order within the time fixed by such order, then the City shall cause such dwelling to be repaired or demolished and removed pursuant to said order. The cost of such repairs, alterations, improvements, or demolition and removal shall be a lien on the property as prescribed in Sec. 11.6.14. E.	Whenever a determination is made pursuant to this Article that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed, or demolished, notice of the order shall be given by first class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request with the City for such notices. No removal or demolition by action of the public officer shall occur until a minimum of 45 days has elapsed from the mailing of such notice. Sec. 11.6.9. Methods of ServiceA.	Complaints or orders issued by an inspector shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected. B.	If the identities of any owners or whereabouts of persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if the owners are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, the inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, stating the steps taken to determine and locate the persons in interest, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such owners or persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under Sec. 11.6.7. Where such service is by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. Sec. 11.6.10. Lis PendensA.	After an inspector issues a complaint containing a notice of hearing or issues an order pursuant thereto, any inspector shall file a notice of lis pendens with the Clerk of Superior Court of the county where the property is located. A copy of the complaint containing a notice of hearing or a copy of the order shall be attached to the lis pendens. When the lis pendens is filed with the Clerk, it shall also be served on the owners and parties in interest in the building or dwelling, including any lienholders and tenants who may be determined by the exercise of reasonable diligence. B.	Any inspector may cancel the lis pendens upon a determination by that inspector that the property fully complies with the Minimum Housing Code, and Article 11.6 of this UDO. Cancellation of the lis pendens must be made in a writing signed by the inspector and filed with the Clerk of Court. Sec. 11.6.11. Board of Adjustment to Hear AppealsAn appeal from any decision or order of the inspector pursuant to this Article may be made by the person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of the City. Any such appeal shall be made to the Board of Adjustment and governed by the procedures set forth in G.S. 160A-446.Sec. 11.6.12. Placarding PremisesIf the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the City may cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; the City may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." The removal of such placard when posted pursuant hereto shall be unlawful. Sec. 11.6.13. Approval by Governing Body of Removal or Demolition of DwellingIf the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish a dwelling, the City may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished. Provided that placarding of the premises as set forth in Sec. 11.6.12. shall not be exercised until the Council shall have by ordinance found the property to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties were so found described in the ordinance. Such ordinance shall be recorded in Register of Deeds of Wake County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. Sec. 11.6.14. Lien On Premises for Costs; Sale of Materials, etc. A.	The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements to the property; vacating and closing of the property; or removal or demolition of the property by the City of Raleigh shall be a lien against the real property upon which such costs were incurred.B.	Any lien filed pursuant to this section shall have the same priority and be collected as set forth in G.S. 160A-216 et seq.C.	If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the City of Raleigh, the materials of the dwelling and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling shall be sold and the proceeds of the sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition.  Any balance remaining after the sale shall be deposited with the Superior Court and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by the court and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled to the proceeds thereof as established by order or decree of the court.D.	Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by any method authorized by this UDO, the Code or the laws of the State of North Carolina.Sec. 11.6.15. Alternate RemediesIf any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter or of any ordinance or code adopted or any valid order or decision of the City or board made pursuant to any ordinance or code adopted, the City or board may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling. Sec. 11.6.16. PenaltyA.	It shall be unlawful for the owner to occupy or to permit the occupancy by others or for anyone to occupy a dwelling which has been posted with the notices authorized by Sec. 11.6.12. after the time prescribed in the notice for the vacation of said dwelling. Each day's occupancy after said date shall be a separate and distinct offense. B.	If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. C.	Any owner of a dwelling who fails to comply with an order to repair, vacate and close or demolish any dwelling determined to be unfit for human habitation pursuant to the provisions contained in Sec. 11.6.7.and Sec. 11.6.8., or who permits the reoccupancy of an unfit dwelling in violation of Sec. 11.6.6. shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.00 for the first day following the expiration of an order to repair, vacate and close or demolish any dwelling or following a determination that an unfit dwelling has been reoccupied in violation of Sec. 
































11.6.6.B. In each instance, a penalty of $100.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that the unfit dwelling remains in violation of an order issued pursuant to Sec. 11.6.7. and Sec. 11.6.8. or in violation of Sec. 11.6.6.B. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after being notified of the amount due, the City may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. D.	Any owner of a dwelling whose property shall be subject to an order to repair, vacate and close, or demolish said dwelling or who permits the reoccupancy of an unfit dwelling as provided in subsection (c) shall on the second offense occurring within 1 year be subject to an additional civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first day following the expiration of the order to repair, vacate and close or demolish said dwelling or the unlawful re-occupancy of the unfit dwelling. In each instance, a penalty of $250.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that the unfit dwelling remains in violation of the order or remains unlawfully occupied. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after being notified of the amount due, the City may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. E.	Any owner of a dwelling who fails to comply with an order to repair, vacate and close or demolish any dwelling determined unfit for human habitation pursuant to the provisions contained in Sec. 11.6.12. and Sec. 11.6.13. shall be subject to an additional civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first day following the effective date of a City Council Ordinance declaring said dwelling to be unfit for human habitation or ordering it to be repaired or demolished. In each instance, a penalty of $250.00 per day shall be imposed for each subsequent day that the unfit dwelling remains in violation of the Ordinance or remains unlawfully occupied. If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after being notified of the amount due, the City may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. Sec. 11.6.17. Administrative FeeIn addition to any other charge, any owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit located within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be subject to an administrative fee of $325.00 upon an inspection hearing disclosing violations of minimum housing code standards Sec. 11.6.3. In addition to any other charge, any owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit located within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be subject to an administrative fee of $650.00 upon any additional inspection hearing disclosing violations of minimum housing code standards Sec. 11.6.3. within the same 12-month period. The property owner may also be assessed any costs incurred in obtaining service including legal publication of notice of complaint charges, hearing notice and findings of fact and orders related to the dwelling. 

Article 11.7. Manufactured HomesSec. 11.7.1. Inspection of Manufactured Homes Certificate RequiredA.	All manufactured homes manufactured after September 1, 1971, shall bear permanently attached thereto a label attesting to compliance with the provisions of G.S. 143-149. B.	The Development Services Department shall inspect each manufactured home to determine whether the manufactured home complies with this section. Such inspection shall be as follows: 1.	Manufactured HomeThe inspector shall inspect each manufactured home for physical damage and determine that conditions of health and sanitation are met. Each manufactured home shall comply with Title 11, Chapter 8, §.0900, et seq. of the North Carolina Administrative Code. 2.	ElectricalUpon receipt of a certificate signed by a licensed electrician representing a licensed electrical contractor, certifying that the electrical system is properly grounded and free of short circuits, the inspector shall verify that the matters stated in the certificate are true. 3.	PlumbingThe inspector shall inspect the plumbing of each manufactured home to assure that the plumbing is in a satisfactory working condition. As permitted by visual inspection, without the removal of walls, flooring, ceiling, or roofing, the inspector shall be satisfied that all plumbing fixtures are trapped and vented. C.	The certificate required by subsection B.2., above shall contain the license number of the electrical contractor and shall be deemed to be in compliance with said requirement if said certificate, upon identifying the manufactured home, contains language substantially as follows: "This is to certify that the described unit has been properly grounded and is free of short circuits. The circuitry has been rung out with a meggar and it has been found to ring clear." D.	All manufactured homes shall be erected or placed on a foundation as indicated in the publication "State of North Carolina, Procedures and References Codes for Mobile Homes, Modular Dwelling Units and other Factory Built Structures" as published by the North Carolina Department of Insurance. All manufactured homes shall be connected to the appropriate utilities as approved by the City of Raleigh. Sec. 11.7.2. Permit Requirements in Floodprone AreasNo building permits shall be issued for the placement, replacement, or substantial improvement, as defined in Part 12 of this UDO, of manufactured homes, foundations, stands, or pads which are located or to be located in floodprone areas, delineated as provided in Article 9.3. Floodprone Area Regulations, unless: A.	The provisions of Sec. 11.4.6. are met; B.	Load-bearing foundation supports such as piers or pilings when used must be placed on stable soil or concrete footings no more than 10 feet apart, and when foundation supports are more than 6 feet above ground level, the support must contain steel reinforcement; and C.	Over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Specifically:1.	Over-the-top ties are provided at each of the 4 corners of the manufactured home, with 2 additional ties per side at intermediate locations; and 1 additional tie per side for manufactured homes less than 50 feet long; 2.	Frame ties are provided at each corner of the manufactured home with 5 additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and 4 additional ties per side for manufactured homes less than 50 feet long; and 3.	All components of the anchoring system are capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.Article 11.8. Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay DistrictsSec. 11.8.1. ApplicabilityA.		The purpose of this section is to prevent the gradual deterioration of historic resources due to a failure to provide normal and customary maintenance such that the unique attributes and character of the resource or historic district might be lost due to decay, deterioration or structural defects.B.		The exterior features of any building or structure (including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, paths, or any other appurtenant feature), or any type of outdoor advertising sign either designated as a Historic Landmark or found to be a contributing resource to the Historic Overlay District shall be preserved by the property owner against decay and deterioration and kept free from structural defects. For purposes of this section, the term “property owner” shall include such other person who may have interest, legal possession, custody, and/or control of the property C.	Only Historic Landmarks and contributing resources to Historic Overlay Districts shall be governed by this section.D.	Only the Raleigh Historic Development Commission may file a petition alleging Demolition by Neglect to a contributing Historic Resource.E.	Petitions alleging Demolition by Neglect shall be filed and considered in accordance with the provisions of this Article.F.	Nothing contained within this Article shall diminish the City's power to declare an unsafe building or a violation of the minimum housing code.Sec. 11.8.2. Petition and ActionA.	Filing of Petition1.		Petitions charging that a structure is undergoing demolition by neglect shall be filed with the City. 2.		The Historic Development Commission may file a petition on its own initiative.3.		Any official, commission, or department of the City of Raleigh, any state agency, or any local or state historical, preservation, neighborhood, or business association may request in writing to the Historic Development Commission that it make a preliminary investigation of a structure to determine whether a basis exists for a determination of demolition by neglect.4.	The Historic Development Commission shall complete an investigation and notify the requestor in writing within 60 days the results of its preliminary investigation. The commission is under no obligation to file a petition on any structure. Should the commission determine that a petition is warranted, the commission shall prepare and file such petition within 90 days of its notification to the requestor.5.		Petitions shall be filed in a format determined by the Historic Development Commission to clearly describe and illustrate the specific defects citing in each instance the specific standard or standards (as outlined in Sec. 11.8.5.) being violated.6.		A petition alleging demolition by neglect may not be filed for the same property more frequently than once every 2 years.B.	Methods of Service1.		Complaints, notices, or orders issued by the Director shall be served upon property owners either personally or by registered or certified mail.2.		If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Director in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Director shall make an affidavit to that effect stating the steps taken to determine and locate the property owners, then the serving of such complaint, notice, or order may be made by publishing the same once each week for 2 successive weeks in a newspaper generally circulated within the City. Where such service is by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.C.	Hearing on Petition1.		Whenever a petition is filed with the City charging that a structure is undergoing demolition by neglect, the Director shall make a preliminary investigation of the charges within 21 days of the filing of the petition. 2.		If after preliminary investigation the Director determines that the charges in the aggregate do not rise to the applicability of Sec. 11.8.1.A. and Sec. 11.8.1.B., the Director shall provide written notification to the Historic Development Commission outlining in general terms the reasons for not applying the provisions of this section. The petition shall be returned to the Historic Development Commission. 3.		If the investigation discloses a basis for such charges, within 14 additional days the Director shall issue and cause to be served upon the property owners, as may be determined by reasonable diligence, a complaint stating the charges in that respect, including a copy of the petition and this section of the UDO. The complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Director at a place fixed not less than 30 nor more than 45 days after the serving of such complaint; that the property owners shall be given a right to give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Director. The Historic Development Commission shall also be given notice of the hearing. 4.		The purpose of the hearing is to receive evidence concerning the charge of deterioration and to ascertain whether the property owner wishes to make a claim of undue economic hardship.D.	Action on Petition1.		If after notice and hearing the Director determines that the structure is not undergoing demolition by neglect according to the applicability of Sec. 11.8.1.A. and Sec. 11.8.1.B. as judged by the standards of Sec. 11.8.5., the Director shall within 30 days of the hearing state in writing the findings of fact for not applying the provisions of this section. The written findings and conclusion shall be sent to the property owners and the Historic Development Commission. The petition shall be returned to the Historic Development Commission.2.	If after notice and hearing the Director determines that the structure is undergoing demolition by neglect because it is deteriorating, or if its condition is contributing to deterioration, according to the applicability of Sec. 11.8.1.A. and Sec. 11.8.1.B. as judged by the standards of Sec. 11.8.5., the Director shall within 30 days of the hearing state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the property owners an order to repair within a reasonable time specified those elements of the structure that are deteriorating, contributing to deterioration, or deteriorated. A copy of the order shall also be sent to the Historic Development Commission.3.		In the event that the property owners wish to make a claim of undue economic hardship, the Director's order shall be stayed until after the Hardship Review Panel's determination in accordance with the procedures of Sec. 11.8.3., except as provided in Sec. 11.8.4.B.Sec. 11.8.3. Safeguards from Undue Economic HardshipA.		Claim of Undue Economic Hardship1.		When the property owners believe that they will be unable to obtain a reasonable return on or a reasonable beneficial use from the property owing to the effects of this section, written notice of intent to file a claim of Undue Economic Hardship must be sent to the City postmarked within 10 days following the hearing on the petition, unless oral notice of intent is made to the City during the hearing. The City shall notify the Historic Development Commission within 3 days following receipt of a written notice of intent. 2.		The Economic Documentation outlined in Sec. 11.8.3.C. shall be provided by the claimant to the City within 45 days following the hearing on the petition for transmittal to the Hardship Review Panel.3.		Under this section, the claimant for economic hardship and the City, the Historic Development Commission, the Hardship Review Panel, and any interested party shall consult in good faith in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. Such efforts shall be documented by the claimant and presented at the hearings described inSec. 11.8.3.B.B.		Hardship Review Panel1.		A Hardship Review Panel shall be established to analyze documentation submitted in support of claims of undue economic hardship. The panel shall prepare a report of its determination whether the evidence supports a conclusion that the property owners will be unable to obtain a reasonable return on or a reasonable beneficial use from the property owing to the effects of this section. If in the panel’s opinion a hardship exists, the report may also offer recommendations for relief of the economic hardship.2.		The City shall coordinate the selection of an ad hoc review panel. The panel shall be comprised of real estate and redevelopment experts knowledgeable in real estate economics in general, and more specifically, in the economics of renovation, redevelopment and other aspects of rehabilitation. 3.		The panel shall consist of 3 persons. Two of the persons shall be selected within 30 days of the hearing on the petition – one by the Historic Development Commission and one by the claimant. The third person shall be selected by the first 2 appointees. The City and the claimant shall bear the cost of their respective selectees and shall split the cost of the third person. If the first 2 appointees cannot agree on a third person within 45 days of the date of the hearing on the petition, the third appointee shall be selected by the City within 5 days after the expiration of the 45-day period. Members of the review panel may not be:a.		A person with financial interest in the property;b.		An employee of or paid consultant to the claimant, the City, or the Historic Development Commission; orc.		A person that has generated or been involved with any of the economic documentation outlined in Sec. 11.8.3.C.4.		The City shall provide the Hardship Review Panel with the Economic Documentation provided by the claimant within 5 days of the panel’s formation or when the documentation is received, whichever occurs later. 5.		Within 90 days of the hearing on the petition for Demolition by Neglect, the Hardship Review Panel shall review the Economic Documentation, hold a hardship hearing, and forward its findings and determination to the City.a.		The City shall provide notice that a hardship hearing will be held before the panel at a place fixed not less than 30 nor more than 45 days after the panel is formed; that the property owners shall be given a right to give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Hardship Review Panel. The Historic Development Commission shall also be given notice of the hearing.b.		The panel shall hold its initial meeting to review the claimant’s submitted Economic Documentation within 10 days of when the panel is formed. The panel may at any time request any additional information as set forth in Sec. 11.8.3.C.
























c.	
	The purpose of the hardship hearing is to review the claimant’s submitted Economic Documentation, receive additional evidence concerning the claim of undue economic hardship, and to ascertain whether additional economic documentation is required.

d.	
	Following the Hardship Review Panel’s hearing on the claim, the panel shall consider all information received and cause to be made a determination of undue or no undue economic hardship. The panel shall prepare a written report of its determination that shall include findings of fact for such determination.

e.	
If in the panel’s opinion a hardship exists, the panel’s report shall establish a monetary value of capital expenditure on the property that the panel believes would yield a return on the investment without economic hardship. If the panel believes the property cannot support any capital expenditure, it shall so state. The panel may also offer recommendations for relief of the economic hardship.



6.	
	The determination of the Hardship Review Panel shall be final, subject to appeal as noted in Sec. 11.8.4.B.



C.	
	Economic Documentation
1.	
	When a claim of undue economic hardship is made owing to the effects of this Article, the property owners must provide evidence describing the circumstances of hardship. The minimum evidence provided by the property owners shall include for all property: 
a.	
The property owner's knowledge of the landmark or historic overlay designation at the time of acquisition, or whether the property was designated subsequent to acquisition; 

b.	
Form of ownership or operation of the property (sole proprietorship, for-profit corporation or non-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, etc.) or legal possession, custody, and control;

c.	
Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased, or other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance, and any terms of financing between buyer and seller;

d.	
The annual gross and net income, if any, from the property for the previous 3 years; 

e.	
Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous 3 years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were followed;

f.	
	Past capital expenditures during ownership of current owner;

g.	
Depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, for the previous 3 years; 

h.	
	Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, during the previous 3 years; 

i.	
Real estate taxes for the previous 3 years and assessed value of the property according to the 2 most recent Wake County assessed valuations; 

j.	
All appraisals obtained within the previous 3 years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 

k.	
Any state or federal income tax returns on or relating to the property for the previous 3 years;

l.	
Any listing of the property for sale or lease within the previous 3 years, price asked and any offers received, the name of the any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the property, and any advertisements placed for the sale or rent of the property;

m.	
	A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation;

n.	
An estimate of the cost of the required construction, alteration, repair, demolition, or removal required by the order; 

o.	
The estimated market value of the property in its current condition and such value after completion of the required construction, alteration, repair, or removals; 

p.	
A report from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property;

q.	
An analysis of common costs expended in both rehabilitation and comparable new construction immaterial to which type of project is undertaken;

r.	
Economic incentives and/or funding available to the applicant through federal, state, city, or private programs.



2.	
The review panel may receive and consider studies and economic analyses from other city agencies and from private organizations relating to the property in question.

3.	
The review panel may require that the property owners furnish such additional information that is relevant to its determination of undue economic hardship. The review panel may request the City to furnish additional information as it believes is relevant. The review panel shall also state which forms of financial proof it deems relevant and necessary to a particular case. 

4.	
In the event that any of the required information is not reasonably available to the property owners or the City and cannot be obtained by the owner or the City, the owner or City shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained.



D.	
	Action on Hardship Review Panel’s Determination
1.	
The City shall provide a copy of the Hardship Panel’s report to the property owner and to the Historic Development Commission.

2.	
In the event of a determination of no undue economic hardship, the City shall cause to be re-issued the stayed order for such property to be repaired within the time specified. 

3.	
In the event of a determination that undue economic hardship would result from an order to repair, the Historic Development Commission shall within 60 days of its receipt of the report prepare a Plan for Relief of Economic Hardship.

4.	
Should the Historic Development Commission fail to act within 60 days of its receipt of the report, the City shall rescind the order for repair and return the petition to the Historic Development Commission.



E.	
Plan for Relief of Economic Hardship
1.	
	In the event of a determination of undue economic hardship, the Historic Development Commission shall develop a plan to relieve the economic hardship. This plan may include, but is not limited to, 
a.	
Capital expenditure by the property owner,

b.	
Property tax relief as may be allowed under North Carolina law, 

c.	
Loans or grants from the City, the County, or other public, private, or nonprofit sources, 

d.	
Acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, 

e.	
Building code modifications, 

f.	
Changes in applicable zoning regulations, or 

g.	
Relaxation of the provisions of this section sufficient to mitigate the undue economic hardship. 



2.	
	The Commission shall give precedence to recommendations for relief of hardship contained in the report of the Hardship Review Panel, if any; the plan should include the Commission’s rationale for not incorporating any Panel recommendations into the Commission’s plan. The plan should also include a statement documenting good faith consultation as outlined in Sec. 11.8.3.A.3.3.	The Commission’s plan shall utilize the Hardship Review Panel’s estimation of monetary value of capital expenditure outlined in Sec. 11.8.3.B.5.e. (if any) as a budget figure to recommend prioritized repairs that shall to the greatest extent possible stabilize the effects of deterioration upon the property.4.		The Commission shall report its plan to the City. The City shall provide notice that a hearing will be held before the Director at a place fixed not less than 10 nor more than 25 days after the report is received; that the property owners, the Historic Development Commission, and the Hardship Review Panel shall be given a right to give testimony; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Director. The Historic Development Commission and Hardship Review Panel shall also be given notice of the hearing.5.		Following the hearing, City shall either approve the Plan or refer it to the Historic Development Commission for amendment. Referrals for amendment shall specify items to be amended. The amended report shall be returned to the City by the Historic Development Commission within 15 days. Upon receipt of the approved or amended Plan, the City shall cause to be re-issued the stayed order for such property to be repaired within the time specified, and according to the provisions of the approved plan. Sec. 11.8.4. AppealsA.	Determination of Demolition by NeglectDeterminations made by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. To perfect such an appeal, application must be filed by an aggrieved party with the Board of Adjustment within 10 days following receipt of the order for repair of the property. Appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari. B.	Determination of Undue Economic HardshipDeterminations made by the Hardship Review Panel and the Plan for Relief of Economic Hardship prepared by the Historic Development Commission may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. To perfect such an appeal, application must be filed by an aggrieved party with the Board of Adjustment within 10 days following receipt of the determination or the order for repair of the property. Appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari. Sec. 11.8.5. StandardsA.	Determination of Demolition by NeglectThe property owners shall, upon written request by the City, repair such exterior features if they are found to be deteriorating, or if their condition is contributing to deterioration, including but not limited to any of the following defects: 1.	Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, or other vertical support that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling. 2.	Deterioration of flooring or floor supports, roofs, or other horizontal members that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling. 3.	Deterioration of external chimneys that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling.4.	Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortars.5.	Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors.6.	Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall and roof coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering. 7.	Rotting, holes, and other forms of decay.8.	Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings, and architectural details that causes delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling. 9.	Heaving, subsidence, or cracking of sidewalks, steps, or pathways.10.	Deterioration of fences, gates, and accessory structures.11.	Deterioration that has a detrimental effect upon the special character of the district as a whole or the unique attributes and character of the Historic Landmark. 12.	Deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions to life, health, or other property. B.	Determination of Undue Economic Hardship1.		The determination of undue economic hardship is based solely on the characteristics of the property, independent of the owner or ownership.2.	When a claim of undue economic hardship is made, the burden of proof is upon the owner and/or parties in interest to demonstrate that:a.	The hardship is not of their own making; andb.	The property is incapable of providing a reasonable return on investment, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible, or the property is incapable of providing a reasonably beneficial use; and c.	The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return or beneficial use; andd.	Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed.Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure CodeSec. 11.9.1. TitleThis Article shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Nonresidential Building or Structure Code". Sec. 11.9.2. PurposeIn order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its citizens, it is the purpose of this Article to establish minimum standards of maintenance, sanitation, and safety relating to nonresidential buildings or structures, as expressly authorized by North Carolina General Statute §160A-439. This Article provides for the repair, closing or demolition of nonresidential buildings or structures as a result of a public necessity caused by conditions that are dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. Sec. 11.9.3. DefinitionsThe following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article: A.	"Basic structural elements" means the parts of a building which provide the principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety of the building, including, but not limited to plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers, stairs, sub-flooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry and all other essential components. B.	"Nonresidential" means any building or structure or portion of a building or structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a use other than a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. C.	"Operator" shall mean any person who has charge, care, or control of a nonresidential building or structure, or part thereof. D.	"Parties in interest" means all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and any who are in possession thereof. E.	"Vacant manufacturing facility" means any building or structure previously used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been converted to another use. F.	"Vacant industrial warehouse" means any building or structure designed for the storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes, which has not been used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been converted to another use. Sec. 11.9.4. Applicability and ComplianceA.	This Article establishes minimum standards for all nonresidential buildings and structures and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of the building or structure, equipment or facilities.B.	The provisions of this Article shall apply to all nonresidential buildings or structures which are now in existence or which may be built within the corporate limits of the City. Every nonresidential building or structure, and the premises on which it is situated, shall comply with the provisions of this Article, whether or not such building or structure shall have been constructed, altered, or repaired before or after the enactment of this Article, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or structure or for the installment or repair of equipment or facilities. Sec. 11.9.5. Maintenance Standards for Nonresidential Buildings and StructuresAll nonresidential buildings and structures shall be free of all conditions that are dangerous and injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare of occupants or members of the general public. The existence of any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare for which a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such building or structure and must be corrected in accordance with the provisions of this Article: A.	Interior walls, vertical studs, partitions, supporting members, sills, joists, rafters, or other basic structural members that list, lean, or buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe, that are rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and that have holes or cracks which might admit rodents. B.	Exterior walls that are not structurally sound or free from defects and damages or capable of bearing imposed loads safely. Where a wall of a building has become exposed as a result of demolition of adjacent buildings, such wall must have all doors, windows, vents, or other similar openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. The exposed wall shall be painted, stuccoed, or bricked and sufficiently weatherproofed to prevent deterioration of the wall. C.	Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. Roofs shall be kept structurally sound and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to prevent rain or other objects from penetrating into the interior of the building. D.	Damage by fire, wind, or other causes rendering the building unsafe. E.	Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions, or disrepair, dangerous to the health and safety of the occupants or members of the general public. F.	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating, or sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or members of the general public. G.	Buildings and structures including their environs that have accumulations of garbage, trash, or rubbish. All garbage and solid waste shall be in approved containers or stored in a safe and sanitary manner. H.	Buildings and structures that have loose and insufficiently anchored overhanging objects, posing a danger to persons or property. I.	Buildings and structures including their environs that have insufficiently protected holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, and other dangerous impediments on or around walks, driveways, parking lots, alleyways, or other areas accessible to and generally used by persons on or around the premises. J.	Buildings and structures that have cracked or broken glass, loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or brick, loose or broken plastic, other dangerous objects or similar hazardous conditions. Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in such material or treated in such a manner as to prevent deterioration and shall be repaired or replaced with like or similar material according to its original use. K.	Buildings and structures that have objects or elements protruding from building walls or roofs, which are unsafe or not properly secured or which can create a hazard such as abandoned electrical boxes and conduits, wires, brackets, and similar objects. L.	Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments thereto which are not structurally sound. Chimneys, flues, gas vents, or other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight, and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases. M.	Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, or fire escapes which are not structurally sound . All exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept sound, in good repair, and free of defects. N.	Cornices which are not structurally sound or are rotten or weakened. Any rotten or weakened areas shall be repaired and/or replaced. All exposed wood shall be treated or painted. O.	Improperly attached gutters or down-spouts located so as to cause a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or adjacent property. P.	Advertising sign structures, attached or freestanding awnings, marquees and their supporting members, and other similar attachments or structures that cause a safety hazard to the occupants or members of the general public. Q.	All exterior surfaces that may cause unsafe conditions due to a lack of maintenance. Exterior surfaces shall be painted or sealed to protect the underlying surface from deterioration. All exterior surfaces that have been painted shall be maintained generally free of peeling and flaking. Where 50% or more of the aggregate of any painted surface shall have peeling or flaking or previous paint worn away, the entire surface shall be repainted in order to prevent further deterioration. R.	Windows containing broken glass or cracked glass that could be in danger of falling or shattering. All windows must be tight-fitting and have sashes of proper size and design and free from rotten wood, broken joints, or broken or loose mullions. S.	All openings originally designed as windows, doors, loading docks, or other means of egress or ingress which have been temporarily closed by boarding or other manner in a non-secure manner so as to allow unauthorized admittance. If an opening is temporarily closed by boarding to secure the building or structure, the boarding shall be trim fit, sealed to prevent water intrusion, and painted or stained to properly conform with the other exterior portions of the building and the building or structure shall be maintained in a state that secures the building or structure from any unauthorized admittance from humans, animals, or birds. T.	Any other condition which,  by the determination of the code enforcement coordinator or officer renders any building or structure dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or members of the general public. Sec. 11.9.6. Duties and Powers of Code Enforcement Coordinator or OfficerA.	The code enforcement coordinator or officer is hereby designated as the public officer to enforce the provisions of this Article and to exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the code enforcement coordinator or officer: 1.	To investigate the conditions of nonresidential buildings and structures in the City and to inspect nonresidential buildings and structures located in the City in order to determine which nonresidential buildings and structures are not being maintained so that the health and safety of its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized and for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this Article with respect to such nonresidential buildings and structures; 2.	To take such action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect the repair or demolition of nonresidential buildings and structures which have not been properly maintained in compliance with minimum standards established by this Article; 3.	To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this Article and an inventory of those non-residential buildings and structures which have not bee properly maintained in compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article; and 4.	To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed. B.	The code enforcement coordinator or officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this Article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 1.	To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the City to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article so that the safety or health of the occupants or members of the general public are not jeopardized;2.	To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 3.	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections in accordance with law; and 4.	To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents, and employees as the code enforcement coordinator or officer deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article. Sec. 11.9.7. InspectionsFor the purpose of making inspections, the code enforcement coordinator or officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times, nonresidential buildings and structures. If entry upon the premises for purposes of investigation is necessary, such entry shall be made with permission of the owner, the owner's agent, a tenant, or other person legally in possession of the premises, or if permission is not granted, pursuant to a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance with G.S. 15-27.2. Sec. 11.9.8. Procedure for EnforcementA.	Preliminary Investigation Whenever it appears to the code enforcement coordinator or officer that any nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum standards established by this Article, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall undertake a preliminary investigation, including, but not limited to, an inspection of the premises and discussion with any witnesses. B.	Complaint and HearingIf the preliminary investigation discloses evidence of a violation of the minimum standards established by this Article, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall issue and serve a complaint upon the owner of and any parties in interest, as may be established by reasonable due diligence, of the nonresidential building or structure. The complaint shall set forth and describe the violation and contain a notice stating that a hearing will be held before the code enforcement coordinator or officer at a place and time set forth in the notice; that the hearing shall be held not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after service of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to answer the complaint and to appear in person and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not control in hearings before the code enforcement coordinator or officer. C.	Procedure after Hearing1.	If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement coordinator or officer determines that the nonresidential building or structure has been maintained in that the property meets the minimum standards established by this Article, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall state in writing findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof a copy of said determination. 2.	If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement coordinator or officer determines that the nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or members of the general public is jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum standards established by this Article, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall state in writing findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 3. and 4. below and subject to the limitations set forth in Chapter 6. Use Regulations of this UDO.3.	If the code enforcement coordinator or officer determines that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would not exceed 50 percent of its then current value, then the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and issue an order that the owner, within a time specified in the order, either (i) repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article or (ii) vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure for any use. 4.	If the code enforcement coordinator or officer determines that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would exceed 50 percent of its then current value, then the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and issue an order that the owner, within a time specified in the order, either (i) remove or demolish the nonresidential building or structure or (ii) repair, alter or improve the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article. D.	Failure to Comply with Order and Ordinances1.	If the owner fails to comply with an order to either (i) repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure or (ii) vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall submit to the City Council an ordinance ordering the code enforcement coordinator or officer to cause such nonresidential building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article or to be vacated and closed for any use. The property shall be described in the ordinance. If City Council adopts the ordinance, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall cause the building or structure to be vacated and closed for any use. 2.	If the owner fails to comply with an order to either (i) remove or demolish the nonresidential building or structure or (ii) repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall submit to the City Council an ordinance ordering the code enforcement coordinator or officer to cause such nonresidential building or structure to be removed or demolished. No ordinance shall be adopted to require removal or demolition of a nonresidential building or structure until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the minimum standards established by the City Council. The property shall be described in the ordinance. If City Council adopts the ordinance, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished. Sec. 11.9.9. Limitations on Orders and Ordinances—Historic Landmark or Historic DistrictNotwithstanding any other provision of this Article, if the nonresidential building or structure is designated as a local historic landmark, listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or located in a locally designated historic district or in a historic district listed in the National Register of Historic Places and the City Council determines, after a public hearing, that the nonresidential building or structure is of individual significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the district, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned as unsafe, the order issued by the code enforcement coordinator or officer pursuant to Sec. 11.9.11. and the ordinance approved by City Council may only require that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated and closed until it is brought into compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article. Sec. 11.9.10. Limitations on Orders and Ordinances—Vacant Manufacturing Facility or Vacant Industrial WarehouseNotwithstanding any other provision of this Article, an order issued by the code enforcement coordinator or officer pursuant to Sec. 11.9.11. and the ordinance approved by City Council may not require repairs, alterations, or improvements to be made to a vacant manufacturing facility or a vacant industrial warehouse to preserve the original use. The order and/or ordinance may require such building or structure to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be required only when necessary to maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard that cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed for any use. Sec. 11.9.11. Vacated and Closed Nonresidential Buildings or StructuresA.	If the City Council has adopted an ordinance or the code enforcement coordinator or officer has issued an order requiring the building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or vacated and closed and the building or structure has been vacated and closed for a period of 2 years pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the City Council finds that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the building or structure and that the continuation of the building or structure in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of the City in that it would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, or would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, then City Council may, after the expiration of the 2-year period, adopt an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following: 1.	The ordinance shall require that the owner either (i) demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure within 90 days or (ii) repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article within 90 days. 2.	The ordinance shall require that if the owner does not either (i) demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure within 90 days or (ii) repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this Article within 90 days, then the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure. B.	In the case of a vacant manufacturing facility or a vacant industrial warehouse, the building or structure must have been vacated and closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a period of 5 years before City Council may take action under this section. C.	If the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the ordinance within 90 days, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure. Sec. 11.9.12. Methods of Service of Complaints and OrdersA.	Complaints or orders issued by the code enforcement coordinator or officer under this Article shall be served upon persons by personal service or by registered or certified mail, in conjunction with first class mail. When the manner or service is by first class mail in conjunction with registered or certified mail, and the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the first class mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after mailing, service shall be deemed sufficient. The person mailing the complaint or order by first class mail shall certify that fact and the date thereof, and such certificate shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. If first class mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject property. B.	If the identities of any owner or the whereabouts of parties in interest are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement coordinator or officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the code enforcement coordinator or officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the unknown owner or other parties in interest may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City at least once no later than the time by which personal service would be required under the provisions of this Article. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject. Sec. 11.9.13. In Rem Action by The Code Enforcement Coordinator or OfficerAfter failure of an owner of a nonresidential building or structure to comply with an order of the code enforcement coordinator or officer issued pursuant to the provisions of this Article and upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance authorizing and directing the owner to do so, as provided by G.S. 160A-439(f), the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall proceed to cause the nonresidential building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum standards established by this Article, or to be vacated and closed or to be removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the City Council. The code enforcement coordinator or officer shall post on the main entrance of any nonresidential building or structure which is to be vacated and closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for any use; the use or occupation of this building for any purpose is prohibited and unlawful." Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Sec. 11.9.14. Costs, a Lien on PremisesA.	As provided by G.S. 160A-439(i), the amount of the cost of any repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to be made or done by the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such costs were incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as provided by Article 10, Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes. The amount of the costs shall also be a lien on any other real property of the owner located within the City limits except for the owner's primary residence. The additional lien on other real property of the owner, excluding the subject property, as provided in this subdivision is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment. B.	If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or demolished by the code enforcement coordinator or officer, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall offer for sale any recoverable materials of the building or structure and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the building or structure and shall credit the proceeds of the sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the code enforcement coordinator or officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the Court, and shall be disbursed by the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the Court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the governing body to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Sec. 11.9.15. EjectmentIf any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a nonresidential building or structure, a civil action may be filed in the name of the City to remove the occupant. The action to vacate shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as the defendant any person occupying the nonresidential building or structure. The Clerk of Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date, and place not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at the hearing the code enforcement coordinator or officer produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the City Council pursuant to G.S. 160A-439(f) and this UDO to vacate the occupied nonresidential building or structure, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered under this subsection by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or structure who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this subsection unless the occupant was served with notice, at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding, that the City Council has ordered the code enforcement coordinator or officer to proceed to exercise his duties under G.S. 160A-439(f) and this UDO to vacate and close or remove and demolish the nonresidential building or structure. Sec. 11.9.16. Filing of OrdinancesAn ordinance adopted by City Council pursuant to this Article shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Wake County and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. 160A-439(f) and (g). Sec. 11.9.17. Alternative RemediesNeither this Article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Raleigh to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this Article by criminal process as authorized by G.S. 14-4, and this Article, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein or in other ordinances or laws. Sec. 11.9.18. Board of Adjustment to Hear AppealsA.	All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the code enforcement coordinator or officer pursuant to this Article shall be heard and determined by the Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body, the Board shall have the power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. B.	Appeals shall be subject to the following: 1.	An appeal from any decision or order of the code enforcement coordinator or officer may be taken by any aggrieved party. Any appeal from the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall be taken within 10 days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the code enforcement coordinator or officer, and the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the code enforcement coordinator or officer shall transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the appealed decision was made. When the appeal is from a decision of the code enforcement coordinator or officer refusing to allow the aggrieved party to act, the code enforcement coordinator or officer's decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When the appeal is from a decision of the code enforcement coordinator or officer requiring the aggrieved party to act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing of the appeal by the Board; however, should the code enforcement coordinator or officer certify to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certification, a suspension of the requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order. The restraining order may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than 1 day's written notice to the code enforcement coordinator or officer, by the Board or by a court of general jurisdiction upon petition made pursuant to G.S. 160A-446(f) and this UDO. 2.	The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give notice to all parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed or order, and may make such decision and order as ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the code enforcement coordinator or officer. The concurring vote of 4/5 of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the code enforcement coordinator or officer. In any case when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of this Article, the Board may adapt the application of the Article to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the Article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 3.	Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by the Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the Board. Sec. 11.9.19. Temporary Injunction Remedy for Aggrieved PersonAny party aggrieved by an order issued by the code enforcement coordinator or officer or a decision rendered by the board of adjustment shall have the right within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. 160A-446(f). Sec. 11.9.20. Conflict With Other ProvisionsIn the event any provision standard, or requirement of this Article is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance or code of the City, the provisions which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of health and safety of the citizens of the City shall prevail. Sec. 11.9.21. Violations; PenaltyA.	It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential building or structure to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the code enforcement coordinator or officer duly made and served in accordance with the provisions of this Article, within the time specified in the order. Each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential building or structure, with respect to which an order has been issued, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, improvement, or its vacation and closing. Each day that such occupancy continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. B.	The violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. 14-4. C.	In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies provided by this Article, any owner of a nonresidential building or structure that fails to comply with an order of the code enforcement coordinator or officer within the time specified therein, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense in the calendar year, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent offenses in the calendar year. Each subsequent offense after the third will be subject to a civil penalty of $250.00. Each 30-day period, or part thereof, in which a violation continues will constitute a separate and distinct offense. Article 11.1. Adoption of Codes by Reference	11 – 3











































Sec. 11.1.1. Scope of Chapter and Codes...................................................11 – 3
Sec. 11.1.2. Jurisdiction of Chapter and Codes...........................................11 – 3
Sec. 11.1.3. Technical Codes......................................................................11 – 3
Sec. 11.1.4. Compliance With Codes ........................................................11 – 4
Sec. 11.1.5. Copies of Codes Filed With City Clerk......................................11 – 5


Article 11.2. Development Services Department	11 – 6Sec. 11.2.1. Functions and Duties.............................................................11 – 6
Sec. 11.2.2. Inspection Procedure............................................................11 – 6
Sec. 11.2.3. Oversight Not to Legalize Violation........................................11 – 7
Sec. 11.2.4. Administrative Liability..........................................................11 – 7
Sec. 11.2.5. City Liability...........................................................................11 – 7


Article 11.3. Examining Boards & Licensing	11 – 8Sec. 11.3.1. Registration of Contractors....................................................11 – 8
Sec. 11.3.2. Electrical...............................................................................11 – 8


Article 11.4. Enforcement Provisions	11 – 10Sec. 11.4.1. Permit Requirements...........................................................11 – 10
Sec. 11.4.2. Application for Permit..........................................................11 – 10
Sec. 11.4.3. Plans and Specifications.......................................................11 – 11
Sec. 11.4.4. Limitations on Issuance of Permits.......................................11 – 11
Sec. 11.4.5. Reserved for Future Use.......................................................11 – 11
Sec. 11.4.6. Limitation on Issuance of Permits for Construction in Floodprone Areas......................................................................................................11 – 11
Sec. 11.4.7. Issuance of Permit................................................................11 – 13
Sec. 11.4.8. Permit Fees..........................................................................11 – 13
Sec. 11.4.9. Violations.............................................................................11 – 13
Sec. 11.4.10. Civil Penalty........................................................................11 – 14


Article 11.5. Unsafe Buildings	11 – 15Sec. 11.5.1. Short Title.............................................................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.2. Defined................................................................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.3. Remedy; No Action or Appeal...............................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.4. Nuisances Declared..............................................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.5. Emergency Cases.................................................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.6. Administrative Liability........................................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.7. Violations; Unlawful to Disregard Notices or Orders..............11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.8. Enforcement........................................................................11 – 15
Sec. 11.5.9. Lis Pendens..........................................................................11 – 16
Sec. 11.5.10. Administrative Fee.............................................................11 – 16


Article 11.6. Housing Code	11 – 17Sec. 11.6.1. Preamble; Definitions...........................................................11 – 17
Sec. 11.6.2. Conflict With Other Provisions..............................................11 – 17
Sec. 11.6.3. Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities........11 – 17
Sec. 11.6.4. Responsibilities of Persons...................................................11 – 26
Sec. 11.6.5. Powers of Department.........................................................11 – 28
Sec. 11.6.6. Inspections...........................................................................11 – 28
Sec. 11.6.7. Abatement; Hearing on Charges; Filing; Petition and Charges; Investigation; Time and Conduct of Hearing...........................................11 – 29
Sec. 11.6.8. Service of Order, Contents...................................................11 – 29
Sec. 11.6.9. Methods of Service..............................................................11 – 30
Sec. 11.6.10. Lis Pendens........................................................................11 – 30
Sec. 11.6.11. Board of Adjustment to Hear Appeals.................................11 – 30
Sec. 11.6.12. Placarding Premises...........................................................11 – 30
Sec. 11.6.13. Approval by Governing Body of Removal or Demolition of Dwell­
ing..........................................................................................................11 – 30
Sec. 11.6.14. Lien On Premises for Costs; Sale of Materials, etc. .............11 – 30
Sec. 11.6.15. Alternate Remedies............................................................11 – 31
Sec. 11.6.16. Penalty...............................................................................11 – 31
Sec. 11.6.17. Administrative Fee..............................................................11 – 31


Article 11.7. Manufactured Homes	11 – 33Sec. 11.7.1. Inspection of Manufactured Homes Certificate Required......11 – 33
Sec. 11.7.2. Permit Requirements in Floodprone Areas............................11 – 33


Article 11.8. Demolition by Neglect of Historic Landmarks and Structures Within Historic Overlay Districts	11 – 34Sec. 11.8.1. Applicability.........................................................................11 – 34
Sec. 11.8.2. Petition and Action...............................................................11 – 34
Sec. 11.8.3. Safeguards from Undue Economic Hardship........................11 – 35
Sec. 11.8.4. Appeals................................................................................11 – 38
Sec. 11.8.5. Standards.............................................................................11 – 38


Article 11.9. Nonresidential Building or Structure Code	11 – 40Sec. 11.9.1. Title......................................................................................11 – 40
Sec. 11.9.2. Purpose................................................................................11 – 40
Sec. 11.9.3. Definitions...........................................................................11 – 40
Sec. 11.9.4. Applicability and Compliance...............................................11 – 40
Sec. 11.9.5. Maintenance Standards for Nonresidential Buildings and Struc­
tures.......................................................................................................11 – 40
Sec. 11.9.6. Duties and Powers of Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer.....11 – 42
Sec. 11.9.7. Inspections...........................................................................11 – 42
Sec. 11.9.8. Procedure for Enforcement..................................................11 – 42
Sec. 11.9.9. Limitations on Orders and Ordinances—Historic Landmark or His­
toric District............................................................................................11 – 44
Sec. 11.9.10. Limitations on Orders and Ordinances—Vacant Manufacturing Facility or Vacant Industrial Warehouse..................................................11 – 44
Sec. 11.9.11. Vacated and Closed Nonresidential Buildings or Structures.11 – 44
Sec. 11.9.12. Methods of Service of Complaints and Orders....................11 – 44
Sec. 11.9.13. In Rem Action by The Code Enforcement Coordinator or Officer...11 – 45
Sec. 11.9.14. Costs, a Lien on Premises...................................................11 – 45
Sec. 11.9.15. Ejectment...........................................................................11 – 45
Sec. 11.9.16. Filing of Ordinances...........................................................11 – 46
Sec. 11.9.17. Alternative Remedies.........................................................11 – 46
Sec. 11.9.18. Board of Adjustment to Hear Appeals................................11 – 46
Sec. 11.9.19. Temporary Injunction Remedy for Aggrieved Person.........11 – 46
Sec. 11.9.20. Conflict With Other Provisions...........................................11 – 46
Sec. 11.9.21. Violations; Penalty..............................................................11 – 47




Page Intentionally Left Blank




CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.1. General
.Sec. 12.1.1. General Meaning of Words and Terms

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
B

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
E

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
F

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
G

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
M

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
O

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
R

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
S

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
U

.CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 .

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
A

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 C

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 F

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 F

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 I

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 M

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 P

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
R

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
 T

Article 12.2. Defined Terms   |   CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS  
W

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
Housing Code Definitions

CHAPTER 12. DEFINITIONS   |   Article 12.2. Defined Terms
Housing Code Definitions

Chapter 12. 
Definitions

Article 12.1. 
General

Sec. 12.1.1. 
General Meaning of Words and Terms

A.	
All words and terms used have their commonly accepted and ordinary meaning unless they are specifically defined in this UDO or the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary. 

B.	
In the absence of court decisions or Board of Adjustment decisions specifically interpreting a provision in question, specific definitions listed in this UDO or previous interpretations of a provision by the Zoning Administrator, the meaning of provisions shall be based on the following general hierarchy of sources:
1.	
For a legal term, definitions in a legal dictionary or if not a legal term, definitions in an ordinary dictionary; 

2.	
Statements of the purpose and intent of particular sections or background reports and studies adopted or referred to in this UDO, although such documents cannot overrule a specific code provision;

3.	
Minutes of discussions of legislative or advisory bodies considering adoption of the provision in question;

4.	
Definitions of similar terms contained in Federal and State statutes and regulations; and

5.	
Ordinary rules of grammar.



C.	
When vagueness or ambiguity is found to exist as to the meaning of any word or term used, any appropriate cannon, maxim, principle or other technical rule of interpretations or construction used by the courts of this State may be employed to resolve vagueness and ambiguity in language.

Sec. 12.1.2. 
Graphics, Illustrations, Photographs & Flowcharts


The graphics, illustrations, photographs and flowcharts used to explain visually certain provisions of this UDO are for illustrative purposes only. Where there is a conflict between a graphic, illustration, photograph or flowchart and the text of this UDO, the text of this UDO controls. 
Sec. 12.1.3. 
Abbreviations

A.	
BFE: Base Flood Elevation

B.	
DBH: Diameter at Breast Height

C.	
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration

D.	
FC: Footcandle 

E.	
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency

F.	
FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Map


Article 12.2. 
Defined Terms


a
Accessory Dwelling Unit 
A self-contained dwelling unit that is located on the same lot as a principal dwelling but is used independent and subordinate of the principal dwelling. Accessory Dwelling Units include a living room, sleeping area, kitchen, and bathroom, and have a lockable entrance door. An Accessory Dwelling Unit may be located above a garage. Accessory Dwelling Units may be detached or attached to the principal dwelling, but shall not be permitted within the attached building type.
Accessory Structure
Unless otherwise specifically regulated elsewhere herein, a structure with height greater than 4 feet that is subordinate in both purpose and size that is incidental to and customarily associated with any principal structure that is located on the same lot and detached from the principal structure. 
Accessory Use
Any use subordinate in both purpose and size that is incidental to and customarily associated with any principal use that is located on the same lot.
Accelerated Erosion
Any increase over the rate of natural erosion which results from land-disturbing activities. 
Active Tree Preservation
Arboricultural practices designed to ensure survival of existing trees by the protection of critical root zones from tree disturbing activities and the application of one or more arboricultural maintenance procedures, including but not limited to: watering, fertilizing, pruning of trees, pruning of roots and aeration.
Addition (to an existing buidling)
Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is “new construction.” 
Adequate Erosion Control Measure
Any structure, device or measure which controls accelerated erosion, retains stormwater and prevents off-site sedimentation. 
Adult Cabaret
Any place which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
Adult Establishment
Adult cabarets, adult media centers, sadomasochism centers and any place contained in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202-10(b), excluding masseurs. 
Adult Media Center
Any place: 
1.	
Which receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar month from the sale, rental or both of books, periodicals, magazines, videotapes, CD-ROM, computer software, movies and other products offered in photographic, print, electronic, magnetic or digital or other imaging medium which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202.10(10) or “specified sexual activities” as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202.10(11); or “sexually oriented devices” as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202.10(9) or any combination thereof; or 

2.	
Having as a preponderance of its books, periodicals, magazines, videotapes, CD-ROM, computer software, movies and other products offered in photographic, print, electronic, magnetic or digital or other imaging medium which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202.10(10) or “specified sexual activities” as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-202.10(11); or “sexually oriented devices” as defined in G.S. 14-202.10(9) or any combination thereof. 


Affected Area
An area which will potentially suffer special damages, distinct from the rest of the community, by the determination of a quasi-judicial body. The boundaries of an affected area will vary depending on the particular subject matter to be decided by the quasi-judicial body. 
Affordable Housing 
Housing that is affordable to and occupied by families with an annual household income of no greater than 60% of area median income, adjusted for household size, according to the then-current income limits established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development in accordance with Section 3 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.) or any successor legislation. An affordable rental housing development has a minimum of 10% affordable rental housing units and has a compliance period of at least 30 years. 
Agricultural Produce   
Fresh farm or garden-produced crops and goods, the majority of which were grown and harvested in North Carolina including, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, eggs, nuts, honey and fresh-cut flowers.
Attic
An unfinished space between roof framing and the ceiling of rooms below that is accessed by ladder or permanent stairs. This area is used for storage or mechanical equipment and cannot be used as habitable space. If an attic is con­verted to a habitable space, such conversion shall cause the area to be deemed as an additional story.
b
Banner
Any sign, except an awning sign, made of flexible, fabric-like material. 
Basal Area
The total cross sectional area, stated in square feet per acre, of trees in a wooded area measured at 4½ feet above ground level. 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
A determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood based on current conditions hydrology or future conditions hydrology as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has not been provided in a flood hazard area, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal or State other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with 2 additional vertical feet establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation in flood hazard areas. 
Base Flood
The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement
Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below grade level) on all sides. 
Being Conducted
A land-disturbing activity has been initiated, but permanent stabilization of the site has not been completed.
Block
A an area of land enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings. 
Building Facade
The face of a building that delineates the edge of conditioned floor space.
Building Foundation Wall
A structural portion of a building that serves to retain grade or maintain a continuous ground floor elevation. A building foundation wall is an integral part of the structure of a building.
Built Area
The sum of the horizontal areas of materials existing or placed at the ground surface that have impervious surfaces, as defined herein, that are not 0% impervious, including but not limited to permeable and semi-permeable pavements and pavers, green roofs, and living roofs.
c
Caliper 
The diameter of nursery-grown trees measured at a point on the tree 6 inches above soil line for trees up to 4 inches caliper or measured at a point on the tree 12 inches above soil line for trees greater than 4 inches caliper. Caliper is the measurement used to specify sizes of new or replacement trees planted to meet the requirements of this UDO. 
Casualty
Damage or destruction which is caused by the exercise of the power of eminent domain; man-made acts such as riot, fire, accident, explosion; or flood, lightning, wind or other calamity or act of nature. 
Champion Tree
Any tree listed as the champion or co-champion of its species, either on the “National Big Tree” list as compiled by the American Forestry Association or on the “Champion Big Trees of North Carolina” list as compiled by the North Carolina Division of Forest Resources or on the “Capital Trees Program” list as complied by Wake County Keep America Beautiful. 
Charitable Institution
Establishments that are primarily engaged in administration of programs of financial assistance, training, counseling and other services to individuals or organizations, but not providing housing or shelter. 
Closed Fence or Wall
A fence or wall which has no openings and contains shiplap or tongue and groove or similar overlapping design if made of wood. 
Civic Club
A not for profit club for civic, social or fraternal purposes operated by a civic, social or fraternal organization, including offices for local, State and regional officials, not including a political party club.
Completion of Construction or Development
No further land-disturbing activity is required on a phase of a project except that which is necessary for establishing a permanent ground cover. 
Comprehensive Plan
Refers to the 2030 Comprehensive Plan (latest addition) for the City of Raleigh.
Conservation Development
A conservation development trades smaller lot sizes (with smaller setbacks) and additional density in exchange for protecting a significant amount of open space.
Construction Permit 
A zoning permit, grading permit, right-of-way permit, driveway permit, tree conservation area permit or utility plan permit.
Construction Sign
Any temporary sign erected during construction which may indicate the project name and the names of architects, contractors, subcontractors, developers, rental agencies, financial institutions or other principals involved in the sponsorship, design and construction of a structure or project. 
Convention Center, Arena
A place of assembly that charges for meeting or exhibition areas and such areas either contain North Carolina Building Code occupancy limits of more than 800 people or have meeting and exhibition areas that total more than 12,000 square feet. 
Copy
The wording or pictorial graphics on a sign surface either in permanent or removable form. 
Copy (Area of)
The square or rectangular area which fully encloses the extreme limits of the message, copy, announcement or decoration on a sign. 
Corner Lot
A lot that has frontage along two or more intersecting streets. 
Courtyard 
An open space, either landscaped, hardscaped or both surrounded by structure(s). Vehicular surface area and parking are not permitted within a courtyard.  
Critical Root Zone
The area uniformly encompassed by a circle with a radius equal to 1¼ feet per inch of DBH tree trunk of the preserved tree measured at 4½ feet above the ground (measured to the nearest inch), with the trunk of the tree at the center of the circle. The minimum radius shall not be less than 7 feet.
Current Conditions Hydrology
The flood discharges associated with the land-use conditions existing within the drainage area of a watercourse at the time a flood study of the watercourse was conducted. Current conditions flood discharges and historical flood study information are published in the flood insurance study. 
Cutoff Fixture
An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that no more than 2½ % of the total light emitted by the fixture is projected above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
d
Decorative Fence 
An open or solid fence or wall that matches or complements the adjacent primary structure on the site. This shall not include a fence that is required to satisfy any provision of this UDO, any retaining wall, any security fence such as chainlink and shall not be available for purchase in stores. 
Department of City Planning
The agency designated and established by City Council to plan, direct and coordinate the operation and application of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO).
Developer 
A site planner or subdivider.
Development 
Any site plan or subdivision.
Development-related Improvements 
Includes streetscape, sidewalk, street, storm drainage, bicycle infrastructure, greenways, transit facilities, utilities, pavement, curb and gutter, turning lanes, acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes.
Development Services Department
The agency designated and established by City Council which provides a one-stop resource for all development reviews, inspections, and permits from initial application through certificate of occupancy.
Development Services Director
The chief administrator as designated by the City Manager to plan, direct and coordinate the operations of the department, the UDO, and the North Caroline State Building Code.
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) 
The diameter of the trunk of a single-trunk tree measured at 4½ feet (breast height) above grade level or the total diameter of all stems of a multi-trunk tree measured at 4½ feet above grade. 
Discharge Point
That point at which runoff leaves a tract of land. 
Display Area
An outdoor open air area where merchandise is stored throughout the day and night and this same stored merchandise is sold or leased, not including the display area for any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer (see vehicular display area).  
Drainage Basin Study Maps
Flood hazard boundary maps adopted by the City. Floodplain areas and the base flood elevations shown on drainage basin study maps are based on future conditions hydrology. 
Dwelling Unit
A building or portion of a building providing complete and permanent living facilities, including cooking and bathing facilities.
e
Elevated Building
An above-ground building built to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls parallel to the flow of water; and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. Elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
Energy Dissipator
An adequate erosion control measure placed at the outlets of storm drainage facilities or at other points as specified by this chapter to receive and breakdown the energy from high velocity flow. 
Engineering Services Department
The Engineering Services Department is responsible for overseeing the design and construction of roadway, stormwater and facility improvement projects to ensure the safety and sustainability through diligent review and thorough inspections as well as cost effective maintenance of existing system components. Services include facility construction management, roadway design and construction, facility maintenance, vehicle fleet services, and stormwater management.
Engineering Services Director
The chief administrator as designated by the City Manager to plan, direct and coordinate the operations of the department.
Ephemeral (Stormwater) Stream
A feature that carries only stormwater in direct response to precipitation with waters flowing only during and shortly after large precipitation events. An ephemeral stream may or may not have a well-defined channel, the aquatic bed is always above the water table and stormwater runoff is the primary source of water. An ephemeral stream typically lacks the biological, hydrological and physical characteristics commonly associated with the continuous or intermittent conveyance of water. 
Erosion
The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity or any combination thereof. 
Existing Transit Route
Any fixed-route public transit service operated by or on behalf of a public transit agency and shown on the current system map of the agency.
Exterior Features
Important landscape and natural features, significant archaeological features, architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the kind and texture of the building material, the size, color and scale of the building and the type, color, style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of outdoor signs, exterior features shall be construed to mean style, material, size, color and location of all such signs. 
f
Face of Sign (Sign Face)
The entire surface area of a sign upon, against or through which copy is placed. 
Flashing Sign
Any sign which contains an intermittent, blinking, scintillating or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light or an externally mounted intermittent light source. 
Flood or Flooding
The general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers or other inland water. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map
The official map of the City on which appears a description of the boundaries of flood -plain, -prone and/or -hazard areas, including representations of the floodway, floodway fringe, future conditions flood hazard areas. The map is applicable to the community within the corporate limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. The flood hazard boundary map(s) consist of flood insurance rate maps and drainage basin study maps, flood hazard soils plus additional distances required in this UDO and recorded flood storage areas required by this UDO. The floodway areas, floodway fringe areas and future conditions flood hazard areas shown and illustrated on floodway hazard boundary maps are hereby adopted as official flood hazard boundary maps and floodway maps for the City and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. These maps and other data are hereby incorporated herein by reference and duly made a part of this chapter. The most recent maps and data officially approved by the City Council are identified in the evidence of the Council’s action and are kept on file with the City for public inspection. 
Flood Hazard Soils
Those types of soils in the relatively flat areas associated with natural watercourses which are subject to periodic flooding. The types of soils and their corresponding symbols are as follows: 
Name
 Map Symbol
 
Altavista fine sandy loam, 0% to 4% slopes
 AfA
 
Augusta fine sandy loam
 Au
 
Buncombe soils
 Bu
 
Chewacla soils
 Cm
 
Congaree fine sandy loam
 Co
 
Congaree silt loam
 Cp
 
Mantachie soils
 Me
 
Roanoke fine sandy loam
 Ro
 
Wahee fine sandy loam
 Wh
 
Wehadkee silt loam
 Wn
 
Wehadkee and Bibb soils
 Wo
 


Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
An official map of the city on which appears a description of the boundaries of floodplain, floodprone and flood hazard areas, including representations of the floodway, floodway fringe, future conditions flood hazard areas and a delineation of the risk premium zones applicable to the community within the corporate limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. The flood insurance study, Wake County, Federal Emergency Management Agency, latest publication, consisting of (i) flood insurance rate maps and (ii) other pertinent data furnished by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, to the City, showing and illustrating floodway areas, floodway fringe areas and future conditions flood hazard areas are hereby adopted as official flood hazard boundary maps and floodway maps for the City and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. These maps and other data are hereby incorporated herein by reference and duly made a part of this UDO. The most recent maps and data officially approved by the City Council are identified in the evidence of the City Council’s action and are kept on file in Engineering Services for public inspection. 
Flood Insurance Study 
An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRM). 
Flood Lamp
A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a specific direction with a reflector formed from the glass envelope of the lamp itself. Such lamps are so designated by the manufacturers and are typically used in residential outdoor area lighting. 
Flood Light 
A form of lighting designed to direct its output in a diffuse, more or less specific direction, with reflecting or refracting elements located external to the lamp. 
Floodplain, Floodprone or Flood Hazard Area 
The maximum area, adjoining a river, stream, watercourse or lake which is likely to be flooded, by the base flood or the future conditions flood. The flood -plain, -prone and/or -hazard area includes “floodway” areas, “floodway fringe” areas and future conditions flood hazard areas. These areas are illustrated on flood hazard boundary maps, flood hazard soils plus additional distances, recorded flood storage areas required by this UDO and drainage basin study maps. 
Floodproofing
Any combination of structural and nonstructural features, additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures in accordance with or comparable to guidelines set forth in “Floodproofing Regulations” June 1972 edition, published by the Office of the Chief Engineers U.S. Army, Washington, D.C. for an essentially dry floodproof class (W2). 
Floodway
That portion of channels of streams and areas of land adjacent thereto within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction necessary to carry and discharge the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than 1 foot at any point, and those areas illustrated on the maps referred to in the definition of flood hazard boundary map, and those areas adjoining watercourses draining 1 square mile or more of watershed which lie within the outermost boundaries of either the flood hazard soils or the made land which traverse such soils lying along said watercourses, and those areas required by this UDO to be delineated as flood storage areas or are delineated as a floodprone areas on the drainage basin study maps. 
Floodway Fringe
That portion of the flood -plain, -prone and/or -hazard area outside the floodway and illustrated on the map referred to in the definition of flood hazard boundary map above. The floodway fringe for watercourses not defined on maps referred to in the definition of flood hazard boundary map above are herein defined for those areas adjoining watercourses draining less than 1 square mile of watershed as the flood hazard soils plus 2 additional vertical feet from the outermost boundaries of either said soils or the made land which traverse such soils lying along said watercourses and the floodway fringe for those areas adjoining watercourses 1 square mile or more is defined as lands which lie 5 vertical feet from the outermost boundaries of either the flood hazard soils or the made land which traverse such soils lying along the watercourse. 
Footcandle (FC)
A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto a given point, measured as 1 lumen per square foot. 
Forestry, General
A woodland area where all of the following occur: 
1.	
The growing of trees;  

2.	
The harvesting of timber, leaves or seeds; 

3.	
The regeneration of trees by the replanting of trees at the rate of 1 inch caliper per every 100 square feet of tree disturbing activity area within 220 days of harvesting; and 

4.	
The application of “best management practices,” including the NC Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources, “Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality”—Title 15A North Carolina Administrative Code, subchapter 11, sections 1.101—.0209 and all successor documents. 

5.	
A forest management plan is prepared or approved either by a professional forester registered in the State of North Carolina or by the Division of North Carolina Forest Resources. Copies of the forest management plan shall be provided to the City upon request. 


Freestanding Retaining Wall
A wall that serves to retain soil where the change in ground elevation exceeds to the angle of repose of the soil. A freestanding wall can be completely disconnected from a building. It can also touch a building, but should not be a structural element that is needed to support the building.
Frontage
There are 7 frontages, including: Parkway (-PK), Detached (-DE),  Parking Limited (-PL), Green, Urban Limited (UL), Urban General (-UG) and Shopfront (-SH).
Front Wall Plane 
The building facade facing the primary street right-of-way. If this facade contains wall articulation, the entire length of the articulated wall shall constitute the front wall plane. Bay windows shall not be considered part of the front wall plane.
Front Yard
The area located between the front line of a building or structure and the front boundary of a lot or an existing or proposed street right-of-way and extending along the entire width of the lot. 
Full Cutoff Fixture
An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that it emits no light above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
Future Conditions Flood
The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future conditions hydrology. 
Future Conditions Flood Elevation
A determination of the water surface elevations of the 1 percent annual chance flood based on future conditions hydrology as published in the flood insurance study. This elevation, when combined with 2 additional vertical feet, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation in future conditions flood hazard areas. 
Future Conditions Flood Hazard Area
The land area that would be inundated by the 1 percent annual chance flood based on future conditions hydrology as determined in this UDO. 
Future Conditions Hydrology
The flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on Raleigh’s zoning maps or the Comprehensive Plan’s Future Land Use Map or both and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway such as bridge and culvert construction, fill and excavation. Future conditions flood discharges are published in the flood insurance study.
.
g
Glare
The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss of visual performance and ability. 
Governmental Entity 
Any department, commission, agency or other instrument of the Federal, State, County or municipal government.
Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI)
Any of a number of practices that, used individually or collectively, contribute to managing, treating, and reducing stormwater runoff from a development or redevelopment site, as close as possible to the runoff's source, by preserving natural landscape features (such as vegetation, soils, hydrology, and natural processes) and/or by mimicking natural processes through installation and maintenance of structurally engineered devices (such as bioretention cells, bioswales, permeable paving/pavers, green roofs, stormwater street trees, and cisterns). In addition to contributing to stormwater management, GSI practices can enhance site aesthetics, improve air quality, reduce urban heat island impacts, provide shading, create wildlife habitat, reduce energy consumption, reduce infrastructure costs, and increase property values.
Gross Floor Area 
The sum in square feet of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline when 2 buildings or units abut. Gross floor area includes basement floor area when more than 50% of the basement height is above the established curb level or above the finished lot grade level where the curb level has not been established. Elevator shafts, stairwells, floor space used for mechanical equipment, attics, balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches and floor area devoted to accessory uses are included in the calculation of gross floor area. However, the following shall not be included: any space devoted exclusively to on-site parking; outdoor loading, display, storage, utility service areas; and/or uninhabited enclosed space on tops of roofs; or attic space having head room of less than 7'-10". 
Ground Cover
Any living or nonliving material incorporated in or covering the surface of the soil which controls accelerated erosion and prevents off-site sedimentation in accordance with this chapter. 
h
Hazardous Tree
A tree is hazardous when it meets all of the following as determined by a Certified Arborist:
1.	
It has a structural defect that predisposes the entire tree, or at least 1/5 or more of the tree's crown, to structural failure; 

2.	
The DBH of the tree predisposed to structural failure is at least 10 inches, or the diameter of the crown limb(s) predisposed to structural failure is at least 8 inches at the largest point;

3.	
The structural defect has a failure potential of "medium" or greater as described in the current edition of A Photographic Guide to the Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas, published by the International Society of Arboriculture, and cannot be remedied by an accepted arboricultural practice;

4.	
A target exists beneath or adjacent to the tree that could be injured or damaged, including but not limited to: pedestrians, vehicles, streets, sidewalks, buildings and other man-made structures. 


Hazardous Waste Facility
A facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery or disposal of hazardous waste, as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §130A-290.
Heritage Tree
A single-trunk shade tree that is 24 inches DBH or larger, or a single-trunk understory tree that is 12 inches DBH or larger that is not unhealthy and not a hazardous tree. 
High-Quality Waters
Waters classified in title 15A North Carolina Administrative Code chapter 2B section .0101(e)(5) - General Procedures and amendments thereto, all of which is incorporated by reference.
High-Quality-Water (HQW) Zones
Those areas that are within both 1 mile and drain to high-quality waters. 
Historic Alley
A publicly dedicated alley that was in existence as of September 1, 2013. 
Historic Landmark
A building, site or object that has been designated by the City Council as either a historic site, property or landmark. 
Hospice
Any coordinated program of care provided by a medically directed interdisciplinary team designed to provide palliative care and emotional support to the terminally ill in a home or homelike setting so that quality of life is maintained and family members may be active participants in care of the terminally ill family member.
Hospital 
One or more buildings or structures located on the same lot primarily devoted to the rendering of health, medical and nursing care to persons on an in-patient basis and which provide facilities and services of a scope and type customarily provided by hospitals, which may include facilities for intensive care and self-care; clinics and out-patient facilities; clinical, pathological and other laboratories; health care research facilities; laundries; training facilities for nurses, interns, physicians and other staff members; food preparation and food service facilities; administration buildings, central service and other administrative facilities; medical office facilities owned and operated by the hospital for physicians who are members of the hospital medical staff; and other general hospital facilities. 
Household
One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption, no household shall contain more than 4 unrelated persons. A household may include 5 or fewer foster children placed in a family foster home licensed by the State of North Carolina.
i
Impervious Surface
Any material that significantly reduces and prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include but are not limited to roofs, patios, balconies, decks, streets, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks and any concrete, stone, brick, asphalt or compacted gravel surfaces. The effective impervious coverage for certain surfaces listed below are as follows: 
1.	
Asphalt, concrete, crusher-run gravel, masonry, marl, wood and other impermeable surfaces that prevent land area from infiltrating stormwater are 100% impervious. 

2.	
Porous surfaces that permit direct infiltration of unconcentrated stormwater into ground areas which are prepared in accordance with plans approved by the City so that the first one-half inch of stormwater infiltrates into the ground are 70% through 10% impervious, depending on: 
a.	
Compaction;

b.	
Condition of subgrade;

c.	
Extent of land disturbance;

d.	
Extent of porous openings;

e.	
Protection from siltation and clogging;

f.	
Slope of the ground area; and

g.	
Volume of stormwater stored.



3.	
Slatted wood decks that allow the drainage of water through the slats to an unpaved surface below are 50% impervious. If the area covered by the deck is washed gravel, the deck is 30% impervious. 

4.	
Ungraveled natural footpaths, water surfaces of swimming pools and drainfields are 0% impervious.

5.	
All other necessary determinations about impervious surfaces will be based on hydrological tests based on existing subgrade soils, slope, rainfall intensity and rainfall duration. 


Indigenous/Locally Adapted Species 
Plant and animal life forms which are naturally found in the State of North Carolina.
Infrastructure
Transit supportive items including but not limited to seating, shelter, trash receptacles, lighting and real-time transit schedule information provided at a transit stop for the comfort, safety and/or convenience of transit passengers.
Interior Lot
A lot other than a corner lot. 
Internal Illumination
A light source concealed or contained within the sign itself, such as a neon tube, which becomes visible in darkness by shining through a translucent surface.
Internal Refractive Lens 
A glass or plastic lens installed between the lamp and the sections of the outer fixture globe or enclosure. Refractive refers to the redirection (bending) of the light as it goes through the lens, softening and spreading the light being distributed from the light source thereby reducing direct glare. 
l
Lake, Watercourses
Any natural or relocated stream, river, brook, swamp, sound, bay, creek, run, branch, canal, waterway, estuary and any reservoir, lake or pond, natural or impounded, in which sediment may be moved or carried in suspension and which could be damaged by an accumulation of sediment. 
Land-Disturbing Activity
 Any use of the land by any person in residential, recreational, industrial, educational, service, institutional, civic, office or commercial development, highway and road construction and maintenance that results in a change in the natural cover or topography or alters the natural structure of the land mass and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation. 
Landfill (debris from on-site)
A demolition landfill that is limited to receiving from the site stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood, uncontaminated earth or other uncontaminated solid waste from construction activities on the same site. 
Landing Pad
A firm, stable and slip-resistant surface typically located between the back of curb and adjacent sidewalk constructed from concrete at a bus stop. The pad provides continuity between the sidewalk and a transit vehicle for all users and allows for the deployment of wheelchair ramps from the transit vehicle. The landing pad may also serve as the foundation to which a bench or shelter is permanently mounted and shall satisfy the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Light Source
The element of a lighting fixture that is the point of origin of the lumens emitted by the fixture. 
Loading Area 
An area which contains trash collection areas, refuse containers, outdoor loading and unloading spaces, docks, outdoor shipping and receiving areas, outdoor bulk storage of materials or parts thereof and outdoor repair areas of any service stations, safety equipment inspection stations or dealers. 
Locally Adapted Species 
Non-native species of animal and plant life that are adapted to the climatic conditions of North Carolina.
Lot Coverage
The amount of net lot area within designated floodway fringe areas and future conditions flood hazard areas expressed in terms of a percentage that is covered by any obstruction restricting or displacing the flow of flood waters and any fill added to the lot after May 3, 2006. 
Lowest Floor
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not constructed so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this UDO. 
Lumen
A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted by a light source. 
m
Manufactured Home 
A structure transportable in one or more sections that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation. The term includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured Home Park
A lot which contains or is intended to contain manufactured home spaces for lease or unit ownership (condominium) pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 47C.  
Manufactured Home Space
A plot of land within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of a single manufactured home. 
Manufactured Home Stands or Pads
That portion of the manufactured home space designed for occupancy by a manufactured home. 
Major Access Corridor
A street or highway designed to move large volumes of through traffic from 1 area to another and usually built and maintained with Federal assistance. These corridors usually have separated grades and a minimum of traffic signals. The following are major access corridors: I-40, I-440, 64 By-pass, U.S. 1, U.S. 70, U.S. 64 and U.S. 401, Wade Avenue between I-440 and I-40 and Northern Wake Expressway. 
Maintained Footcandles
Illuminance of lighting fixtures adjusted for a maintenance factor accounting for dirt build-up and lamp output depreciation. The maintenance factor used in the design process to account for this depreciation cannot be lower than 0.72 for high-pressure sodium and 0.64 for metal halide and mercury vapor. 
Mean Sea Level
The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. The term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Mechanical Equipment 
Machines and devices, including HVAC units, fans, vents, generators and elevator motors, integral to the regular operation of climate control, electrical and similar building systems.
Median
A value or quantity lying at the midpoint of a frequency distribution of observed values or quantities. Where the median includes an even number within the set, the two values closest to the midpoint are averaged.
Medium Base
The size of lamp socket designed to accept a medium or Edison base lamp. 
Metro Park 
The following park: William B. Umstead State Park. 
Mezzanine
An internal space above and open to the first floor below. When a mezzanine comprises less than 33% of the footprint area of the building, it is not considered a story. When a mezzanine comprises 33% or more of the footprint area of the building, it is considered a story. Only one mezzanine is permitted per building.
Minor Tree Removal Activity
The lawful removal of a tree, other than a champion tree and trees protected in either Resource Management District or natural protective yard, which is unrelated to forestry general or to the installation of any driveway, use, structure, facility improvement, site plan or subdivision, is a minor tree removal activity when it meets one or more of the following: 
1.	
Unsafe trees are removed within 1 year following a natural disaster declared by the State of North Carolina or City of Raleigh such an ice storm, hurricane or tornado. 

2.	
Fewer than 16 trees with a DBH of 3 inches or more are lawfully removed from the property within any continuous twelve month period, provided that the subsequent subdivision of the property shall not increase the number of trees which can be removed from the property and that no tree 10 inches or greater in DBH is removed if such tree is located: 
a.	
Within 50 feet of a right-of-way of any thoroughfare; or 

b.	
Within 32 feet of any vacant adjoining property boundary line; or 

c.	
Within 65 feet of any other property line or urban forestry. 



3.	
The term “vacant” means that at the time of application for development there is no building or structure or vehicular surface area within 200 feet from the common property line of the property being developed and the adjoining or adjacent property. 

4.	
An arborist, certified by the International Society of Arboriculture or a forester registered by the State of North Carolina or a landscape architect licensed by the State of North Carolina first certifies in writing to the City that the tree is either unsafe or is unhealthy and applicable soil erosion and sedimentation laws are obeyed. 

5.	
The tree is less than 3 inches DBH. 

6.	
The tree is damaging an existing improvement on the lot. 

7.	
The lawful removal of trees located on lots of record existing prior to the application of this regulation that are less than 2 acres in size. 

8.	
The tree to be removed is for a City of Raleigh project to install or maintain public infrastructure and is unrelated to any site plan, subdivision or building permit.


Mixed Use District
The following general use or conditional use zoning districts: Residential Mixed Use (RX)-, Office Park (OP-), Office Mixed Use (OX-), Neighborhood Mixed Use (NX-), Commercial Mixed (CX-), Downtown Mixed Use (DX-) and Industrial Mixed Use (IX-).
Modified Natural Stream
An on-site channelization or relocation of a stream channel and subsequent relocation of the intermittent or perennial flow as evidenced by topographic alterations in the immediate watershed. A modified natural stream must have the typical biological, hydrological and physical characteristics commonly associated with the continuous conveyance of water. 
Monastery, Convent
A place of residence for bona fide members of a religious order where members are housed in one or more buildings and carry on religious, medical, educational or charitable work in the community.
n
Natural Protective Yard 
A landscaped yard area that contains no buildings, vehicular surface area, loading, storage or display service areas, in which no tree disturbing activity or grading shall take place unless in accordance with an approved tree removal permit. No tree removal permit shall be issued if the cumulative grading and tree removal exceeds 30% of any natural protective yard. 
Natural Resource Buffer Yard
Buffer areas that limit land disturbing activities adjacent to fragile environmental areas, which include, but are not limited to, watercourse buffers. 
New Construction
Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this UDO and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
o
Off-Premises Sign
Any sign or structure, pictorial or otherwise, regardless of size or shape that directs attention to a business, commodity, attraction, profession, service or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, manufactured, existing or provided at a location other than the premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed. Sometimes called non-point-of-sale sign. 
Off-Site Stormwater Control Facilities
The overall design, construction and maintenance of one or more devices and measures and associated drainage easements, conduits, inlets, channels, pipes and ditches, level spreaders, filters, buffers, bioretention areas, sand filters, detention basins, wetlands and ponds necessary to collect, convey, store and control stormwater runoff and pollutants for more than 1 lot. Stormwater control facilities serving contiguous properties or a subdivision or a portion of a subdivision greater than 1 lot are examples of off-site stormwater control facilities. 
One Hundred-Year Storm
The stormwater runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 100 years and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of runoff, for the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions. 
On-Premise Sign
Any sign or structure, pictorial or otherwise, regardless of size or shape that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, attraction, service or entertainment conducted, offered, sold, manufactured, existing or provided at a location on the premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed. A sign that identifies both an on-premises subsidiary and an off-premises parent company is an off-premises sign. 
On-Site Stormwater Control Facilities
The overall design, construction and maintenance of one or more devices and measures and associated drainage easement, conduits, inlets, channels pipes, ditches, level spreaders, filters, buffers, bioretention areas, sand, filters, detention basins, wetlands and ponds, necessary to collect, convey, store and control stormwater runoff and pollutants within and for a single lot. 
Open Space, Active 
Improvements to accommodate recreation or activity, such as play fields and play courts, excluding sidewalks and greenways.
Open Space Area
Primarily vegetated areas where development is restricted and no additional impervious surface may be placed without first obtaining a permit from the City. The following are open space areas: active or passive open space areas, greenways, public parks, natural protective yards set forth in conditional use zoning districts and permanently protected undisturbed open space areas.
Orphanage
A public or private institution providing for the care and protection of children without parents. The care includes physical, medical, psychological, social and educational needs of children often licensed by the state. Orphanage includes children's home and foster care.
Outdoor Advertising Sign
Any off-premises, off-site, poster panel, billboard or non-point-of-sale sign. 
Outdoor Mobile Vending Cart
A non-motorized cart with wheels that is temporarily stored on a premise where goods or merchandise are sold to the general public. 
p
Parapet Wall
That portion of any building wall that rises above the level of the roof line. 
Passive Open Space 
Generally an undeveloped space or environmentally sensitive area that requires minimal development. These open space areas can include pedestrian or bicycle pathways or greenways.
Pedestrian Area
An area used primarily for walking, such as a sidewalk or greenway.
Phase of Grading
One of 2 types of grading, rough or fine. 
Planned Transit Route
Any fixed route public transit service described or illustrated in the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan or adopted by a local or regional public transit agency.
Planning Director
The chief administrator as designated by the City Manager to implement and administer the Department of City Planning and the UDO.
Play Courts
Recreation facilities that operate and use a court such as tennis, basketball, handball, squash, croquet, shuffleboard, volleyball and racquetball courts and clubs. 
Play Fields
Areas in which field games are played and that contain less than 250 seats. Play fields include: baseball, field hockey, football, lacrosse, soccer, softball and open play areas. 
Portable Ground Sign
Any sign which rests upon the ground, a structure, frame, building or other surface.  Portable ground signs are not affixed to a supporting structure, building or frame. Such signs include but are not limited to the following: trailer signs, sandwich board signs, sidewalk signs, curb signs or A-Frame signs.
Post-Development Conditions
Pre-development conditions together with the land use, drainage and impervious conditions that would exist on the site if all proposed development plans for the site are fully completed. 
Pre-Development Conditions
The land use, drainage and impervious surface conditions existing on the site at the time plans are submitted for approval, including any previously approved development plans for the site which has not sunsetted, projects which have an outstanding valid building permit in compliance with N.C. Gen. Stat. §160A-418 and §160A-422 or §153A-358 and §153A-362 and projects that have obtained a State permit such as landfills, land application of residuals on the site. 
Premises
The term premises is interchangeable with the term lot. 
Principal Arterial
Principal arterials are comprised of limited-access freeways, expressway and gateway arterials. Principal arterials are the same roads as major access corridors. 
Principal Building or Use
The building, structure or land that contains the primary function or activity on a lot. 
Project 
A site under unified control for the purposes of development. 
Protective Yard 
A landscaped yard area which contains no buildings, vehicular surface area, loading, storage or display service areas. For street protective yards, driveways and sidewalks necessary to serve the development may be permitted, provided that they are perpendicular to the protective yard. Protective yards include transitional protective yards, street protective yards and Zone A transition zones.
Public Transit Agency
Publicly-funded operators of bus transit systems, including but not limited to the City of Raleigh, GoTriangle, the Town of Cary, and North Carolina State University.
q
Queuing Area
The space devoted to vehicle waiting areas associated with a drive through or drive up facility. The queuing area begins at the point of service, such as a drive through window.
r
Raleigh Stormwater Control and Watercourse Buffer Manual
A manual adopted by the City Council by reference, as fully as though set forth in this UDO that includes plan and data submission requirements, presents design procedures and criteria for conducting natural, hydrologic and hydraulic evaluations, best management practice designs, regulations for riparian surface water buffers, standards for managing the volume and quality of stormwater runoff and standards for maintenance.
Rear Yard
The area located between the rear line of a building or structure and the rear boundary of a lot or an existing or proposed street right-of-way and extending along the entire width of the lot. 
Receiving Watercourse
A lake, natural watercourse or other natural or man-made area into which stormwater runoff flows from a land-disturbing activity site. 
Recyclable Material
Material including, but not limited to, metals (including vehicles which have been crushed off site), glass, rubber (including tires), plastic, paper and scrap, which is intended for reuse or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material shall not include hazardous materials and wastes (as defined in 40 CFR 261.3 to 261.33 or as the same may be amended by law), garbage, biodegradable refuse such as food, medical wastes or other similar material and wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled automobiles.
Refereed Journal 
Publications reviewed by expert readers or referees prior to the publication of the material. After reading and evaluating the material, the referee informs the publisher if the document should be published or if any changes should be made prior to publication. Refereed materials are significant to the research and the literature of most academic fields because they assure readers that the information conveyed is reliable and timely.
Regional Stormwater Control Facilities
The overall design, construction and maintenance of measures and devices and associated drainage easement, conduits, inlets, channels, pipes, ditches, filters, buffers, bioretention areas and ponds that are necessary to collect, convey, store and control stormwater runoff and pollutants within or outside a development and for one or more developments, as shown on the stormwater control master plans approved by the State of North Carolina. 
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
The elevation to which structures and uses within floodway fringe areas and future conditions flood hazard areas are required to be elevated or floodproofed. Within areas which have approved engineered flood studies, such as the FEMA flood insurance study and floodway fringe areas, this elevation will be the “without floodway” base flood elevation plus 2 additional vertical feet. Base flood elevations are shown in the flood insurance study for Wake County, Volumes 1 through 7. Within future conditions flood hazard areas, this elevation will be the future conditions flood elevation plus 2 additional vertical feet. Future conditions flood elevations are shown in the flood insurance study for Wake County, Volumes 1 through 7. For flood hazard soil areas and for areas without established flood elevations within watercourses which drain 1 square mile or more, this elevation is the topographic contour lying 5 vertical feet from the outermost boundaries of either the flood hazard soils or the made land, which traverse such soils. The regulatory flood protection elevation for flood hazard soil areas and for areas without established flood elevations within watercourses which drain less than 1 square mile is the elevation of the outermost boundaries of either the flood hazard soils or the made land which traverse such soils plus 2 additional vertical feet, or as determined from a flood hazard soil interpretation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be the base flood elevation established on the drainage basin study maps plus 2 additional vertical feet. 
Replacement Cost
Either the median value based Square Foot Costs established by the most recent edition of Building Construction Cost Data published by R.S. Means or the most recent tax value for a building as reported in the County tax office. The property owner shall decide which of the 2 methods for determining replacement cost is to be used.
Residential District
The following general use and conditional use zoning districts: Residential-1 (R-1), Residential-2 (R-2) Residential-4 (R-4), Residential-6 (R-6) and Residential-10 (R-10). Includes Manufactured Housing (MH).
Resource Management District
The following general use, conditional use zoning and overlay zoning districts: Conservation Management (CM), Metro-Park Protection Overlay District (-MPOD), Special Highway Overlay District-1 (-SHOD-1) and Special Highway Overlay District-2 (-SHOD-2).
Reverse-frontage lot
A residential lot with more than one frontage, where access from the lot or adjacent lots is taken from a street with a lower classification on the Raleigh Street Plan Map, and rear yards are located adjacent to a street with a higher classification on the Raleigh Street Plan Map.
Riparian Surface Water
Actual surface water that is shown as a feature on either the most recent version of (a) the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Services of the United States Department of Agriculture or (b) the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS) except for the following surface waters: 
1.	
Man-made channels, such as ditches and canals, other than a modified natural stream.

2.	
Man-made ponds and lakes that are located outside natural drainage ways.

3.	
Ephemeral (stormwater) streams. 


Rooming Unit
Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
s
Sadomasochism Center
Any for profit establishment wherein the practice of flagellation, torture or fettering is used or administered to an individual either by an employee of the establishment or a patron of the establishment.
Salvage Yard
Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection or recycling of any type of equipment, including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery. 
Sediment
Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been or is being transported by water, wind, gravity or ice from its point of origin. 
Sedimentation
The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion has been or is being transported off a site of the land-disturbing activity or into a lake or watercourse. 
Senior Housing
Housing for residents at least 62 years in age. The housing must comply with the Federal Fair Housing Act.
Shade Tree
An evergreen or deciduous tree whose mature height can be expected to exceed 35 feet and which has an expected crown spread of 30 feet or more or is considered a shade tree in accordance with “American Standards of Nursery Stock”, set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
Side Yard
The area located between the side line(s) of a building or structure and the side boundary of a lot or an existing or proposed street right-of-way and extending along the entire length of the lot. 
Sign
Any temporary or permanent identification, description, animation, illustration, or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any right-of-way, situated indoors or outdoors, and which directs attention to any realty, product, service, place, activity, person, institution, performance, commodity, firm, business or solicitation, or any emblem, painting, banner, poster, bulletin board, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed to identify or convey information. Signs do not include displays located inside buildings, courts, lobbies, stadiums, or other structures that are not positioned in such a manner so as to be intended to be seen from the exterior of the building or structure.
Siltation
The sediment resulting from accelerated erosion which is settleable or removable by properly designed, constructed and maintained control measures and which has been transported from its point of origin within the site of a land-disturbing activity and which has been deposited or is in suspension in water. 
Solid Waste Disposal Facility
Any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste, as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. §130A-290(a)(35).
Special District
The following general use and conditional use zoning districts: Conservation Management (CM), Agricultural Productive (AP), Heavy Industrial (IH), Manufactured Home Park (R-MP) and Campus (CMP).
Start of Construction
The date a building permit was issued, provided the actual “start of construction,” repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was made within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a “manufactured home” on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction is the first alteration of any load-bearing wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Stepback 
The horizontal distance of a building facade that is recessed on a horizontal plane.
Stormwater Control Devices 
The overall design, construction and maintenance of one or more devices, measures and associated drainage easements, conduits, inlets, channels, pipes and ditches, level spreaders, filters, buffers, bioretention areas, sand filters, detention basins, swales, wetlands and ponds or any other City-approved best management practice necessary to collect, convey, store, treat and control stormwater runoff and pollutants.
Stormwater Control Facilities
Off-site stormwater control facilities, on-site stormwater control facilities, regional stormwater control facilities or any combination thereof. 
Stormwater Control Master Plan
A conceptual plan approved by the City Council which establishes stormwater control policies and recommendations for an entire watershed or region as an alternative to individual site specific stormwater control plans.
Storm Drainage Facilities
The man-made system of inlets, conduits, channels, ditches or other such facilities and appurtenances which collect and convey stormwater. 
Stormwater Runoff
Runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any form. 
Street Furniture 
Physical improvements required by approved streetscape plans including but not limited to: benches, bicycle racks, pedestrian lighting, trash receptacles, planters, flower boxes/pots or other objects located outdoors. 
Street Protective Yard
A landscaped protective yard adjacent to a street right-of-way. 
Structural Flooding
Crawlspace, finished floor, garage and/or basement flooding caused by concentrated stormwater flows and not groundwater infiltration. Structural flooding also occurs in sheds and outbuildings on a permanent, enclosed foundation that cannot be easily moved. Sheds and outbuildings not on permanent, enclosed foundations or that can be easily moved and where moving the structure is the least cost alternative to prevent flood damage to the structure, are not defined as having structural flooding. Structural flooding does not include those portions of residential and commercial structures located in a floodplain area and designed and constructed to flood or a commercial structure that has a City approved floodproofing plan. 
Substantial Damage
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed the 50% of the estimated market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement
Any reconstruction, repair, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which over a 5 year period singularly or collectively equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the substantial improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Sustainable Energy Systems
On-site renewable energy generation technologies such as a solar array, solar collection system, wind energy system or geothermal energy system. 
t
Ten-Year Storm
The stormwater runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 10 years and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of runoff for the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions. 
Through lot
A lot with more than one frontage, not located on a corner.
Thoroughfare
A street delineated as a major thoroughfare or a minor thoroughfare on the Comprehensive Plan or a major access corridor. Major thoroughfares include: (1) principal arterials, which are either gateways, freeways or expressways; (2) secondary arterials; (3) other major thoroughfares; or (4) any Major Street identified in Article 8.4.
Transit Easement
A permanent easement dedicated to the City and recorded with the County where the transit stop is located for the purpose of providing public transit services. The transit easement provides public access to the property, allows construction, installation and maintenance of amenities on the site.
Transit Shelter
A permanently installed structure located at a transit stop that provides seating and protection from the weather for people waiting for a transit vehicle.
Transit Stop
A designated place where public transit vehicles pause on a scheduled basis to allow for passenger boarding and alighting a public transit vehicle. A transit stop is marked with a City-issued bus stop sign and may include amenities such as shelters, benches and trash receptacles.
Transit Stop Pad
A firm, stable and slip-resistant surface constructed from concrete at a bus stop. The transit stop pad provides a permanent location to construct transit amenities and for passengers to wait for an approaching bus, and shall satisfy the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall be constructed in conformance with the design standards contained in the Raleigh Street Design Manual.
Transparency
The ability to transmit light so objects on the other side of the material are visible. As applied to windows, the transparent material must pierce the building façade with a minimum distance of 4 feet maintained free of building materials, shelving or other impediment so that views are provided into and out of the building.
Transportation Director
The chief administrator as designated by the City Manager to plan, direct and coordinate various aspects of the UDO.
Tree Disturbing Activity
Any activity that results in one or more of the following: 
1.	
The movement of earth, compaction of earth, chemical or physical alteration of earth or a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non vegetative) or the existing soil topography in the critical root zone of a tree or within any tree conservation area, including but not limited to: chemical application, clearing, grading, filling, excavation, stabilization of structures and road or walkway construction 

2.	
Chemical or physical alteration of a tree in any way that diminishes its health and vigor, including but not limited to removal, cutting, root pruning, branch pruning, topping, bark scraping and application of chemical or biological agents. 

3.	
The placement within the critical root zoneor within any tree conservation area of any permanent or temporary encroachment, including but not limited to application of impervious surfaces, storage of equipment, materials, earth parking or circulation of vehicles or equipment. 


Twenty Five-Year Storm
The stormwater runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 25 years and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of runoff, from the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions. 
Two-Year Storm
The stormwater runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 2 years and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of runoff, for the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions. 
u
Uncovered
The removal of ground cover from, on or above the soil surface. 
Understory Tree
An evergreen or deciduous tree whose mature height can be expected to range between 15 feet and 35 feet and which has an expected crown spread range between 15 feet and 25 feet as determined by the latest edition of “American Standards of Nursery Stock” as set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
Undisturbed Area
An area free of any tree disturbing activity except the planting of required landscaping and plantings required by conditional use zoning requirements. 
Unhealthy
A plant or tree that meets any one or more of the following: 
1.	
Its foliage and bark have a form and color that is not characteristic of the species similarly located within the city;

2.	
Its twig elongation is dissimilar to that of others of the same species and size similarly located within the city;

3.	
It is not free from infestation of insects and detrimental diseases;

4.	
More than 10% of its trunk circumference dies in any 1 calendar year;

5.	
More than 30% of its crown dies or is lost in any 1 calendar year; and/or

6.	
It no longer screens, filters or shades the area for which it was installed.


Unity of Development
The visual and functional integration of buildings within a development or area. 
Urban Frontage
The following frontages: Green (-GR), Urban Limited (-UL), Urban General (-UG) and Shopfront (-SH).
Utility Service Area
An area which contains any utility box, booster box, switching station, transformer, pedestal or backflow preventor or similar above-grade device used to serve underground utilities. 
Utility Service Plan 
A plan associated with a Planned Development Master Plan that provides information for mail distribution and solid waste collection.
v
Vegetated GSI Practices
GSI practices that are predominantly vegetated at the surface of the practice. Examples of such practices include preserved natural areas, bioretention areas, and green roofs.
Vehicular Canopy
A roofed and open drive-through structure designed to provide temporary shelter for vehicles and their occupants while making use of a business’ services.
Vehicular Surface Area
An area where motor vehicles are either stored or driven, including private driveways and private streets, parking lots, vehicular display lots, rental lots and depots, but not including parking buildings or areas which are used exclusively as loading areas and service areas.
Vehicle Sign
 Any sign attached to or painted on, or otherwise positioned, (whether exterior or interior), in or on, located upon a vehicle or a tractor trailer.
Velocity
The average velocity of water flow through the cross-section of an effluent main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. The cross-section of the main channel, if any, shall be that area defined by the geometry of the channel plus the area of flow below the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main channel banks. Overbank flows are not to be included for the purpose of computing velocity of flow. 
w
Wall Pack
A type of light fixture typically flush-mounted on a vertical wall surface.
Wall plate 
A structural element, usually horizontal, situated along the top of a wall at the level of the eaves for bearing the ends of joists or rafters. 
Wide-Body Refractive Globe 
A translucent lamp enclosure used with some outdoor fixtures to provide a decorative look including but not limited to acorn- and carriage light-style fixtures. “Wide-body” refers to a wider than average size globe (greater than 15.75 inches in diameter). “Refractive” refers to the redirection (bending) of the light as it goes through a lens, rendering the light fixture more effective. Wide-body refractive globes are intended to soften and spread the light being distributed from the light source thereby reducing direct glare.
z
Zoning Administrator
Position in the Department of City Planning as a sworn officer to enforce and administer the regulations found in the City Unified Development Ordinance and associated manuals.
Housing Code Definitions
Agent 
Any person, firm or corporation who is responsible for the management, maintenance, operation, renting, leasing or sale of any property or who makes application for or seeks a permit or certificate on behalf of the owner of any property or who in any other way represents the owner or the property in any particular case.
 
Basement
 A portion of a building which is located partly underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground. 
Cellar 
A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground. 
Dwelling 
Any building, structure, manufactured home, mobile home or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any temporary housing as hereinafter defined.
 
Duplex 
A structure containing 2 complete and separate dwelling units with a common wall or ceiling and under 1  roof. 
Dwelling unit 
One or more rooms physically arranged as to create an independent housekeeping establishment with separate facilities for cooking, sleeping and toilet. 
Equivalent dwelling unit. 
For purposes of computing the means of egress required by this chapter, the following shall be considered equivalent to a dwelling unit: any room or rooms not provided with cooking facilities and occupied by 4 persons within a rooming house, fraternity, sorority, rest home or any dwelling however styled. 
Extermination 
The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the inspector. 
Family  
An individual or 2 or more persons related by blood to the third degree lineally or the fourth degree collaterally, marriage or adoption living together in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than 4 persons, one or more of whom is not related by blood as described above, marriage or adoption to the other.  A family may include 5 or fewer foster children placed in a family foster home licensed by the State of North Carolina. 
Garbage 
The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
Habitable room
A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
 
Infestation 
The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests in such numbers as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public. 
Inspector 
The Appropriate City Official or his authorized inspectors. In addition to the powers and responsibilities granted in this article, the Appropriate City Official or his designee shall exercise the powers and responsibilities given to "public officer" in G.S. 160A-441 et seq. 
Meaning of certain words 
Whenever the words "dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
Multiple dwelling 
Any dwelling containing more than 2 dwelling units. 
Occupant 
Any person, regardless of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
 
Operator 
Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
Owner 
any person who alone or jointly or severally with others: Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or  shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
Plumbing and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supply fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
Rooming house or lodging house or tourist home. 
A type of equivalent dwelling located in a dwelling which contains rooms without cooking facilities that are rented to the general public as a whole to more than 4 persons. 
Rooming unit 
Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
 
Rubbish 
Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage and ashes and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
 
Supplied 
Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of, the owner or operator. 
Temporary housing 
Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
 
Unfit for human habitation 
That conditions exist in a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit which violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the requirements established by this article. 

Article 12.1. General	12 – 2Sec. 12.1.1. General Meaning of Words and Terms....................................12 – 2
Sec. 12.1.2. Graphics, Illustrations, Photographs & Flowcharts.................12 – 2
Sec. 12.1.3. Abbreviations........................................................................12 – 2


Article 12.2. Defined Terms	12 – 3a..............................................................................................................12 – 3
b..............................................................................................................12 – 4
c..............................................................................................................12 – 4
d..............................................................................................................12 – 6
e..............................................................................................................12 – 6
f................................................................................................................12 – 7
g.............................................................................................................12 – 10
h.............................................................................................................12 – 10
i..............................................................................................................12 – 11
l..............................................................................................................12 – 12
m............................................................................................................12 – 12
n.............................................................................................................12 – 14
o.............................................................................................................12 – 14
p.............................................................................................................12 – 15
q.............................................................................................................12 – 16
r..............................................................................................................12 – 16
s.............................................................................................................12 – 17
t.............................................................................................................12 – 19
u............................................................................................................12 – 20
v.............................................................................................................12 – 21
w............................................................................................................12 – 21









