7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF RANDLEMAN, NORTH CAROLINA
____________
Published by Order of the Board of Aldermen
____________

M

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION

CC

Tallahassee, Florida

2001

OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
RANDLEMAN, NORTH CAROLINA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
Bruce M. Moore

Mayor
____________
Tony Lowe
Wade Craven
Melissa Blalock
J. C. Leonard
Bud Talley

City Council
____________
David Cotton

City Manager
____________
Robert Wilhoit

City Attorney
____________
Linda Moore

City Clerk
1/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

PREFACE
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Randleman, North Carolina.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of
alderman. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a
note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables
appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent
ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have
been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have
been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.

Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes.
Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure
after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the
first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be
inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that
would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and
new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the
subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be
assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be
taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.

Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which
represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In
the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to
the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of
ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:

CHARTER

CHT:1

CODE

CD1:1

CODE APPENDIX

CDA:1

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES

CCT:1

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE

SLT:1

CODE INDEX

CDi:1

Index

2/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which
are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and
employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular
item in which the user is interested.

Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this
system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or
pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of
inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are
received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It
is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them
and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.

Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ayn Gregory, Supervising Editor and Bill Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and
able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to David Cotton, City Manager and Peggy Hinshaw, Assistant City Clerk for their cooperation and
assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a
Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the
day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.

Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Randleman, North Carolina.
Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses;
editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index.
Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code
Corporation and the City of Randleman, North Carolina.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Randleman, North Carolina. 2001.
PART I - CHARTER
FOOTNOTE(S):
(1) Editor's

note— The text of the Charter of the City of Randleman is not printed herein but is on file at the city clerk's office for

inspection.
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.

3/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of
Ordinances, City of Randleman, North Carolina," and may be so cited.
(Code 1975, § 1-1)

State law reference— Admission of Code in evidence, G.S. 160A-79.
Sec. 1-2. - De nitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of aldermen or the context clearly requires otherwise:

Board of aldermen. The words "board" or "board of aldermen" means the governing body of the City of Randleman, North Carolina.
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Randleman, North Carolina.
City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of Randleman in the County of Randolph in the State of North Carolina.
City limits. The words "city limits" or "corporate limits" shall mean the legal boundary of the City of Randleman.
Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Randleman, North Carolina, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day;
and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
State law reference— Computation of time, G.S. 1-593.

County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Randolph, in the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
G.S. or General Statutes. The abbreviation "G.S." or the words "General Statutes" shall mean the latest edition of the General
Statutes of North Carolina, as amended.

Governor. The words "governor" or "the governor" shall mean the Governor of North Carolina.
Health officer. The word "health officer" shall mean the Randolph County Health Officer or any duly authorized person who may
represent him.

Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.

Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations,
clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.

May, shall. The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others, as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to such meaning.

Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number.

4/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted
for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."

Officials, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, committees and the like, by title
only, they shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Randleman, North Carolina."

Official time standard. The word "official time standard" means that whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall
mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in this city.

Or/and. The words "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the cause requires it.
Owner. The word "owner," applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such property.

Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a
unit, as well as an individual.

Personal property. The word "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Real property. The word "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Residence. The word "residence" shall mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is
absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps
shall be deemed his residence.

Right-of-way. The word "right-of-way" shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Schedule of fees and charges. The words "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list compiled and
published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as
determined by the governing body, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, where it is available for
reference and review during normal business hours.

Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street, between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for
the use of pedestrians.

Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write.
State. The words "state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane,
viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting
property lines.

Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole
or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.

5/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Vehicle. The word "vehicle" shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided, that for the
purposes of this Code, bicycles shall be deemed vehicles and every rider of a bicycle upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions
of this Code applicable to the driver of a vehicle except those which by their nature can have no application.

Writing, written. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise specified.
(Code 1975, § 1-2)

State law reference— Similar rules of construction of statutes, G.S. 160A-1.
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this
Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(Code 1975, § 1-4)

Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.
(a)

The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.

(b)

The history notes following sections and the references and notes scattered throughout the Code are not part of the
Code but are merely for the benefit of the user of the Code.

(Code 1975, § 1-5)

Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of aldermen that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the
board of aldermen without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or
section.
(Code 1975, § 1-6)

Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations.
(a)

Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $500.00; except, that where the General Statutes of North Carolina provide specific remedies
for violations of provisions of this Code adopted pursuant to such statutes, such remedies available to the city for
enforcement of this Code shall be in addition to the remedies hereinafter stated. No criminal penalties shall be
applicable unless hereinafter stated in this section as being applicable to specific chapters or provisions of this Code.

(b)

Where a civil penalty is incurred, a civil citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the city and either served
directly on the violator or his duly designated agent, or registered agent if a corporation, in person or posted in the
United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as contained in the
records of the county, or obtained from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. The violator shall be
deemed to have been served upon the mailing of such citation. The citation shall direct the violator to appear before the
city treasurer, located in the city hall, within 15 days of the date of the citation or alternatively to pay the citation by mail.
The violation for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid, if applicable;
6/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

otherwise, further citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the
prohibited activity is ceased or abated. If the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15 days of its issuance and pay
the penalty prescribed therein, the city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of the
North Carolina General Court of Justice for the collection of the penalty.
(c)

Any willful failure to pay any civil penalty imposed within this Code is a misdemeanor under G.S. 14-4 and punishable by
a fine of $500.00 or 30 days in jail or both.

(d)

In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this section, any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance
may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the
general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to
the application of the city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.

(e)

In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this section, any provision of this Code or any other city ordinance
that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of
abatement, and the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a
provision occurs, the city may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a mandatory or
prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or
cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil
proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.

(f)

In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order
of abatement may direct that:
(1)

Buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed;

(2)

Fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property;

(3)

Grass and weeds be cut;

(4)

Improvements or repairs be made; or

(5)

Any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Code or such ordinance.

If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the
court, he may be cited for contempt, and the city may execute the order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the
property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The
defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for
compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount
approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with
the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not
suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
(g)

The provisions of this Code and any other city ordinances may be enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies
authorized and prescribed by this section, except that any provision the violation of which incurs a civil penalty shall not
be enforced by criminal penalties except as outlined in subsection (c) of this section.

(h)

Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day's continuing violation of any provision of this Code or any other city
ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense.

(i)

Any ordinances hereafter adopted by the board of aldermen, the violation of which shall incur a penalty, shall specify
whether the enforcement shall be pursuant to the civil penalty or criminal penal provisions of this section.

(j)

Upon determination of a violation of any section of this Code, the penalty for which is a civil penalty, the city may cause a
warning citation to be issued to the violator, setting out the nature of the violation, the section violated, the date of the
violation and an order to immediately cease the violation or, if the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an
order of abatement would be appropriate in a civil proceeding, stating a reasonable period of time in which the violation
must be abated. The warning citation shall specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty.

(k)

Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation, a civil citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the
county and either served directly on the violator or his duly designated agent, or registered agent if a corporation, in
7/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

person or posted in the United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator
as contained in the records of the county, or obtained from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation.
The violator shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of such citation. The citation shall direct the violator
to appear before the county treasurer, located in the county hall, within 15 days of the date of the citation or alternatively
to pay the citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation
is paid; otherwise, further citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the
prohibited activity is ceased or abated. If the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15 days of its issuance and pay
the penalty prescribed therein, the city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt pursuant to subsection (a) of this
section.
(Code 1975, § 1-7)

State law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-175; penalty for violation of city ordinances, G.S. 14-4.
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; e ect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a)

All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any
chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by
omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal,
shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of aldermen.

(b)

Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to
the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of
Randleman, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.

(c)

If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of
Ordinances, City of Randleman, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ____________,
Which section shall read as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.

(d)

All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or
chapter number, as the case may be.

Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code.
(a)

By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the
Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of aldermen during
the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete
or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.

(b)

In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the
Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.

(c)

When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to
prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in
the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
(1)

Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.

(2)

Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the
supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.

(3)

Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
8/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(4)

Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as
be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which em
substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code).

(5)

Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted
into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material
included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.

Sec. 1-9. - Ordinances not a ected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:
(1)

Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of this Code;

(2)

Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the
issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness;

(3)

Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;

(4)

Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee;

(5)

Any right or franchise granted by the city;

(6)

Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or
public way in the city;

(7)

Any appropriation ordinance;

(8)

Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term;

(9)

Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements;

(10)

Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;

(11)

Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city;

(12)

The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this
Code;

(13)

Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;

(14)

Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city;

(15)

Any personnel ordinance;

nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section.
State law reference— Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, G.S. 164-7.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(2) Cross

reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(3); the administrative ordinances or

resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-9(12); civil emergencies, ch.
12; administration of emergency operations center regulations, § 12-36; administration of civil disturbances, § 12-66; administration of
manmade disasters, § 12-96; administration of natural disasters, § 12-126; administration of junk vehicles regulations, § 14-91; library,
ch. 20; utilities, ch. 34; administration of zoning regulations, § 38-61 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
9/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY

Sec. 2-31. - Regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be held on Tuesday after the first Monday of each month, at the
city hall annex at 7:00 p.m.
(Code 1975, § 2-6)

State law reference— Regular and special meetings, G.S. 160A-71.
Sec. 2-32. - Special meetings.
(a)

The mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or any two members of the board of aldermen may at any time call a special council
meeting by signing a written notice stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be considered. The
notice shall be delivered to the mayor and each member of the board of aldermen or left at his usual dwelling place at
least six hours before the meeting. Only those items of business specified in the notice may be transacted at a special
meeting, unless all members are present or have signed a written waiver of notice. In addition to the procedures set out
in this subsection or any city charter, a person or persons calling a special meeting of a board of aldermen shall comply
with the notice requirements of the General Statutes.

(b)

Special meetings may be held at any time when the mayor and all members of the council are present and consent
thereto, or when those not present have signed a written waiver of notice.

(c)

During any regular meeting, or any duly called special meeting, the board of aldermen may call or schedule a special
meeting, provided that the motion or resolution calling or scheduling any such special meeting shall specify the time,
place and purpose or purposes of such meeting and shall be adopted during an open session.

(d)

Any regular or duly called special meeting may be recessed to reconvene at a time and place certain, or may be
adjourned to reconvene at a time and place certain, by the board of aldermen.

(Code 1975, § 2-7)

State law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-71(b).
Sec. 2-33. - Mayor to preside at meetings.
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of aldermen which he is able to attend, and in his absence the mayor pro
tempore shall preside.
(Code 1975, § 2-9)

State law reference— Duty of mayor to preside over meetings, G.S. 160A-69.
Sec. 2-34. - Quorum.
A majority of the actual membership of the board plus the mayor, excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a quorum. A member
who has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused by majority vote of the remaining members present shall be counted as
present for purposes of determining whether or not a quorum is present.
(Code 1975, § 2-10)

State law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-74.
10/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-35. - Resignation of members.
The resignation of any member of the board of aldermen shall be in writing and shall not be acted on until the next regular meeting
of the board after the submission of such resignation.
(Code 1975, § 2-12)

Secs. 2-36—2-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(3) Cross

reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-9(4); code enforcement

officer, § 8-34.
Sec. 2-61. - Mayor; duties.
The mayor shall be the official head of the city government and shall preside at all the meetings of the board of aldermen. The
mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are or may be conferred upon him by the general statutes, the city
Charter, this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the board of aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 2-13)

State law reference— Mayor, G.S. 160A-64, 160A-67, 160A-69.
Sec. 2-62. - Compensation.
The mayor and board of aldermen shall receive as compensation such sum as is from time to time fixed by the board of aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 2-14)

State law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-64.
Sec. 2-63. - Mayor pro tempore; disability of mayor.
At the organizational meeting, the board of aldermen shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore to serve at the
pleasure of the board of aldermen. An aldermen serving as mayor pro tempore shall be entitled to vote on all matters and shall be
considered a councilman for all purposes, including the determination of whether a quorum is present. During the absence of the
mayor, the board of aldermen may confer upon the mayor pro tempore any of the powers and duties of the mayor. If the mayor should
become physically or mentally incapable of performing the duties of his office, the board of aldermen may by unanimous vote declare
that he is incapacitated and confer any of his powers and duties on the mayor pro tempore. Upon the mayor's declaration that he is no
longer incapacitated, and with the concurrence of a majority of the board of aldermen, the mayor shall resume the exercise of his
powers and duties. In the event both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore are absent from a meeting, the board of aldermen may
elect from its members a temporary chairman to preside in such absence.
State law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-70.
Sec. 2-64. - City clerk; duties.
There shall be a city clerk appointed by the city manager who shall give notice of meetings of the board of aldermen, keep a journal
of the proceedings of the board of aldermen, be the custodian of all city records, and shall perform any other duties that may be
required by law or the city manager.
State law reference— City clerk, G.S. 160A-171.
11/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-65. - City attorney; appointment and duties.
The board of aldermen shall appoint a city attorney to serve at its pleasure and to be its legal adviser.
State law reference— City attorney, G.S. 160A-173.
Sec. 2-66. - Oaths.
Every person elected by the people or appointed to any city office shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, take and
subscribe the oath of office prescribed in Article VI, section 7 of the state Constitution. Oaths of office shall be administered by some
person authorized by law to administer oaths, and shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Code 1975, § 2-19)

State law reference— Similar provisions, G.S. 160A-61.
Sec. 2-67. - Powers and duties of city manager.
The city manager shall be the chief administrator of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the board of aldermen for
administering all municipal affairs placed in his charge by them, and shall have the following powers and duties:
(1)

The city manager shall appoint and suspend or remove all city officers and employees not elected by the people,
and whose appointment or removal is not otherwise provided for by law, except the city attorney, in accordance
with such general personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the board of aldermen may adopt.

(2)

The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city,
subject to the general direction and control of the board of aldermen, except as otherwise provided by law.

(3)

The city manager shall attend all meetings of the board of aldermen and recommend any measures that he deems
expedient.

(4)

The city manager shall see that all laws of the state, the city charter and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations
of the board of aldermen are faithfully executed within the city.

(5)

The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the board of aldermen.

(6)

The city manager shall annually submit to the board of aldermen and make available to the public a complete
report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of the fiscal year.

(7)

The city manager shall make any other reports that the board of aldermen may require concerning the operations
of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and control.

(8)

The city manager shall perform any other duties that may be required or authorized by the board of aldermen.

Sec. 2-68. - Acting city manager.
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager may designate, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen, a qualified
person to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence or disability. During this absence
or disability, the board of aldermen may revoke that designation at any time and appoint another to serve until the manager returns or
his disability ceases.
Sec. 2-69. - Interim city manager.
When the position of city manager is vacant, the board of aldermen shall designate a qualified person to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of city manager until the vacancy is filled.
Secs. 2-70—2-100. - Reserved.

12/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(4) Cross

reference— Alcoholic control board, § 4-2; housing appeals board, § 8-42; board of aldermen, § 38-61; planning board, § 38-62;

zoning board of adjustment, § 38-63.
Sec. 2-101. - Established.
The planning and zoning board, established for the city under the authority of G.S. 160A-361 and in accordance with and as
restricted by the other laws of the state thereunto pertaining, shall continue on a permanent basis. Such planning board shall also be
known as, and shall act as a zoning board, under and in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 160A-360 et seq., and in accordance with
and as restricted by the other laws of the state thereunto pertaining.
(Code 1975, § 2-22)

State law reference— Planning commissions, G.S. 160A-360 et seq.
Sec. 2-102. - Membership; vacancies.
The planning and zoning board shall consist of ten members. Five of such members shall be residents of the city and the other five
members shall be residents of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and shall be appointed by the board of aldermen of the city.
(Code 1975, § 2-23)

Sec. 2-103. - Organization; records; quorum; meetings to be public.
(a)

As soon as can be reasonably accomplished after the beginning of each fiscal year, and not later than 60 days after such
beginning, the planning and zoning board shall meet and elect a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary and a treasurer.
The offices of secretary and treasurer may be combined into one office if it is the will of the planning and zoning board.
The planning and zoning board may elect such other officers as it may determine, or may delegate to the chairman the
authority to appoint other officers. The terms of all officers, either elective or appointive, shall be for one year, with
eligibility for re-election.

(b)

The planning and zoning board shall keep accurate minutes, to be typed in minute books, which minutes shall reflect
attendance, petitions, findings, recommendations, and all other pertinent matters, which record shall be a public record
and subject to the inspection of any citizen living in the areas served by the planning and zoning board, at all reasonable
times at the city hall.

(c)

The planning and zoning board shall have full authority to adopt its own rules for the transaction of business, except that
a quorum for the purpose of taking any official action shall consist of not less than six members.

(d)

All official meetings of the planning and zoning board shall be open to the public.

(Code 1975, § 2-24)

Sec. 2-104. - Powers and duties.
(a)

It is the duty of the planning and zoning board to perform the following duties:
(1)

Make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and surrounding areas;

(2)

Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the study area;

(3)

Prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;

(4)

Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures and other means for carrying out plans in
a coordinated and efficient manner;

(5)

Advise the board of aldermen concerning the use and amendment of means for carrying out plans;
13/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(6)

Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of various means for carrying out plans that the board o
direct;

(7)
(b)

Perform any other related duties that the board of aldermen may direct.

The board shall prepare a proposed zoning ordinance, including both the full text of such ordinance and maps showing
proposed district boundaries. The board may hold public hearings in the course of preparing the ordinance. Upon
completion, the board shall certify the ordinance to the board of aldermen. The board of aldermen shall not hold its
required public hearing or take action until it has received a certified ordinance from the board. Following its required
public hearing, the board of aldermen may refer the ordinance back to the board for any further recommendations that
the board may wish to make prior to final action by the board of aldermen in adopting, modifying and adopting or
rejecting the ordinance.

State law reference— Powers and duties of municipal planning agencies, G.S. 160A-361.
Secs. 2-105—2-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE

FOOTNOTE(S):
(5)

Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the

issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-9(2).
(5)

State Law reference— Selling city property, G.S. 160A-266(c).

Sec. 2-131. - Authority to dispose of surplus property.
The city manager is hereby authorized to dispose of any surplus personal property owned by the city, whenever he or she
determines, in his or her discretion, that:
(1)

The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than $5,000.00;

(2)

The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public business; and

(3)

Sound property management principles and financial considerations indicate that the interests of the city would
best be served by disposing of the property.

(Ord. of 6-6-2000, § 1)

Sec. 2-132. - Methods of disposal.
The city manager may dispose of any such surplus personal property by any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to
yield the highest attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including but not limited to the methods of sale provided in the
general statutes. Such sale may be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting period.
(Ord. of 6-6-2000, § 2)

Sec. 2-133. - Sale, retention or disposal of property.
The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to
the city if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the city manager is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any
applicable title documents. If no offers are received within a reasonable time, the city manager may retain the property, obtain any
reasonably available salvage value, or cause it to be disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the board of aldermen.
(Ord. of 6-6-2000, § 3)

14/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-134. - Records.
The city manager shall keep a record of all property sold under authority of this article and that record shall generally describe the
property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and the amount of money or other consideration received
for each sale or exchange.
(Ord. of 6-6-2000, § 4)

Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(6) Cross

reference— Businesses, ch. 10.

(6) State

Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, G.S. ch. 18B.

Sec. 4-1. - Sale of beer and wine.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any beer or wine or any other type of beverage as defined in G.S. 18B-101 between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. Sunday to 7:00 a.m. the following Monday, or at any time on Christmas Day.
(Code 1975, § 3-1)

Sec. 4-2. - Alcoholic control board.
There shall be a city alcoholic control board to consist of three members appointed by the board of aldermen and each member
shall serve a term of three years. Compensation shall be such as determined by the board of aldermen. The alcoholic control board
shall perform such duties as prescribed to the board of aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 3-2)

Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq.
Sec. 4-3. - Consumption or display of beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or display beer, wine, ale or any other alcoholic beverage, as defined under G.S. 18B101, in or on any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the city, or city-owned property which is located
inside or outside the corporate city limits.
(Code 1975, § 3-3)

Sec. 4-4. - Penalties.
Any misdemeanor violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $500.00 fine. Any violation of this chapter subjects the
offender to a civil penalty of $100.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(7) Cross

reference— Environment, ch. 14; animal hospitals, § 38-152.

(7) State

Law reference— Authority of city to regulate domestic animals, G.S. 160A-186.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

15/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 6-1. - De nitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:

Animal control officer means a city employee designated as dog warden, animal control officer, animal control official or other
designations that may be used whose responsibility includes animal control.

At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either
by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.

Cat means a domestic feline.
Certified rabies vaccinator means a person appointed and certified to administer rabies vaccine to animals in accordance with this
chapter.

Dog means a domestic canine.
Owner means any person keeping or harboring a dog.
Rabies vaccine means an animal rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture and approved for use in
this city by the board of aldermen.

State public health veterinarian means a person appointed by the state to direct the state public health veterinary program.
Vaccination means the administration of rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian or by a certified rabies vaccinator.
(Code 1975, § 4-4)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-2. - Keeping of hogs, pigs, etc., prohibited.
The keeping of hogs, pigs, pot-bellied pigs or swine in any building, pen, enclosure or other place within the corporate limits of the
city is hereby declared a public nuisance and an injury to adjoining property owners and to the public, and the keeping or maintaining
of hogs, pigs, pot-bellied pigs or swine within the corporate limits of the city is, for the protection of the public health, prohibited.
(Code 1975, § 4-1)

Sec. 6-3. - Maintenance of chicken coops, etc.
Any person who owns or maintains pens, coops or shelters in which chickens, turkeys, ducks or other fowl are kept shall maintain
such pens, coops or shelters in a sanitary condition. Manure accumulating in such pens, coops or shelters shall be removed from the
pens, coops and shelters not less than each five days and either removed from the corporate limits of the city immediately or placed in
a bin which shall be watertight and so constructed that it is flyproof, or in a watertight barrel with a tightfitting lid. Effective fly control
methods such as the use of approved insecticide shall be practiced during the fly-breeding period from March 15 to November 1 of
each year.
(Code 1975, § 4-2)

Sec. 6-4. - Maintenance of stables; horses, pigs, fowl, etc., prohibited at large.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, operates or maintains a stable in the corporate limits of the city, in which
horses, mules, cows, goats or other type of livestock or similar animals are kept, to keep such stable in an unclean or
unsanitary condition. There shall be provided a bin or pit which shall be watertight and so arranged that it is flyproof, or
16/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a watertight barrel with a tightfitting lid. Manure accumulating in such stable shall be placed in the bin, pit or barrel each
day and the bin, pit or barrel shall be removed from the stable at intervals of not longer than five days, beginning on
March 15 and continuing until each following September 15, and at intervals of one week from each September 16 to
each following March 14.
(b)

It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any hogs, pigs, swine, horses, mules, cows, goats or other type of stock, or any
chickens, turkeys, ducks or other types of fowl, to run at large or go upon the premises of others within the corporate
limits of the city.

(Code 1975, § 4-3)

Secs. 6-5—6-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DOGS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(8) State

Law reference— Dogs generally, G.S. 67-1 et seq.; rabies control, G.S. 106-184 et seq.

Sec. 6-31. - De nitions and procedures.
(a)

Definitions. As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise and except as modified in subsection (b)
of this section, the term:

Dangerous dog means:
(1)

A dog that:
a.

Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a person; or

b.

Is determined by the person or board designated by the city responsible for animal control to be potentially
dangerous because the dog has engaged in one or more of the behaviors listed in subsection (2) of this
definition.

(2)

Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.

Owner means any person or legal entity that has a possessory property right in a dog.
Owner's real property means any real property owned or leased by the owner of the dog, but does not include any public right-ofway or a common area of a condominium, apartment complex or townhouse development.

Potentially dangerous dog means a dog that the person or board designated by the city responsible for animal control determines
to have:
(1)

Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or
hospitalization;

(2)

Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not on the owner's real property; or

(3)

Approached a person when not on the owner's property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude
of attack.

Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or
hospitalization.
(b)

Exceptions. The provisions of this article do not apply to:
(1)

A dog being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties;

(2)

A dog being used in a lawful hunt;
17/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(3)

A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog was sustained by a domestic animal while the dog was working
herding dog or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage o
species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog; or

(4)

A dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury, was committing
a willful trespass or other tort, was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, had tormented, abused or assaulted
the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-32. - License and registration—Required; fee; exemptions.
All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the city must be licensed and registered in accordance with the provisions
of this section. Dog licenses shall be issued by the city clerk and finance director upon payment of a license fee in the amount as set
from time to time by the board of aldermen and on file in the city clerk's office. The owner shall state at the time application is made for
license and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his name and address, and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog
owned or kept by him. The provisions of this article shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily
within the city, nor to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to disability assistance dogs
properly trained to assist disabled persons when such dogs are actually being used by disabled persons for aiding them in going from
place to place.
(Code 1975, § 4-5)

Sec. 6-33. - Same—Tag and collar; expiration date.
Upon payment of the license fee, the city clerk and finance director shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag
for each dog so licensed. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and
shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued upon presentation
of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year, and the payment of a fee for such duplicate. Dog tags shall not
be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the
owner' s leaving the city before expiration of the license period. The license period shall expire annually on December 31.
(Code 1975, § 4-6)

Sec. 6-34. - Investigative authority of police.
To discharge the duties imposed by this article and to enforce its provisions, any police officer may obtain an administrative search
warrant to enter any premises where a dog is kept or harbored and may require the dog's owner to show its license.
(Code 1975, § 4-13)

Sec. 6-35. - Interference with enforcement authorities.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest in any way any agent of the city or a police officer in performing any of his duties or
seek to release any animal from the custody of these authorities, except as provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 4-14)

Sec. 6-36. - Restraint.
It shall be unlawful for a dog owner to permit a dog to go beyond the owner's real property unless the dog is leashed or is
otherwise securely restrained.
(Ord. of 5-1-1992)

Sec. 6-37. - Fines for violation of section 6-36.
18/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Violations of the preceding section subjects the offender to fines as set from time to time by the board of aldermen and on file in
the city clerk's office.
(Ord. of 6-2-1992)

Sec. 6-38. - Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding
$500.00 and/or a civil penalty of $50.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt. If the violation is continued, each day's violation shall be
a separate offense.
(Ord. of 3-9-1994, § 4-15)

Sec. 6-39. - Designation of dangerous dog.
The city shall designate a person or a board to be responsible for determining when a dog is a potentially dangerous dog and shall
designate a separate board to hear any appeal. The person or board making the determination that a dog is a potentially dangerous
dog must notify the owner in writing, giving the reasons for the determination, before the dog may be considered potentially dangerous
under this article. The owner may appeal the determination by filing written objections with the appellate board within three days. The
appellate board shall schedule a hearing within ten days of the filing of the objections. Any appeal from the final decision of such
appellate board shall be taken to the superior court by filing notice of appeal and a petition for review within ten days of the final
decision of the appellate board. Appeals from rulings of the appellate board shall be heard in the superior court division. The appeal
shall be heard de novo before a superior court judge sitting in the county in which the appellate board whose ruling is being appealed is
located.
Sec. 6-40. - Precautions against attacks by dangerous dogs.
(a)

It is unlawful for an owner to:
(1)

Leave a dangerous dog unattended on the owner's real property unless the dog is confined indoors, in a securely
enclosed and locked pen, or in another structure designed to restrain the dog;

(2)

Permit a dangerous dog to go beyond the owner's real property unless the dog is leashed and muzzled or is
otherwise securely restrained and muzzled.

(b)

If the owner of a dangerous dog transfers ownership or possession of the dog to another person (as defined in G.S. 123(6)), the owner shall provide written notice to:
(1)

The authority that made the determination under this article, stating the name and address of the new owner or
possessor of the dog; and

(2)

The person taking ownership or possession of the dog, specifying the dog's dangerous behavior and the authority's
determination.

Chapter 8 - BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(9) Editor's

note— By agreement, the County of Randolph, through its various administrative agencies, enforces building regulations in

the city and handles all inspections.
(9) Cross

reference— Environment, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 16; floods, ch. 18; smoking in municipal buildings and

vehicles, § 22-34; solid waste, ch. 24; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; subdivisions, ch. 28; utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch.
38.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

19/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Secs. 8-1—8-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS

Sec. 8-31. - Findings; purpose; authority.
(a)

Pursuant to G.S. 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that there exist in the city dwellings which are unfit for human
habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other calamities, lack of ventilation,
light and sanitary facilities, and other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe, unsanitary and dangerous and
detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city.

(b)

In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city as authorized by the general statutes, it is
the purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all
buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. 160A-444.

(c)

In addition, it is hereby found and declared, under the authority of G.S. 160A-174, that there exist in the city dwellings
which, although not meeting the classification as unfit for human habitation, fail to fully comply with all the minimum
standards for housing fitness as established in this article and therefore have present one or more conditions which are
inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions, if not corrected can lead to deterioration and
dilapidation of dwellings which render them unfit for human habitation.

(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-1)

Sec. 8-32. - Scope.
(a)

This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes
thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate
light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration,
repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures
or premises used or intended for use as such.

(b)

The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the city.
Portable, mobile or demountable buildings or structures, including trailers, manufactured homes and mobile homes
when used or intended for use for housing within the city, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this article. This
article establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human
habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in this article.

(c)

The provisions of this article shall also apply to abandoned structures which are found by the board of aldermen to be a
health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous
conditions constituting a threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary
conditions.

(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-2)

Sec. 8-33. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Abandoned structure means any structure, whether designed and intended for residential or other uses, which has been vacant or
not in active use, regardless of purpose or reason, for the past two-year period and which is determined by the code enforcement
officer to be unfit for human habitation or occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this article.
20/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Basement means a portion of a building which is located partly underground, having access to light and air from windows located
above the level of the adjoining ground.

Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having an inadequate access to light and air from
windows located partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.

Deteriorated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the
minimum standards established by this article, at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by findings of the code
enforcement officer.

Dilapidated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of
the minimum standards established by this article at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by findings of the
code enforcement officer.

Dwelling means any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or part thereof, used and occupied for human
habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any accessory buildings and structures and appurtenances belonging thereto or
usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely for a seasonal
vacation purpose.

Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.

Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the code enforcement officer.

Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage
spaces.

Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute
a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.

Manufactured home (mobile home) means a structure as defined in G.S. 143-145(7).
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
Occupant means any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling
unit or rooming unit.

Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units
are let.

Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are
in possession thereof.

Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the
city, county or state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings in the city.

Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of
the owner or operator.
21/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Rooming unit means any room or group or rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and
sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.

Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage and ashes, and the term shall include paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery
and dust.

Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or operator.
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this article, they
shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-3)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 8-34. - Code enforcement o cer designated.
For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article the code enforcement officer is hereby designated as
the chief administrative and enforcement official. The code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the city manager who may also
serve as the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to
carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, in
addition to others granted in this article, the following powers:
(1)

Investigations. To investigate the dwelling and building conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings
therein are unfit for human habitation and dangerous, being guided in such examination of dwellings and buildings
by the requirements set forth in this article.

(2)

Oaths, witnesses, etc. To administer oaths and affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence.

(3)

Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises and dwellings for the purpose of making examinations and
investigations; provided, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession.

(4)

Warrants, citations, etc. To swear criminal warrants, issue civil citations and to take such other actions as may be
necessary to carry out the enforcement procedures of this article.

(5)

Delegation of functions, etc. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and
agents as he may designate.

(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-4)

Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
Sec. 8-35. - Inspections.
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article, the code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine and
survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises, including abandoned structures. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the code enforcement officer free
access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to
any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-5)

Sec. 8-36. - Preliminary investigations; notices; hearings.
22/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Whenever a petition is filed with the code enforcement officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging
that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the code enforcement officer (on his own motion) that any
dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in such dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the code enforcement officer (or his designated agent) at a place
within the county in which the property is located fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint;
that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise,
and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in hearings before the code enforcement officer.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-6)

Sec. 8-37. - Dwelling un t for human habitation.
(a)

Determination; conditions. The code enforcement officer shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if
he finds that any one of the following conditions exist in such dwelling:
(1)

Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to render the dwelling unsafe.

(2)

Supporting member or members which show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration, or nonsupporting,
enclosing or outside walls or covering which shows 50 percent or more of damage or deterioration.

(3)

Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.

(4)

Such damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the dwelling unsafe.

(5)

Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or other people in the city.

(6)

Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic.

(7)

Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities.

(8)

Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety or
general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the city.

(9)

Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required by this article which constitutes a health or a
definite safety hazard.

(10)

Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system,
the lack of either one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purposes of this standard, a
dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been "cut off" because of nonpayment
of the water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap.

(b)

Additional conditions. In addition to the conditions stated in subsection (a) of this section, any one of which renders a
dwelling unfit for human habitation, the code enforcement officer shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he finds that a dwelling fails to fully comply with seven or more of enumerated standards of dwelling fitness
in subsection (c) of this section.

(c)

Standards of dwelling fitness. Standards for dwelling fitness shall be as follows:
(1)

Structural standards. Structural standards shall be as follows:
a.

Structural integrity. Walls, partitions, supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or other structural members
shall not list, lean or buckle, shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks
which might admit rodents.

b.

Supports. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose used.

c.

Foundations. Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or
damaged.
23/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

d.

Steps. Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that
collapse.

e.

Egress. Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided.

f.

Interior materials. Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall be furnished of suitable
materials which will, by use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall
be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between
various spaces.

g.

Weatherization. The roof, flashings exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all doors and windows exposed
to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so as to be weather and watertight.

h.

Chimneys. There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective, deteriorated or in danger of
falling, or in such condition or location as to constitute a fire hazard.

i.
(2)

Floors. There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the ground.

Plumbing standards. Plumbing standards shall be as follows:
a.

Facilities. Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen, sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet
and an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved
pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. For the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is
not connected to a potable water supply if the water supply has been "cut off" because of nonpayment of the
water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable water to the tap.

b.

Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the plumbing code and shall be maintained in
a state of good repair and in good working order.

c.

Accessible. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling and be accessible to the
occupants of the dwelling. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the use.

(3)

Heating standards generally. Every dwelling shall have facilities for providing heat in accordance with either
subsections (c)(3)a or b of this section or G.S. 160A-433.1. Such facilities shall be maintained in a state of good repair
and good working order.
a.

Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so
as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling to which it is
connected with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the
floor during average winter conditions.

b.

Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each dwelling shall be
provided with sufficient electrical receptacles, fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating
appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments
with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured three feet above the floor during average
winter conditions.

(4)

Electrical standards. Electrical standards shall be as follows:
a.

Wiring, lights, outlets. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every
habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Bedrooms shall
have, in addition, at least one wall switch controlled lighting outlet. In kitchens, three separate and remote
receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall switch shall be
provided. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at
least one ceiling-mounted or wallmounted lighting outlet. In bathrooms, the lighting outlet shall be controlled
by a wall switch. In addition to the lighting outlet in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided
at least one receptacle outlet. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection.

b.

Hall lights. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights
24/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

at all times when natural light is not sufficient.
c.

Maintenance. All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair,
safe, capable of being used and installed in accordance with the electric code.

(5)

Ventilation standards. Ventilation standards shall be as follows:
a.

Generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and
such light obstructions are located less than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is
a skylight type window in the top of such a room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15
percent of the total floor area of such room, or other suitable ventilation.

b.

Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened,
or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable
room, shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight type
window size as required, or shall have other approved equivalent ventilation.

c.

Bathroom and water closet room. Every bathroom equipped with more than one water closet compartment
shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms.

(6)

Space, use and location standards. Space, use and location standards shall be as follows:
a.

Room sizes. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each habitable room as
required by the residential building code. (Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling may count for not more than ten percent of the
required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than 4½
feet shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total area of the room to determine
maximum permissible occupancy.)

b.

Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less
than seven feet and six inches.

c.

Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes unless:
1.

The floor and walls are substantially watertight;

2.

The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling height are equal to those required for a
habitable room;

3.

The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining such
window area, except where the windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.

(7)

Safe and sanitary maintenance standards. Safe and sanitary maintenance standards shall be as follows:
a.

Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be
substantially weathertight and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable
of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the
entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.

b.

Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof; shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon.

c.

Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.

d.

Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto shall
be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall
25/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

be kept in sound condition and good repair. Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed structure
over 30 inches from the ground level or on any steps containing four risers or more.
e.

Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every bathroom and kitchen floor surface and water closet compartment floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit
such floor to be easily kept in sound condition and good repair.

f.

Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this article shall
be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.

g.

Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.

(8)

Insect, rodent and infestation control standards. Insect, rodent and infestation control standards shall be as follows:
a.

Screens. For protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects every dwelling shall have:
1.

Supplied and installed screens on every door opening leading directly from the dwelling to outdoor
space. Except, that sliding doors, doors with self closing devices, doors on mobile homes with self closing
devices and doors that open into rooms of living spaces that are artificially ventilated or air conditioned
are exempt from this provision.

2.

Supplied and installed screens on every window or other device with an opening to outdoor space,
except that this requirement shall not apply for any room or rooms of a dwelling that are ventilated year
round with an operable and installed heating and air conditioning system.

b.

Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other
opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with an approved device as
will effectively prevent their entrance.

c.

Infestation. Every dwelling shall be maintained in a manner to be free of any infestations of insects, rodents or
other pests. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling
units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.

d.

Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish as required by city ordinances, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling
or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.

e.

Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility,
which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or
an incinerator unit, to be approved by the code enforcement officer, in the structure for the use of the
occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can as required by city ordinances.

f.

Smoke detector systems. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector,
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector
shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of
UL 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors.

(9)

Roominghouse standards. Roominghouse standards shall be as follows:
a.

Generally. All of the provisions of this article, and all of the minimum standards and requirements of this
article, shall be applicable to roominghouses, and to every person who operates a rooming house or who
occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided in the
following subsections:

b.

Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
26/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied
for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be
located within the residence building served, shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway
and shall not be more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities
shall not be located in a cellar.
c.

Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at
least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.

d.

Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the roominghouse; and
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or
building within which the roominghouse is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.

e.

Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by
subsection (c)(9)b of this section shall be located within the roominghouse and within a room or rooms which
afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible from a common hall and
without going outside the roominghouse or through any other room therein.

Note: Full compliance with a standard means that if any part of the stated standard is not complied with by a particular
dwelling then that dwelling has failed to fully comply with the enumerated standard. For example, in regard to subsection
(c)(2)a of this section, if all standards are met in a dwelling except that a supply of hot water is not provided then the
dwelling fails to fully comply with subsection (c)(2)a. of this section.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-7)

Sec. 8-38. - Dwellings not in compliance but not un t for human habitation.
In any case where the code enforcement officer determines that a dwelling fails to fully comply with one or more but less than
seven of the enumerated standards of dwelling fitness in subsection 8-37(c), such dwelling shall not be found to be unfit for human
habitation and shall not be subject to the procedures and remedies as provided for in this article for dwellings unfit for human
habitation. Each such failure of noncompliance, however, shall constitute a violation of the terms of this article and shall subject the
violator to the penalties and enforcement procedures, civil or criminal or both, of section 8-43. In making the determination as
described in this section, the code enforcement officer shall not be required to make notice and hold the hearing as called for in section
8-36, but the code enforcement officer may do so if the determination of the severity and classification of dwelling fitness is not clear to
the code enforcement officer upon preliminary investigation.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-8)

Sec. 8-39. - Procedure after hearing; order.
If, after notice and hearing, the code enforcement officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human
habitation in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection 8-37(c), he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:
(1)

If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a cost of less than 50 percent of the value of
the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to
render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation, based upon the code
enforcement officer's standards for closing dwellings; or

(2)

If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a cost of less than 50 percent of the
value of the dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such
dwelling. However, notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district of the
27/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

city and the historic district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by ordinance, that the
dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has
not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with G.S.
160A-400.14(a). If, after notice and hearing the code enforcement officer determines that the dwelling under
consideration is not unfit for human habitation but is not in full compliance with one or more standards of dwelling
fitness as set forth in subsection 8-37(c), he may proceed with the enforcement procedures of section 8-43, civil or
criminal or both. Whenever a determination is made pursuant to subsections (1) or (2) of this section that a dwelling
must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the provisions of this section, notice of the order
shall be given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable
housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such
notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the code enforcement officer, to allow the
opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for
the purpose of providing affordable housing. The code enforcement officer shall certify the mailing of the notices,
and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written
request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order
requiring the code enforcement officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-9)

Sec. 8-40. - Failure to comply with order.
(a)

If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the code
enforcement officer may:
(1)

Cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed.

(2)

Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a violation of this article.

(b)

If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the code enforcement officer may:
(1)

Cause such dwelling to be vacated and removed or demolished.

(2)

Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a violation of this article.

(c)

The duties of the code enforcement officer set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not be exercised until
the board of aldermen shall have by ordinance ordered the code enforcement officer to proceed to effectuate the
purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the code enforcement officer shall have
found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such
ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable
opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing code. For the purposes of this subsection, a period of 90 days
following the date of the code enforcement officer's order shall constitute a reasonable opportunity. The ordinance
adopted pursuant to this subsection shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the
property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.

(d)

The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the
code enforcement officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be
filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in the General Statutes of
North Carolina. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the code enforcement officer, he shall sell the materials of
the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit
the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in
the superior court by the code enforcement officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be
disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order of the decree of the court.
28/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(e)

If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the code enforcement officer may file a civil action in
the name of the city to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary
ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any persons occupying such
dwelling. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a
certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The
summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor,
and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the code enforcement officer produces a
certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the board of aldermen pursuant to subsection (c) of this section authorizing
the code enforcement officer to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering
that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgement ordering that the dwelling be vacated
shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from
any judgment entered under this subsection by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the
execution of such judgement may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling
who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this subsection
unless such occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that
the board of aldermen has ordered the code enforcement officer to proceed to exercise his duties under subsections (a),
(b) and (c) of this section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.

(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-10)

Sec. 8-41. - Service of complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the code enforcement officer pursuant to this article, except those being prosecuted under section
8-43, shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the identities of any owners or the
whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the code enforcement officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the
unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least once no
later than the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this article. When service is made by
publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-11)

Sec. 8-42. - Housing appeals board created; appeals.
(a)

A housing appeals board is hereby created consisting of five members who shall be residents of the city. The members of
the housing appeals board shall be appointed by the board of aldermen. Initial appointments to the housing appeals
board shall be as follows: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years.
Subsequent appointments to the housing appeals board shall be for three-year terms and members may be
reappointed. Vacancies on the housing appeals board shall be filled for the unexpired term. As an alternate, the board of
aldermen may appoint the board of adjustment to serve as the housing appeals board as one of its duties. The housing
appeals board shall elect its own officers, fix the time and place for its meetings, adopt necessary rules of procedure and
adopt other rules and regulations for the proper discharge of its duties. The housing appeals board shall keep an
accurate record of all its proceedings. The code enforcement officer shall serve as the nonvoting, ex officio secretary to
the housing appeals board.

(b)

An appeal from any decision or order of the code enforcement officer may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or
any officer, board or commission of the city. Any appeal from the code enforcement officer shall be taken within ten days
from the rendering of the decision or service of the order by filing with the code enforcement officer and with the
housing appeals board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing
of any notice of appeal, the code enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the housing appeals board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the code
enforcement officer refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any such act, his decision shall remain in force
29/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the code enforcement officer requiring the person
aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the housing
appeals board, unless the code enforcement officer certifies to the housing appeals board after the notice of appeal is
filed with him, that because of facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a
suspension of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the requirement shall not be
suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's
written notice to the code enforcement officer, by the housing appeals board, or by a court of record upon petition made
pursuant to subsection (e) of this section.
(c)

The housing appeals board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall
render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear before the housing appeals board in person or by
agent or attorney. The housing appeals board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or
order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to
that end it shall have all the powers of the code enforcement officer, but the concurring vote of four-fifths of the
members of the housing appeals board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the code
enforcement officer. The housing appeals board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the article, to adapt the application
of the article to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the article shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done.

(d)

Every decision of the housing appeals board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari
instituted within 15 days of the decision of the housing appeals board, but not otherwise.

(e)

Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the code enforcement officer or a decision rendered by the housing appeals
board may petition the superior court for an injunction, restraining the code enforcement officer from carrying out the
order or decision and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the code enforcement
officer pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or
rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the court on a petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference
over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such
final order or decree as law and justice may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining
a temporary injunction under this subsection.

(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-12)

Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq.
Sec. 8-43. - Alternative remedies.
(a)

No dwelling shall be erected, altered, moved or changed in occupancy without a certificate of occupancy. In any case
where the code enforcement officer, after notice and hearing as required in this article, finds that a dwelling or dwelling
unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling
unit until such time that he determines that it is fit for human habitation. In addition, in any case where the code
enforcement officer, after preliminary investigation as provided for in this article, concludes, based upon that
investigation, that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation and believes that the occupancy of such
dwelling or dwelling unit could cause imminent peril to life or property from fire or other hazards, he shall withhold
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling unit until such time that he determines that it is fit for
human habitation.

(b)

If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used in violation of this article or of
any valid order or decision of the code enforcement officer or housing appeals board made pursuant to any ordinance or
code adopted under authority of this article, the code enforcement officer may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or occupancy, to restrain, correct
or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwellings, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about
the premises of the dwelling.
30/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(c)

Nothing in this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement o
remedy provided in this article prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided in this article or in othe
ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for in this article, any violation of the terms of this article shall con
either a misdemeanor fine of $500.00 or, at the election of the city, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the issu
citation for such violation as provided in this section. The civil penalty, if not paid to the city within 15 days of the issuance o
may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt. The civil penalties shall be in the amount of $100.00 for e
violation and each day any single violation continues shall be a separate violation.

(d)

In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any provision of this article may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to
issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the city for equitable relief
that there is an adequate remedy at law.

(e)

In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any provision of this article that makes unlawful a condition existing upon
or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement by general court of justice. When a
violation of such a provision occurs, the city may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a
mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful
condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and
rules governing civil proceedings, including the rules of civil procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.

(f)

An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed;
that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that abandoned or junked
vehicles be removed; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring
the property into compliance with this article. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an
order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the city may execute the
order of abatement. The city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the
nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by
paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with
sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard
and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed
by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction
therewith.

(g)

The provision of this article may be enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by
this section.

(h)

Upon determination of a violation of any section of this article, the penalty for which is a civil penalty, the code
enforcement officer of the city shall proceed to issue a warning citation to the violator. Such citation shall set out the
nature of the violation, the section violated, the date of the violation, and shall contain an order to immediately cease the
violation. If the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an order of abatement would be appropriate in a civil
proceeding, a reasonable period of time must be stated in which the violation must be abated.

(i)

Where the city determines that the period of time stated in the original warning citation is not sufficient for abatement
based upon the work required or consent agreement, the appropriate official may amend the warning citation to provide
for additional time. The warning citation shall specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty, together with costs
and attorney fees.

(j)

Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation, a civil citation shall be issued by the code enforcement officer
and either served directly on the violator, his duly designated agent, or registered agent if a corporation, either in person
or posted in the United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as
contained in the records of the city or obtained from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. The
violator shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of the citation. The citation shall direct the violator to

31/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

appear before the city manager, or his designee, within 15 days of the date of the citation, or alternatively to pay the
citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid,
otherwise further citations shall be issued.
(k)

Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated.

(l)

If the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15 days of its issuance, and pay the penalty prescribed therein, the city
may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of the state general court of justice for the
collection of the penalty, costs, attorney fees and such other relief as permitted by law.

(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-13)

Sec. 8-44. - Con ict with other provisions.
In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other
ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the residents of the city's jurisdiction shall prevail. The North Carolina Building Code, current
edition, shall serve as the standard for all alterations, repairs, additions, removals, demolitions and other acts of building made or
required pursuant to this article.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-14)

Sec. 8-45. - Violations.
In addition to the conditions, acts or failures to act that constitute violations specified in this article, it shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit, or to vacate and
close or vacate and remove or demolish the dwelling or dwelling unit, upon order of the code enforcement officer duly made and
served as provided in this article, within the time specified in such order. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, with respect
to which an order has been issued pursuant to section 8-39, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the dwelling after the time prescribed
in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing, or vacation and removal or demolition.
(Ord. of 5-3-1994, § 5-15)

Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(10) Cross

reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; telecommunications, ch. 30; utilities, ch. 34; vehicles for hire, ch. 36; B-1 central

business district, § 38-105; B-2 commercial district, § 38-106; I-1 light industrial district, § 38-107; I-2 heavy industrial district, § 38-108;
bed and breakfast inns, § 38-155.
(10) State

Law reference— Authority of city to license and regulate occupations, businesses, trades, etc., G.S. 160A-194; privilege license

taxes, G.S. 160A-211; state license taxes generally, G.S. 105-33 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 10-1. - De nitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:

Agent means the person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or distributor.
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind, subject, by the provisions of this
chapter, to a license tax.

32/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Engaged in the business means engaged in the business as owner or operator.
Fiscal year means the period beginning with July 1 and ending with the June 30 next following.
(Code 1975, § 11-1)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-2. - License, payment of license tax required to conduct business within city.
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or servant to engage in or carry on a business in the city for which there is required
a license, without first having paid the license tax and obtained the license. For the purpose of this section, the opening of a place of
business or offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in furtherance of the business shall be construed to
be engaged in or carrying on such business; and each day that such person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on such
business shall be construed to be a separate offense.
(Code 1975, § 11-2)

Sec. 10-3. - Taxes levied; transfer of licenses.
In addition to the tax on property, as otherwise provided for, and under the power and authority conferred in the laws of the state,
there shall be levied and collected annually or more often, where provided for, a privilege license tax on trades, professions, business
operations, exhibitions, circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed, as set out in the following sections and the schedule of the
license taxes to be found filed in the city clerk's office. All licenses shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the board of aldermen from imposing from time to time, as it may see fit, such
license taxes as are not specifically defined in this chapter, or from increasing or decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or
from prohibiting or regulating the business or acts licensed, and all licenses are granted subject to the provisions of existing ordinances
or those hereafter enacted.
(Code 1975, § 11-3)

Sec. 10-4. - Term of validity.
All taxes provided for and fixed in the following sections of this chapter and the schedule of license taxes referred to in section 10-3
shall be for 12 months, unless otherwise specified, and shall so remain for 12 months beginning June 1, and ending May 31; provided,
that where the license is issued after January 1, then the licensee shall be required to pay one-half the tax prescribed, except where
otherwise specifically provided for.
(Code 1975, § 11-4)

Sec. 10-5. - License required for each separate business; valid only according to terms of issuance and at designated location; relocation or
sale of business to require new issuance; blanket fee.
(a)

The payment of any particular tax imposed by this article shall not relieve the person paying the tax from the payment of
any other tax imposed by this article for any other business he may carry on, unless so provided by the section imposing
such tax; it being the intent of this article that license taxes prescribed by the various sections, subsections and schedules
of this article applicable to any business shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided.

(b)

A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is only valid for the business conducted at the place and by the
licensee named in the license. Every person doing business in more than one factory, mill, warehouse or store, stall or
stand or other place of business shall secure a separate license for each such place of business, unless such places of
business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with an opening into each other and are operated as a unit.
If the business is moved or if the licensee sells to another, then a new license is necessary.

(c)

Where multiple independent businesses are operated under one roof, canopy or tent, in any one enclosure or upon one
or several continuous tracts of land, the city may, in its sole discretion, collect a blanket fee from the owner, lessor or
33/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

manager of such building, enclosure or tract of land at a rate as may be promulgated by the city manager from time to
time.
(Code 1975, § 11-5)

Sec. 10-6. - Display.
Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named in the license, or if the licensee has
no fixed place of business, such licensee must keep the license wherever such business is being operated and where it can be inspected
at any time by the proper city officials.
(Code 1975, § 11-6)

Sec. 10-7. - No abatement of tax.
No license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any part thereof be made in any case where the licensee discontinues his
business before the end of the period for which such license was issued.
(Code 1975, § 11-7)

Sec. 10-8. - Schedule of fees.
An annual schedule of the types of businesses to be licensed and the various amounts to be charged for such licenses, shall be kept
on file in the city clerk' s office and shall be available for inspection by all interested parties.
(Code 1975, § 11-8)

Secs. 10-9—10-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - GAME ROOMS

Sec. 10-31. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Department means the police department of the city.
Game room means any place of business that operates four or more mechanical games or pay devices for which charge is made
either directly or indirectly (including by way of illustration, video games); provided, that such games or pay devices shall not include
vending machines or photo laminating machines.

Interested party means any person who is an applicant for a license or who is an employee of an applicant for a license, any person
who is a partner in a partnership which is an applicant for a license and any person who is an officer, director or principal stockholder of
a corporation which is an applicant for a license.
(Code 1975, § 11-9)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-32. - License—Required; application; application fee; investigations and reports; issuance; revocation; removal of business.
(a)

No interested party shall operate a game room unless such party shall have first applied for and received the regulatory
license provided by this section.

(b)

Every application for the regulatory license prescribed in this article shall be upon a form approved by the city manager
and shall be filed with the city clerk. Every such application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following
34/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

information:
(1)

The name, age and residence of any interested party.

(2)

The address of the premises where the business shall be located.

(3)

The proposed hours of operation of the business.

(4)

A complete statement of all criminal convictions of any interested party.

(5)

A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or an adjoining premises owned or
controlled by the applicant.

(6)
(c)

A statement of any prior revocations of a license to operate a game room or similar business.

An application fee as set from time to time and on file at the city clerk's office shall be paid to and collected by the city
clerk when the application is submitted, to cover the cost of processing the application.

(d)

It shall be unlawful to operate a game room within the city without a regulatory license as required by this section and
unless the game room is in an area where such a business is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city.

(e)

The city clerk shall, within five business days, transmit a copy of the application to the police department for an
investigative report, to the county building inspection department to determine compliance with all building regulations
and to the planning board to determine compliance with all zoning regulations. The police department, county building
inspection department and planning board shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, report the results of
their examinations to the city clerk.

(f)

An application in proper form, accompanied by all reports required by this section, shall be submitted to the board of
aldermen, which shall approve such application if the board of aldermen determines that:
(1)

The application contains no misstatement of fact.

(2)

Any interested party has not been convicted, within five years preceding the application, of selling intoxicating
liquor or narcotic drugs, of violating any gambling laws of the state, of violating any provisions of G.S. ch. 14, art. 37
or of violating any comparable statute of any other state.

(3)

The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning and building codes.

(4)

Any interested party has not had a previously issued license revoked for engaging in a business dealing with
operating a game room.

(g)

Upon approval of the application by the board of aldermen, the clerk shall issue a privilege regulatory license to the
applicant.

(h)

A regulatory license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by action of the board of aldermen if the board
determines that the licensee has violated any liquor charge or gambling laws of the state or the United States of America.

(i)

A license issued pursuant to this section shall become void if the licensee moves or ceases to operate at the location
required to be stated in the application for the license, pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section.

(Code 1975, § 11-10)

Sec. 10-33. - Same—Notice and hearing prerequisite to revocation or denial.
Before the board of aldermen revokes a license issued pursuant to, this article, or if the board of aldermen determines that
reasonable grounds exist to deny an application for a license pursuant to this article, the board of aldermen shall cause a written notice
to be sent by certified mail to the licensee or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application. The notice shall
advise the affected party of a right to appear before the board of aldermen, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place, for
the purposes of presenting any evidence, examining any evidence submitted and examining or cross-examining any person providing
such evidence.
(Code 1975, § 11-11)

Sec. 10-34. - Rules for operation.
The following rules shall be observed by all operators of game rooms within the city:
35/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(1)

All game rooms shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. Monday through Thursday and shall close at 12:00 midn
and Saturdays.

(2)

Game rooms may be open on Sunday only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.

(3)

No play on any game shall be allowed during the times when game rooms are required by this article to remain
closed.

(4)

There must be an adult (18 years of age or older) managing the business on the premises during hours of operation
at all times.

(5)

All game rooms shall be closed to minors during normal school hours (that is, while any public school is in session).

(Code 1975, § 11-12)

Sec. 10-35. - Violations.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment as provided by
G.S. 14-4. Any violation subjects the offender to a $100.00 civil penalty to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
(Code 1975, § 11-13)

Secs. 10-36—10-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - NASCAR DAYS

Sec. 10-61. - Sale of food, beverages and souvenir items to be within festival area.
It shall be unlawful during the period of "Nascar Days" (Friday through Sunday) each year for any person, firm, or corporation to sell
food, beverages, souvenir items, other concession items or to perform publicly within the designated "festival area" as depicted in the
accompanying illustration titled "NASCAR DAYS FESTIVAL AREA" without prior approval and proper registration through the Randleman
Chamber of Commerce.
(Ord. No. O-8-95-1, § 1, 9-1-1995)

Sec. 10-62. - Existing and established businesses.
Existing and established businesses located in the "NASCAR DAYS FESTIVAL AREA" are allowed to continue operating during "Nascar
Days" without registering through the Chamber of Commerce.
(Ord. No. O-8-95-1, § 2, 9-1-1995)

Sec. 10-63. - Exception to privilege license for registered vendors or performers.
Privilege licenses will not be required for vendors or performers who are registered through the Chamber of Commerce as an
approved vendor or performer for "Nascar Days."
(Ord. No. O-8-95-1, § 3, 9-1-1995)

Sec. 10-64. - Exception to noise regulations.
Code subsection 14-31(b)(4), regarding noise restrictions, shall not apply to vendors and entertainers licensed through the
Randleman Chamber of Commerce participating in the City of Randleman's Annual "Nascar Days" and inside the designated festival
area for the.hours of Friday 7:00 p.m. through Saturday 10:00 p.m. and Sunday 12:00 p.m. through 7:00 p.m. Any violation of this
section not covered by this specific exception shall be punishable by the same provision as subsection 14-31(b)(4).
(Ord. No. O-8-95-1, § 4, 9-1-1995)

36/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Secs. 10-65—10-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ITINERANT SHOWS AND PEDDLERS

Sec. 10-91. - Shows, carnivals, etc.—Not to be held near church without permission; permit required.
It shall be unlawful to exhibit any show, carnival, performance, merry-go-round or other type of ride or rides in the city without first
obtaining a license from the proper city officials and paying the lawful tax therefor. No such license shall be issued unless and until the
owner or manager of such show or performance shall prove to the satisfaction of the proper city official that all of the performers or
persons employed or connected with the show, carnival or exhibition are of good moral character and are free from any sexually
transmitted diseases and that the exhibition and presence of the persons connected therewith will not be detrimental to the public
health and morals.
(Code 1975, § 13-11)

Sec. 10-92. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Solicitor or canvasser means any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor
truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take
orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to
be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such
sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, that such definition shall include any person, who for
himself, or for another person hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop
or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. This definition shall
not apply to, and this chapter shall not apply to, the following persons:
(1)

Those who peddle solely to industrial, commercial or professional establishments within the city.

(2)

Those who peddle solely agricultural or forest products which have not been subjected to manufacturing process.

(3)

Those peddling for schools or approved educational, religious or charitable organizations.

(Code 1975, § 16.1-1)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-93. - Business license.
Every person peddling, soliciting or canvassing in the city shall obtain a license under the provisions of article I of this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-2)

Sec. 10-94. - Permit—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the corporate limits of the city without first
obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-3)

Sec. 10-95. - Same—Application; fee.
(a)

Applicants for a permit under this article shall personally file with the chief of police, or his designated agent, a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, which shall give the following information:
37/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(1)

Name and description of the applicant.

(2)

Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.

(3)

A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.

(4)

If employed, or acting as agent, the name and address of the employer or principal, together with credentials
establishing the exact relationship.

(5)

Length of time for which the permit is desired.

(6)

The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured
or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery.

(7)

Two photographs of the applicant, taken within the 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the
application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguished manner.

(8)

The fingerprints of the applicant, a copy of which shall remain in the police department.

(9)

A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinances, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.

(10)

A statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not more than ten days prior to submission of the
application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or communicable disease.

(b)

At the time of filing the application, a fee as set from time to time and on file in the city clerk's office shall be paid to the
chief of police to cover the cost of issuing the permit.

(Code 1975, § 16.1-4)

Sec. 10-96. - Same—Denial; appeal and hearing on denial.
(a)

If the chief of police finds that the previous criminal record of the applicant justifies the conclusion that the health and
safety of occupants of the places solicited might be menaced by commission of a breach of peace or some form of
assault, he shall not approve the permit. Whenever an application for a permit is disapproved on this ground, the
applicant shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the chief of police by filing with the board of aldermen,
within 14 days after the applicant receives notice that the application has been disapproved, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal.

(b)

The board of aldermen shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given
to the applicant by mailing the notice, postage paid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to
the date set for the hearing. The decision of the board of aldermen on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.

(Code 1975, § 16.1-5)

Sec. 10-97. - Same—Issuance.
Upon receipt and approval of an application for a permit and payment of the prescribed fee therefor, the chief of police, or his
designated agent, shall deliver to the applicant the following:
(1)

A permit containing the signature of the issuing officer, the name, address and photograph of the applicant, the
class (type) of permit issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance of the permit, the
length of time the permit shall be in effect, and the license number and other identifying description of any vehicles
used in such business.

(2)

A copy of this article.

(Code 1975, § 16.1-6)

Sec. 10-98. - Same—Term.

38/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be effective during the fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending on the last
day of the succeeding June, unless the applicant requests permission to do business for a lesser period, in which case the permit shall
be valid for such period.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-7)

Sec. 10-99. - Same—Revocation; grounds.
The permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the chief of police after notice and hearing for any of the
following causes:
(1)

Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit.

(2)

Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business.

(3)

Any violation of this article.

(4)

Conducting the business in an unlawful or abusive manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or menace to the health and enjoyment of the privacy of the home of any individual.

(5)

Conviction during the permit year of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.

(Code 1975, § 16.1-8)

Sec. 10-100. - Same—Notice of hearing upon revocation.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage paid, to the person holding the permit at his last known address at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-9)

Sec. 10-101. - Same—Appeal of revocation.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in the revocation of a permit, as provided in section 10-99, shall have the
right to appeal to the board of aldermen. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the board of aldermen, within 14 days after notice of
the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
the appeal. The board of aldermen shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to
the applicant in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on refusal to grant a permit. The decision of the board of aldermen
on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-10)

Sec. 10-102. - Same—Renewal.
Permits shall be renewed without charge upon the application of permit holder at any time between the June 1 and July 1 while the
permit is in force. An applicant shall request such renewal in writing and state at such time any changes applicable to his initial
application for a permit. No other action on his part shall be deemed necessary. Upon application for such renewal, the chief of police
shall issue to the applicant a renewal permit covering the period of the new year.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-11)

Sec. 10-103. - Surety bond.
Before a permit is issued for soliciting or canvassing, every applicant not a resident of the city shall file with the chief of police a
surety bond running to the city in the amount as set from time to time and on file in the city clerk's office, the surety acceptable to and
approved by the city manager, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this Code and other ordinances
of the city and statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of solicitor and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all
39/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representation of the solicitor, and further
guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with the solicitor that the property purchased will be delivered according to the
representation of the solicitor. Such bond shall provide that action thereon may be brought in the name of the city to the use or benefit
of the aggrieved person. A surety bond issued by any surety company licensed to do business by the department of insurance of the
state shall constitute a valid bond under this section.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-12)

Sec. 10-104. - Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer in the city or any tax collection official of the city to require any person seen soliciting,
canvassing or peddling to produce his permit, and for such officials to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to
be violating this article.
(Code 1975, § 16.1-13)

Secs. 10-105—10-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - HOUSEMOVERS

Sec. 10-131. - House moving.
No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public streets or sidewalks of the city without the written consent of
the city manager and the deposit of a good and sufficient bond as set from time to time and on file in the city clerk's office to cover any
damage done to any street or sidewalk, or to the property of any person.
(Code 1975, § 17-7)

Chapter 12 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(11)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 16.

(11)

State Law reference— Riots and civil disorders generally, G.S. 14-288.1 et seq.; power of city to enact ordinances to deal with states

of emergency, G.S. 14-288.12.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 12-1. - Penalties.
Any misdemeanor violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $500.00 fine. Any violation of this chapter subjects the
offender to a civil penalty of $500.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
Sec. 12-2. - Purpose and scope.
(a)

Purpose. This chapter is to provide direction and guidance to city departments for pre-emergency preparedness,
emergency response and post-emergency recovery actions to reduce human suffering and minimize damage to
property, and to return the city to its pre-emergency condition following emergencies of all levels and causes exclusive of
war.

(b)

Scope. The scope of this chapter is to:
(1)

Establish concepts under which city departments will operate in response to emergencies by:
40/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

Defining the responsibilities and authorities of the city, city departments and city officials.

b.

Defining the emergency role and missions of the city, city departments and city officials.

c.

Providing pre-emergency planning guidance for city departments, including measures to prevent and
minimize injury and damage.

d.

Providing procedures for warning.

e.

Providing procedures to determine and report severity and magnitude of an emergency.

f.

Establish procedures for expeditious and active deployment of resources in support of:

g.

1.

Emergency operations of city departments.

2.

City departments' responsibilities for persons and properties in city owned or controlled areas.

Providing the actions required of city and city departments to obtain and implement outside assistance from
other cities, quasigovernmental and private organizations and the state.

h.

Providing for coordination of emergency response actions of the city with city departments and assistance
being provided by other local governments, quasi-governmental relief, private organizations and the federal
government.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § I)

Sec. 12-3. - Planning factors.
(a)

Authorities for emergency operations.
(1)

Pursuant to G.S. 160A-193, cities have general authority to enact ordinances to remedy situations which are
dangerous to or threaten public health.

(2)

Pursuant to G.S. 14-288.12, specific authorities are granted to local governments to enact ordinances to deal with
states of emergency. In particular, a city may place prohibitions or restrictions upon other activities or conditions
the control of which may be reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the state
of emergency. During a state of emergency as determined by the mayor or mayor pro-tem, or by resolution of the
board of aldermen, the following prohibitions or restrictions may be invoked:
a.

Limitations on the movement of people in public places.

b.

Limitations on the operation of offices, business establishments and other places to or from which people may
travel or at which they may congregate.

c.

Limitation, restriction or prohibition of the possession, transportation, sale, purchase and consumption of
alcoholic beverages.

d.

Limitation, restriction or prohibition of the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, storage and use of
dangerous weapons, substances and gasoline.

e.

Regulation of the sale or use of scarce supplies which are essential for the public health or safety.

f.

Regulation of evacuation and evacuation shelters which may be reasonably necessary to maintain law and
order and protect lives and property.

g.

Regulation of other activities or conditions the control of which may be reasonably necessary to maintain
order and protect lives or property during the state of emergency.

(3)

Pursuant to G.S. ch. 166A, the North Carolina Emergency Management Act outlines the governor's emergency
powers and states municipalities are authorized to:
a.

Establish and maintain emergency management agencies subject to coordination by the county.

b.

Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for
emergency management purposes and to provide for the health and safety of persons and property.

c.

Direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with
the policies and standards set by the state.

41/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

d.

Assign and make available resources for emergency management purposes for services within or outside the phy
municipality.

e.

Delegate powers in a local state of emergency to an appropriate official.

f.

Establish mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions and agreements and understanding with
public and private agencies within the state, and with the approval of the governor, enter such agreements
with agencies and organizations of other states.

g.

Accept services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by gift, grant, or loan from the federal government or
any person, firm or corporation.

h.

Declare a local state of emergency upon occurrence or imminent threats of disaster. The declaration:
1.

Activates local ordinances dealing with states of emergency and plans mutual assistance compacts and
agreements.

2.
(4)

Authorizes the furnishing of assistance under mutual assistance compacts and agreements.

Ordinance enacted pursuant to G.S. 14-288.12 and G.S. 166A-8 to authorize declaration of a state of emergency by
proclamation of the mayor.

(b)

Definitions of terms used in this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Assistant emergency operations officer (A.E.O.O.) means any assistant to a lead department head.
City emergency response team means any group of individuals (two or more) ordered into an emergency area/site in an attempt to
reconcile the emergency condition.

County emergency operations center means the county facility used during county emergencies.
Direct support department means any department that provides personnel and equipment in direct support of the lead
department, i.e., the police department provides direct support to the fire department during fires.

Emergency means an occurrence or threat of an occurrence which can impair public health and/or safety and/or cause destruction
or damage to property and which calls for immediate action. An emergency situation is a condition resulting from the effects or
potential effects of a destructive force.

Emergency communication center means the place designated by emergency operations supervisor to act as the emergency
communication center.

Emergency communications center supervisor, communications officer means the person designated by emergency operations
supervisor for such position.

Emergency operations center means the place designated by emergency operations supervisor to act as the emergency operations
center.

Emergency operations officer means any lead department head as designated by the emergency operations supervisor.
Emergency operations supervisor means the city manager.
Emergency operations support group supervisor means the person designated by the city manager for such position.
Forward command post means a position near the actual site of an emergency from which command and control of the immediate
vicinity is exercised.

General support department means any department providing assistance/support to the lead department or direct support
department but not actually involved in the street operation.

Lead department means any department appointed to exercise overall control/coordination and direction of the emergency
situation.
42/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

All other terms are explained where they appear in this chapter.
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
(c)

Civil disturbances. Civil disturbances can be any or all of the following:
(1)

Mass demonstrations, involving hundreds or thousands of people, which can overwhelm the capabilities of law
enforcement agencies.

(2)

Civil disobedience, often involving elderly women, young females and mothers with small children whose
nonviolent posture places the control forces in an awkward position.

(3)

Idealistic protest, involving fanatically dedicated, often naive young participants for whom normal deterrents such
as threats of arrest or use of force has limited effect.

(4)

Dispersed riots, involving many small groups of demonstrators operating independently or in concert over a wide
urban area, dispersing when threatened by control force operations, later reassembling elsewhere.

(5)

Political terrorism, involving extremely violent, often nihilistic or even anarchistic tactics, such as sniping and
bombing attacks, which make conventional police operations probably ineffective and certainly dangerous.

(d)

Assumptions.
(1)

Emergencies will occur in and around the city.

(2)

City departments, to some degree, have capabilities, plans and procedures to provide for the safety and welfare of
the citizens in times of emergency.

(3)

City departments have mutual assistance programs/procedures with each other.

(4)

In situations so requiring, a state of emergency will be declared, the provisions of this plan invoked and the city
emergency operations center activated to provide for the coordinated response by the city government.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § II)

Sec. 12-4. - Organization for emergencies and disasters.
(a)

State. The state government organization for emergencies is based on the day to day organization of the executive
branch. Emergency functions and other responsibilities assigned to state departments are coordinated by the secretary
of crime control and public safety.

(b)

County. All emergency management activity within a county, including that of municipalities within the county, is
coordinated at the county level (county department of emergency management).

(c)

City task force organization for emergencies. The city task force organization for emergencies shall be as follows:
(1)

(2)

Command and control group:
a.

City manager (emergency operations supervisor).

b.

Chief of police (emergency operations officer).

c.

Chief of fire (emergency operations officer).

d.

Journal recorder (city clerk/assistant city clerk operations coordinator).

e.

Public information officer (city manager).

f.

Courier (designated by city manager).

Support group:
a.

Emergency operations support group supervisor: (planning director).

b.

Recreation director (member).

c.

Water plant superintendent (member).

d.

Wastewater plant superintendent (member).

e.

Public works supervisor (member).

f.

Librarian (member).
43/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(3)

Communications group:
a.

Communication group supervisor (designated by city manager).

b.

Telecommunicator (designated by city manager).

c.

Deputy fire chief (assistant emergency operations officer).

d.

Police lieutenant (assistant emergency operations officer).
Note: Assistant emergency operations officer may be located elsewhere, due to overcrowding, at the
discretion of the city manager.

(4)

Lead departments.

(5)

Direct support departments.

(6)

General support departments.

(7)

Forward command posts.

(8)

City emergency response team.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § III)

Sec. 12-5. - Situation and resources.
(a)

Natural and manmade disasters. The city is vulnerable to the effects of natural and manmade disasters.
(1)

Natural disasters. Natural disasters can and do cause injury, death, damage to property and economic loss to the
city. The principle natural destructive forces are:

(2)

a.

Severe thunderstorms.

b.

Tornadoes.

c.

Hurricanes.

d.

Flooding.

e.

Winter storms.

f.

Droughts.

g.

Forest and grass fires.

h.

Earthquakes.

Manmade disasters. Manmade disasters are categorized as:
a.

Land, water and air transportation accidents.

b.

Industrial accidents/hazardous materials incidents (see article IV of this chapter).

c.

Structural fires/structural collapses, in conjunction with or independent of the accidents or incidents set out in
subsections (a)(2)a and b of this section.

d.

Civil disturbances (riots).

Note: All categories may involve hazardous materials including those presenting radiation hazards. Air and water
contamination from these materials and from oil spills can adversely affect the people, property and environment
of the community.
(b)

Resources. Resources to be utilized in case of natural or manmade disasters include the following:
(1)

Personnel, equipment, supplies, physical facilities and funds of the city government.

(2)

Personnel, equipment and supplies of other governments, quasigovernmental and private organizations within the
locality secured under prearranged agreements and understandings.

(3)

Resources obtainable in accordance with the terms and conditions of mutual aid agreements with neighboring
jurisdictions.

(4)

Trained and organized volunteers.

44/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(5)

Untrained volunteer manpower.

(6)

Resources obtained under contract.

(7)

Community service project, state department of corrections.

(8)

Departments will maintain equipment and personnel lists, which will be available.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § IV)

Sec. 12-6. - Execution.
(a)

Concept of operations.
(1)

When an emergency situation happens or threatens the city, all city department heads will be notified. The city
manager will make a decision as to full, partial or nonactivation of the city emergency operations center location to
be determined by the city manager.

(2)

If the emergency operations center is activated, radio and telephone communications will be established between
the emergency operations center, city communications center, county central dispatch and the support group.
Additional radio/telephone stations may be established at the discretion of the city manager. Separate radio nets
will be established for operations and administrative/logistics matters.

(3)

The emergency operations center will serve as the control center for the city manager and his control group to
direct emergency operations within the city. Each subordinate radio/telephone will pass on status reports, requests
for assistance, and particularly, coordination of orders.

(4)

The emergency operations center will be the coordinating agency and information center for all emergency
activities with the city, process requests for assistance from all sources and provide status reports to the
county/state/federal agencies. The city emergency operations center will coordinate emergency activities and
maintain contact with the county emergency operations center.

(5)

The American Red Cross (where properly requested) will assume primary responsibilities for the shelter and feeding
of all persons relocating at designated shelters.

(6)

The state National Guard (where properly requested and authorized by the governor) will provide support to city
law enforcement personnel.

(7)

Tasked agencies within the city government will provide personnel for emergency operations center staffing to
enable 24-hour operations if required.

(8)

In all cases where the emergency condition becomes widespread (countywide) the county department of
emergency management will assume control and the city emergency operations center will become subject to
directions from the county emergency operations center. At this time, the mayor shall carry out his responsibilities
as delegated in this chapter.

(b)

Duties and responsibilities. The responsibilities noted in this subsection are general in nature and should not be
construed as limiting. Department heads concerned should develop plans and procedures to ensure that the fullest
extent of their capabilities are available and in readiness to support the purpose and scope of this chapter.
(1)

Command and control group. The command and control group shall exercise overall direction and control of
emergency operations including decisions to institute citywide increased readiness conditions and such other
actions deemed necessary to the situation.

(2)

Support group. The support group shall provide professional expertise and material resources for the
implementation of pre-planned actions and emergency decisions as directed by the control group, to provide
information, data and recommendations to the control group.

(3)

Communications group. The communications group shall provide communication between emergency operation
center, emergency communications, county central dispatch, support group, field units and higher authorities
during preemergency, emergency and post-emergency situations; additionally maintain situation maps and facilities

45/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

for the functioning of the AEOO; and receive and pass on alerts/warnings to other concerned parties. The city police
department will have the responsibility for warning the public and for traffic control in and near an evacuation
shelter.
(4)

Other units/individuals. All other units/individuals with a responsibility in support of this chapter but not required in
the control support groups will remain immediately available throughout the emergency.

(5)

The state National Guard. The National Guard, when properly requested and authorized by the governor, will
provide support to the city law enforcement personnel. County emergency management will be contacted for
National Guard support.

(6)

American Red Cross. The Asheboro chapter of the American Red Cross has agreed (the county evacuation plan) to
assume the following missions:

(7)

(8)

(9)

a.

Provide mass care (food, shelter and for evacuees).

b.

Provide management/supervision of evacuation centers/shelters.

Mayor. The mayor shall:
a.

Serve as overall commander-in-chief/senior official for the city.

b.

Assume position in the county emergency operations center in the event of a countywide emergency.

c.

Be prepared to request assistance from higher headquarters in accordance with general statutes.

d.

Maintain contact with the city emergency operations center.

e.

Maintain cognizance of the overall situation.

City manager. The city manager shall:
a.

Provide direction to all city department heads for the management of emergencies.

b.

Serve as emergency operations supervisor in accordance with article II of this chapter.

c.

Serve as public information officer.

d.

Perform other duties as directed.

Emergency operations support group supervisor. The emergency operations support group supervisor shall be
designated by city manager and perform duties as directed.

(10)

Chief of police or public safety director. The chief of police or public safety director shall:
a.

Serve as emergency operations officer during any natural or manmade disasters covered by this chapter.

b.

Ensure the emergency operations center and emergency communication center are properly equipped and
maintained (i.e., maps, references, recall rosters, etc.).

c.

Initiate the secondary alert/call-out when necessary.

d.

Be prepared, on order, to provide emergency assistance in law enforcement to select communities in need of
assistance.

e.
(11)

(12)

Perform other duties as directed.

Chief of fire or public safety director. The chief of fire or public safety director shall:
a.

Serve as emergency operations officer during any natural or manmade disasters covered by this chapter.

b.

Be prepared, on order, to provide emergency fire assistance to communities in need of support.

c.

Perform other duties as directed.

Planning director. The planning director shall:
a.

Serve as emergency operations support group supervisor.

b.

Be prepared, on order, to act as an emergency operations officer in any emergency situation not covered by
chapter.

c.
(13)

Perform other duties as directed.

Deputy fire chief. The deputy fire chief shall:
46/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

Serve as assistant emergency operations officer.

b.

Be prepared, on order, to act as an emergency operations officer in any emergency situation not covered by
this chapter.

c.
(14)

Perform other duties as directed.

Police lieutenant. The police lieutenant shall:
a.

Serve as assistant emergency operations officer.

b.

Be prepared, on order, to act as an emergency operations officer in any emergency situation not covered by
this chapter.

c.
(15)

Perform other duties as directed.

Command/control group journal recorder (city clerk/assistant city clerk/operations coordinator). The
command/control group journal recorder (city clerk/assistant city clerk/operations coordinator) shall:

(16)

(17)

a.

Keep the emergency operations center journal.

b.

Perform other duties as directed.

Command/control group courier. The command/control group courier shall:
a.

Serve as courier to the emergency operations center command/control group.

b.

Perform other duties as directed.

Duties and responsibilities common to all city department heads. The following duties and responsibilities shall be
common to all city department heads.
a.

Develop and maintain internal support plans for effective performance of emergency functions, protection of
facilities and personnel under their cognizance and restoration of any facilities that sustain damage.

b.

Develop and maintain contingency plans to cope with specific hazards that are primarily within areas of
responsibility.

c.

Develop cooperative arrangements with other city departments in areas of mutual concern and
responsibilities.

d.

Develop cooperative understandings and maintain liaison with private industry, associations and
organizations that possess significant resources related to the respective department's primary
responsibilities.

e.

Maintain liaison with appropriate county and state agencies.

f.

Ensure preparation of appropriate emergency plans for use at field locations including provisions for mutual
assistance with local authorities.

g.

Within capability, provide guidance and planning assistance to locate counterparts as requested and directed.

h.

Be prepared to provide city emergency operations center representation.

i.

Maintain strict accounting of all expenditure obligation data to show extent of local response to emergencies
in financial forms.

j.
(c)

Notify the city manager immediately of any emergency or developing emergency.

Coordinating instructions.
(1)

Emergency/readiness conditions.
a.

The following emergency/readiness conditions are established:

Condition 3

Watch (48 hours to event)

Condition 2

Warning (24 hours to event)

Condition 1

Impact (Immediate attention)
47/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

b.

Increased readiness conditions will be placed into effect by the city manager (emergency operations
supervisor) or his designated representative.

c.
(2)

Emergency conditions action checklist is on file with the city manager or his designee.

Areas requiring priority restoration. The following areas require priority restoration. Listed city facilities may require
special security:

Facility

Location

City Hall

101 Hillary Street

Police Department

101 Hillary Street

Fire Department

105 Hillary Street

Public Library

122 Commerce Square

Public Services Garage

1002 East Naomi Street

Parks and Recreation O ce

125 West Academy Street

City Park

406 South Stout Street

Nature Trail

117 Presnell Street

Magistrate O ce

125 West Academy Street

Water Tank

931 Commonwealth Road

Water Tank

107 Hillary Street

Water Tank

163 Morningside Drive

Water Tank and Garage

111 Depot Street

Reservoir

3570 Creckridge Country Road

Wastewater Treatment Plant

3475 Applewood Road

Wastewater Pump Station

240 Upton Street

Wastewater Pump Station

184 Moore Avenue

Wastewater Pump Station

646 Hunters Ridge Road

Wastewater Pump Station

411 Heritage Drive

48/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Wastewater Pump Station

614 Charter Oaks Road

Wastewater Pump Station

218 Russell Walker Road

Water Treatment Plant

1000 East Naomi Street

Water Lift Station

633 West Academy Street

Water Lift Station

4011 Brown Oaks Road

First Methodist Church

301 South Main Street

Emergency Shelter 1
First Baptist Church

100 North Main Street

Emergency Shelter 2

(3)

Shelter areas. The Asheboro chapter of the American Red Cross intends to open as the primary shelter Level Cross
Elementary School. It must be understood that any person or agency, other than the American Red Cross, opening
or designating a "shelter" must assume complete responsibility for its operation including any financial obligations
incurred. The city police department shall assign one officer to each shelter for security reasons during the
emergency situation.

(4)

Reentry/Recovery. Reentry into evacuated areas will be a coordinated decision of the county department of
emergency services. This information/decision will be obtained/released from the county emergency operations
center. Reentry, recovery and securing from emergency operations in the city will be the decision of the mayor
upon recommendation of the city manager.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § V)

Sec. 12-7. - Administration.
(a)

Funding and accounting. Funding and accounting will be in accordance with the existing city/state regulations/policies.

(b)

Reports/records. The city may be required to submit four different reports: a situation report, damage assessment
report, expenditure/obligation data report and unusual occurrence after action report. In the event this becomes
necessary, state disaster plans will be used as a guide.

(c)

State assistance. To obtain state assistance, the city will request assistance through appropriate channels.

(d)

State military support. To obtain state military support, the city will request assistance through appropriate channels as
identified in the state disaster plans.

(e)

Federal assistance. To obtain federal assistance, the city will follow state disaster plans by requesting assistance through
appropriate channels.

(f)

Community relations/public information/casualty information. The public information officer (designated by city
manager) under the direction of the city manager will prepare and release all information pertaining to the emergency to
keep the public informed and dispel rumors. Casualty information will be made through the city emergency operations
center when activated. If the county emergency operations center is in operation, all news releases will be coordinated
with the county.

(g)

Manpower and personnel. In the event additional personnel are needed during the emergency, they may be obtained by
one or all of the following means:
49/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(1)

Volunteers, at no cost.

(2)

Hire part-time/temporary personnel.

(3)

Contract with private firms to meet personnel needs.

(4)

Community service project, state department of corrections.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § VI)

Sec. 12-8. - Logistics/materials/supplies.
(a)

Transportation. The city's transportation equipment will be used to meet emergency needs. If the need exceeds the city's
capabilities, the city finance department's purchasing division will obtain additional transportation from private means or
contracted/hired from commercial sources.

(b)

Water supply and water purity. In the event the water supply of the city becomes inadequate for any reason, assistance
from the state will be requested.

(c)

Debris removal. When the city's resources become inadequate to cope with debris removal problems, state assistance
will be requested through appropriate channels.

(d)

Food assistance. The finance department (purchasing) is responsible for feeding emergency personnel (required). If they
are not able to cope with the situation, assistance will be requested from the state emergency management center.

(e)

Mass care. The Asheboro chapter of the American Red Cross has accepted this responsibility. The department of social
services should maintain a support role under the auspice of the American Red Cross. If the need exceeds the capability,
state assistance will be required. Note: Mass care is defined as food, shelter and care of evacuees.

(f)

Public health. The county public health department handles all problems concerning public health.

(g)

Sewage and waste disposal. When the city's systems are incapable of meeting the needs of the situation, state assistance
is required.

(h)

Medical services. When the medical service demand exceeds the resources, it will be met through prearranged
agreements or requested from the state.

(i)

Identification and mortuary. The city will utilize the coroner, medical examiners, local private facilities and personnel to
handle emergency identification and mortuary needs. The local coroner acting as medical examiner will request
assistance from the state medical examiner if the need exceeds the capacity.

(j)

Mental health/crisis counseling. The county mental health center personnel and facilities will be used to the extent of
their capability. Request for assistance, if needed, will be made to the state department of human resources, division of
mental health services, via the chairman of the county commissioners and the Piedmont regional director.

(k)

Power restoration. Restoration will be carried out by the companies involved using their own equipment and plans. The
city government may assist in power restoration at the discretion of the emergency operation supervisor. The priority of
power restoration is hospitals, water works, emergency first aid centers, evacuation centers, governmental complexes,
radio and television stations, business districts, rural districts and situations affecting the safety of the power company
personnel or the general public will be given priority.

(l)

Engineering services. The city will utilize its own contracted engineering personnel. Assistance beyond mutual aid and
state assistance will be secured through contracts with private organizations.

(m)

Maintenance. All departments possessing motor transportation, engineering or radio equipment must perform routine
monthly maintenance checks to ensure the equipment is in operating condition, i.e., electrical generators should be
started and run for a minimum of 30 minutes per month. During winter months motor transportation equipment should
be checked weekly.

(n)

Traffic control. The police department will be the lead agency providing traffic control at selected locations in the city
based upon the need and circumstances during emergencies.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § VII)

Sec. 12-9. - Command/control/direction.
50/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(a)

Control group function. The control group will exercise overall direction and control of emergency operations including
decisions to institute increased readiness conditions and such other actions necessary to the situation.

(b)

Support group function. The support group will provide professional expertise and material resources for the
implementation of preplanned actions and emergency decisions as directed by the control group; they will also provide
information, data and recommendations to the control group as well as to field positions/operations.

(c)

Communication group function. The communication group will provide communication before, during and after an
emergency and maintain adequate space and facilities to support all assistant emergency operations officers to include
radios, phones and maps for the city.

(d)

Command post. The command post/headquarters for emergency operations will be the fire station located at 105 Hillary
Street.

(e)

(f)

Alternate command post. The alternate command post will be:
(1)

City hall.

(2)

Police station.

Emergency operations center. The city emergency operations center is located in the fire department's first floor
conference room.

(g)

Emergency communication center. The emergency communication center is also located in the fire department's first
floor conference room.

(h)

Location of mayor. The mayor will be located in the county emergency operations center during countywide emergencies
and in the city emergency operations center during emergencies contained within the city limits.

(i)

Location of emergency operations supervisor. The emergency operations supervisor will be located in the city emergency
operations center when it is activated.

(j)

Location of emergency operations officer. The emergency operations officer will be located in the emergency operations
center unless otherwise directed.

(k)

Location of assistant emergency operations officer. The location of the assistant emergency operations officer will be in
the emergency communications center unless otherwise directed.

(l)
(m)

(n)

Location of command/control group. The command/control group will be located in the emergency operations center.
Location of support group. The support group will be located in:
(1)

The emergency operations center;

(2)

The city hall; or

(3)

The police headquarters if city hall is unavailable.

Succession for city administration. The line of succession for the city administration is:
(1)

City manager or designated alternate.

(2)

Emergency operations support group supervisor or alternate, designated by city manager.

(3)

Chief of police (or public safety director).

(4)

Chief of fire (or public safety director).

(5)

Deputy chief of fire.

(6)

Police lieutenant.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, § VIII)

Sec. 12-10. - Communications.
(a)

Generally. Until such time as the emergency operations center is activated, all communications will be located at the
emergency communications center. Upon activation of the emergency operations center, telephone and radio
communications with the command/control group, Randolph County central dispatch, support group and the emergency
communications center will be put into operation. Other radio/telephone stations may be placed in service as needed.
51/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Public services department's frequency will be used to set up separate radio net for support matters between the
emergency operations center and the support group. The primary means of communication will be telephone; the
alternate, radio. Upon termination of the emergency and/or restoration of telephone service, all borrowed radio
equipment will be returned to its rightful owners.
(b)

Warning/alert system. The city may receive a warning or notice of an emergency from any source. All sources should be
verified as far as possible. Upon receipt of an official notice/warning, the emergency communications center supervisor
will initiate the city alert system. When the city manager is notified, he will make a decision whether to activate the
emergency operations center. Once department heads and key individuals have been notified of the situation and
readiness condition (there are significant happenings within a readiness condition or the readiness condition changes).
Once a city department head has been alerted, he will initiate alert/call-out systems within his department, as necessary,
to cope with the situation. Based on an estimate of the situation, the police chief or his designated representative may
implement Phase II of the alert/call-out system. Phase I and Phase II of the system are on file with the appropriate
authorities.

(c)

Communications available. The following are communications available:
(1)

Television.

(2)

Commercial radio.

(3)

National warning system*.

(4)

Division of criminal information (DCI).

(5)

Emergency broadcast system.

(6)

Amateur radio.

(7)

Telephone companies.

(8)

Newspapers.

(9)

Aural system-sirens, bells, horns.

(10)

Courier/messenger.

*Note: Guilford County is responsible for notifying Randolph County.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, § IX)

Secs. 12-11—12-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER

Sec. 12-31. - Purpose and scope.
(a)

Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the functioning of the emergency operations center
during an emergency situation in the city.

(b)

Scope. The scope of this article is:
(1)

Organization of the emergency operations center.

(2)

Activation of the emergency operations center.

(3)

Duties and responsibilities of groups and individuals.

(4)

Operation/functioning of the emergency operations center during preemergency, emergency and post-emergency
situations.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § I)

Sec. 12-32. - Planning factors.

52/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(a)

Authority. The authority for this article is outlined in article I of this chapter.

(b)

References. References for this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.

(c)

Definition of terms. Definition of terms for this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.

(d)

Assumption. There is an assumption that the emergency operations center will be activated.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § II)

Sec. 12-33. - Organization.
The organization of the emergency operations center shall be as outlined in the article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § III)

Sec. 12-34. - Situation/resources.
(a)

Situation. The city may be faced with a natural or manmade disaster. Such a disaster could include destructive weather,
hazardous materials or civil disturbances. When this happens, the city manager would declare an emergency situation
and activate the emergency operations center.

(b)

Resources. The resources of the emergency operations center are outlined in article I of this chapter.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § IV)

Sec. 12-35. - Execution.
(a)

Concept of operations. The emergency operations center may be activated in three phases or fully activated upon first
notice.
(1)

Phase I—Monitoring. Each concerned city department, division, and section receives a report of a potential problem
such as a storm watch. They will monitor progress in their normal workstations or at home, keeping their respective
superiors informed.

(2)

Phase II—Partial activation. The situation escalates into a real threat, such as storm warnings or flash flood
warnings. The emergency operations supervisor decides on a partial activation of the emergency operations center.
The degree of activation will be at the discretion of the emergency operations supervisor.

(3)

Phase III—Full activation. Emergency conditions exist, i.e., natural or manmade disaster utilizing necessary
personnel and city emergency response team.

(b)

Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities for each member of the emergency operations center shall be
as follows:
(1)

(2)

Emergency operations center supervisor. The emergency operations center supervisor shall:
a.

Supervise the overall operations in the emergency operations center.

b.

Supervise all public information/news releases.

c.

Provide briefings as required.

d.

Assign personnel for duty, i.e., watch teams for rotating relief if the emergency situation becomes protracted.

Emergency operations officer (or designee). The emergency operations officer (or designee) shall:
a.

Maintain the situation map in the emergency operations center.

b.

Review all incoming messages for distribution to the proper action department, division, section, agency or
individual. Messages (verbal/written) should be routed from the communication center to the emergency
operations center.

c.

Utilize all available measures of securing information relative to the situation upon request on when
necessary.

d.

Receive damage assessment information and pass it to damage data tabulation personnel.

e.

Determine what information is to be placed on emergency operations center situation map.
53/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(3)

(4)

(5)

f.

Supervise maintenance of the emergency operations center journal.

g.

Establish transmission priority on all outgoing messages.

Assistant emergency operations officer. The assistant emergency operations officer shall:
a.

Maintain situation map in the communication center, or elsewhere, if so directed.

b.

Maintain post and man telephone in the communications center unless directed to do so elsewhere.

c.

Keep the lead department head informed of all matters pertaining to the emergency.

d.

Perform other duties as required/directed.

Journal recorder. The journal recorder shall:
a.

Be provided by the lead department unless otherwise directed.

b.

Maintain the emergency operations center journal.

c.

Maintain copies of all incoming and outgoing messages.

Emergency communications center supervisor/emergency communications center. The emergency
communications center supervisor/emergency communications center shall:
a.

Review all incoming and outgoing messages and direct action requests to the appropriate agency. This
function may be performed by the emergency operations center at the discretion of the emergency operations
center supervisor.

b.

Supervise the operations of the emergency operations center communication center.

c.

Ensure all incoming telephone calls on the emergency circuits are transferred to the proper party.

d.

Ensure radio/division of criminal information messages are transferred to the proper party.

e.

Ensure all outgoing messages are transmitted correctly and by appropriate means.

f.

Manual or data processing equipment as available in the emergency operations center communication center
will suffice as the communications center journal.

(c)

Coordinating instructions.
(1)

Activation of emergency operations center.
a.

Warning/alerts may be received from any source and by any means. Warning or direct messages received
from sources will be verified.

b.

Alerting procedures. The individual receiving the warning messages will notify the emergency communications
center supervisor/communications officer who will initiate the city alert/warning system.

c.

When a city department head has been notified/alerted, it shall be his responsibility to alert the appropriate
personnel, if any, within his department.

(2)

Activation generally.
a.

The emergency operations center will be considered activated when personnel for operations are present and
communication systems are operating.

b.

All personnel reporting for duty in the emergency operations center will report to the emergency operations
supervisor.

c.

When the emergency operations center is activated, office space will be allocated/utilized as directed by the
emergency operations supervisor.

d.

The emergency operations supervisor will provide initial situation briefings to concerned personnel as soon as
possible.

(3)

Team composition. Team compositions for extended (12 hours) emergency operations center will be at the
discretion of the emergency operations supervisor. Generally extended operations will require 12-hour shifts.

(4)

Time schedules. Time schedules for emergency operations center operations will be at the discretion of the
emergency operations supervisor.

(5)

Relief. During extended emergency operations center operations, the emergency operations center oncoming relief
54/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

will report for duty briefing and transition processes. If any emergency operations center member is not present,
emergency operations officers are responsible for obtaining substitutes.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § V)

Sec. 12-36. - Administration.
(a)

The administration of the emergency operations center is outlined in article I of this chapter except where expanded
upon in this section.

(b)

All public information/news releases will be released through the emergency operations supervisor or designated
representative, unless the county emergency operations center is operating, in which case they will be released by the
county.

(c)

The chief of police will set up the emergency operations center upon notice to do so. The chief of police will ensure the
following equipment (at a minimum) is available at all times:

(d)

(1)

Portable generator.

(2)

Appropriate wall maps (large scale of the city with acetate coverings).

(3)

The emergency operations center journal (with extra sheets).

(4)

Note pads.

(5)

Pens/pencils and grease pencils.

(6)

Telephones/radios in accordance with this article and article I of this chapter.

(7)

Additional emergency supplies (to include food and personal supplies as needed).

Each city department will maintain a record of their participation in the emergency using the emergency operations
center journal form.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § VI)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 12-37. - Logistics.
(a)

Logistics for the emergency operations center are outlined in the article I of this chapter except as expanded upon in this
section.

(b)

The chief of police will supply the emergency operations center with all necessary supplies.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § VII)

Sec. 12-38. - Command and control.
The command and control of the emergency operations center is outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § VIII)

Sec. 12-39. - Communications.
(a)

Generally. Communications shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter except as expanded upon in this section.

(b)

Message control.
(1)

Message form. A message form will be used, if needed, to record incoming/outgoing messages.

(2)

Message flow. The message flow will be from the emergency operations center to the emergency communications
center and from the emergency communications center to the emergency operations center.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex A, § IX)

Secs. 12-40—12-60. - Reserved.

55/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE III. - CIVIL DISTURBANCES

Sec. 12-61. - Purpose and scope.
(a)

Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
(1)

Standardize the city's emergency actions during civil disturbances/riots.

(2)

Provide guidance for pre-civil disturbance, civil disturbance and post-civil disturbance conditions to
protect/safeguard the city and its people.

(b)

Scope. The scope of this article is to provide:
(1)

Guidance in preparing for and controlling civil disturbances.

(2)

Commitment/integration/coordination of forces external to the city.

(3)

Principles of civil disturbance control operations.

(4)

Planning for civil disturbance operations.

(5)

Operational tasks and techniques employed to control civil disturbances and neutralize special threats.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § I)

Sec. 12-62. - Planning factors.
(a)

Authority. The authority for this article is outlined in article I of this chapter.

(b)

Definition of terms, Generally. Definition of terms for this article are outlined in article I of this chapter, except where
expanded upon in this section.

Civil disturbances means group acts of violence and disorder prejudicial to public law and order within the city. The form includes
all domestic conditions requiring, or likely to require, the use of police enforcement.
(c)

Other terms. Other terms are explained in the text of this article where they appear.

(d)

Assumption. The assumptions for civil disturbances are as outlined in article I of this chapter.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § II)

Sec. 12-63. - Organization.
(a)

State. For the state organization regarding civil disturbances refer to state adopted plans.

(b)

County. The county organization in the event of civil disturbances is the county department of emergency management.

(c)

City. The city organization in the event of civil disturbances shall be as follows:
(1)

Lead department (police department).

(2)

Direct support department (fire department).

(3)

General support departments (all other city departments).

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § III)

Sec. 12-64. - Situation/resources.
(a)

Situation. The situation of civil disturbances shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.

(b)

Resources. The resources available for civil disturbances shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § IV)

Sec. 12-65. - Execution.
(a)

Concept of operations. It is envisioned the approach to coping with civil disturbances will be in three phases.
(1)

Monitoring/identification. During the monitoring/identification phase, the lead department maintains a
56/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

watch/surveillance over a potential emergency situation. As the situation becomes more intense, measures will be
taken to defuse the situation and return the area to normalcy.
(2)

Intensity reduction phase. In the event the potential emergency situation develops into a civil disturbance and it
cannot immediately be brought under control, steps will be taken to reduce the intensity of the incident to the
lowest level that can realistically be obtained, given all the conditions and variables influencing that particular
situation.

(3)

Restoration of order phase. The ultimate goal and the third phase is the restoration of law and order. Law and
order is a relative term that can generally be equated to the state of normalcy in the community. Long-term
maintenance of law and order will be the goal. Control force, which accomplishes immediate control at the price of
increased social hostilities and potentially greater violence will be avoided and alternate responses sought based on
an estimate of the situation at that time.

(b)

Duties and responsibilities. Duties and responsibitlities are as outlined in article I of this chapter except where expanded
upon in this subsection.
(1)

Lead department (police department).
a.

Patrol services:
1.

Ensure all personnel are trained in civil disturbances/riot control techniques.

2.

On order, be prepared to perform the following operational tasks:

3.

b.

i.

Isolate the area.

ii.

Secure likely targets.

iii.

Gain control over the crowds and mobs.

iv.

Establish area control.

v.

Neutralize special threats.

Be prepared to perform the following duties/integrated tasks:
i.

Gather, record and report information via Polaroid cameras, tape recorder, etc.

ii.

Apprehend violators.

iii.

Maintain communication.

iv.

Maintain a mobile reserve.

v.

Keep the public informed via the emergency operations supervisor.

vi.

Protect fire service personnel/services.

vii.

Process detained persons.

Investigative services:
1.

Production of intelligence with emphasis on leaders and subversive activities.

2.

Collection of information and supervision and coordination of collection activities, including air
reconnaissance and surveillance.

3.

Integration and coordination of information collection effort with other agencies.

4.

Distribution of information to users.

5.

Estimate effects of the characteristics of the area on courses of action.

6.

Estimate of crowd, mob, and dissident organization's capabilities, vulnerabilities and probable courses of
action.

7.

Protection of sensitive information from unauthorized disclosures to local population.

8.

Consideration of crowd/mob reaction to use of various control measures (i.e., riot control agents).

9.

Keep the chief of police/emergency operations supervisor informed as to the intensity of the situations.

10.

On order, be prepared to provide mobile reserve or augmentation to the reserve/patrol services.
57/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(2)

(3)

(c)

11.

Perform other duties consistent with the areas of responsibility.

12.

Render assistance as required.

Direct support department (fire department).
a.

Fire and rescue.

b.

Render assistance as required.

c.

Perform other duties consistent with areas of responsibility.

d.

Be prepared, on order, to assist in forced entries into buildings.

General support departments (all other city departments).
a.

Render support as required.

b.

Perform duties consistent with areas of responsibility.

Coordinating instructions:
(1)

Legal considerations:
a.

All police action taken will be at the direction of supervisory personnel.

b.

Only the minimum force necessary to control the situation will be used. Compliance with state and police
department policy on the use of force will be met.
1.

Ensure all personnel understand that the reckless and malicious use of force may subject them to civil or
criminal liability or both.

2.
(2)

Rules of evidence and laws of arrest will be observed.

Handling of barricaded persons, snipers and hostage situations will be governed by police department written
directives.

(3)

Court and prosecutorial liaison. Legal assistance in arrest, incarceration and court proceedings will be available
upon request from the district attorney's office.

(4)

Juvenile offenders. Compliance with state statute and police department policy will be met when juveniles
participating in civil disturbances are encountered.

(5)

Arrest/confinement procedures. During the course of a civil disturbance, mass arrests may become a reality and
must be handled quickly and efficiently providing for arrest, identification and confinement flexibility.

(6)

Every effort should be made to maintain/keep the general public's sympathy on the side of the control force (police
department/city government).

(7)

Operational unity of forces will be achieved through:
a.

Collocating operational centers.

b.

Integrating communications systems.

c.

Delineating organizational responsibilities.

(8)

Avoid responses that produce greater harm than benefit.

(9)

The objective of civil disturbance control is the restoration of law and order, not the imposition of punishment or
the suppression of peaceful dissent.

(10)

The commitment of military forces to enforce civil law must be considered as a drastic last resort.

(11)

During labor disorders, most trouble will be with picket lines in the industrial areas.

(12)

During transportation disputes, be prepared to:
a.

Escort commercial vehicles in the disturbance area.

b.

Secure road overpasses.

c.

Establish mobile patrols in troubled area and effected highways/streets.

d.

Protect truck terminals.

e.

Maintain aircraft surveillance over trouble areas, if warranted.
58/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Racial disorders. The following techniques have proven most effective in coping with these disorders:
a.

Saturation patrols.

b.

Mobile reserves to neutralize special threats.

c.

Curfews.

d.

Containment. Cordon off the area to prevent spread/reinforcement/resupply.

Mass demonstrations require unique countermeasures such as:
a.

Extra personnel with limited police powers.

b.

Protecting sensitive areas/buildings.

c.

Large mobile reserve force.

d.

Maintain lines of communication with demonstration leaders.

Relief procedures:
a.

Do not use reserve forces for relief.

b.

Relieve units in contact in place.

c.

Relieve during least critical times.

d.

The commander of the outgoing unit supervises the relief.

Termination procedures:
a.

Civil authorities assume control if relinquished.

b.

Military forces are withdrawn if committed.

c.

Gradually reduce patrol activities.

d.

Submit after action reports with emphasis on lessons learned.

e.

Detailed records and journals must be kept in order to provide information for accurate and timely processing
of claims and investigations.

(17)

Welfare/morale/relief/reinforcements:
a.

Morale and welfare. Because control forces are under great physical and mental stress, time off/relief forces
must be planned for.

b.

A command post shall be established in the police department where radios and computers will be readily
accessible.

c.

Procedures for requesting state/federal assistance/troops will be followed according to state plans.

d.

The county mental health center will provide aftermath counseling, as necessary.

e.

The Piedmont triad council of governments will provide critical incident street debriefing team (CISD) support,
as necessary.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § V)

Sec. 12-66. - Administration.
The administration of civil disturbances shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § VI)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 12-67. - Logistics.
Logistics concerning civil disturbances shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § VII)

59/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 12-68. - Command/control/direction.
Command/control/direction regarding civil disturbances shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § VIII)

Sec. 12-69. - Communications.
Communications associated with civil disturbances shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex B, § IX)

Secs. 12-70—12-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - MANMADE DISASTERS

Sec. 12-91. - Purpose and scope.
(a)

Purpose. The purpose of this article is to standardize emergency operating procedures for responding to manmade
disasters within the city.

(b)

Scope. This article will cover organizational responsibilities, operational procedures, key alert listings, actions of forward
command posts, administration, logistics, command/control and communications.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § I)

Sec. 12-92. - Planning factors.
(a)

Authority. The authority for this article is outlined in article I of this chapter.

(b)

Reference. References shall be as outlined in:

(c)

(1)

Article I of this chapter except where expanded upon in this section.

(2)

The county's emergency operation plan for multihazards.

Definitions. The following definitions shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter except where expanded upon in this
section:

Biological means microorganisms or associated products which may cause disease in humans, animals or economic crops and
includes pathogenic wastes from medical institutions, slaughterhouses, poultry processing plants and the like; imported unprocessed
wool fibers.

Chemical means toxic, corrosive or injurious substances because of inherent chemical properties and includes, but is not limited to,
such items as petroleum products, paints, plastics, acids, caustics, industrial chemicals, poisons, drugs, and mineral fibers (asbestos).

Explosive means material capable of releasing energy with blast effect in a split second; upon activation, the released energy
usually damages or destroys objects in close proximity to the blast.

Hazardous material means any substance or material in a quantity or form which may be harmful or injurious to humans, domestic
animals, wildlife, economic crops or property when released into the environment. Hazardous materials are classified in this chapter as
chemical biological, radiological or explosive.

Radiological means any radioactive substance emitting ionizing radiation at a level to produce a health hazard. Other manmade
disasters are as specified in article I of this chapter.
(d)

Assumptions. Assumptions regarding this article shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § II)

60/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 12-93. - Organization.
(a)

Generally. Organization for this article shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter except where expanded upon in this
section.

(b)

State. Organization for this article shall include all state adopted plans.

(c)

County. Organization for this article shall include the county department of emergency management.

(d)

City. City organization for this article shall be as follows:
(1)

Lead department (fire department).

(2)

Direct support department (police department).

(3)

General support departments (all other city departments).

(4)

Forward command posts (as appropriate).

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § III)

Sec. 12-94. - Situation/resources.
(a)

Situation. The city is vulnerable to the effects of manmade disasters. Manmade disasters will adversely affect our
community.

(b)

Resources. Resources for manmade disasters shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § IV)

Sec. 12-95. - Execution.
(a)

Concept of operations. Manmade disasters may result in fire, explosions, radiation dangers, area contamination and
toxic fumes. Firefighting personnel are generally accepted as having the greatest expertise and capability to combat
these dangers and by this chapter are designated as the emergency service to be in charge during emergencies resulting
from such manmade disasters.
(1)

Upon occurrence of a manmade disaster incident, the initial responding fire department officer who will become
the on-scene commander will assume the control of the situation. Prior to his arriving on scene, the responsibility
must be assumed by the senior member of the first emergency unit (i.e., police/rescue) on the scene.

(2)

The on-scene commander will be authorized to declare a state of emergency and order an area evacuation, if
required. The on-scene commander will immediately establish a field command post situated at a location of his
discretion taking into account the hazard involved, the accessibility and space requirements to marshal and manage
the personnel and material to combat the hazard.

(3)

The local on-scene fire officer is in total charge of the field command post and all support units will report to this
individual and operate under this employee's directions from this fixed position.

(4)

The initial responding fire department officer will remain in charge as on-scene commander of the field command
post unless relieved by a senior fire official from the appropriate jurisdictional area.

(5)

It is essential that the field command post management team remain at their established position to coordinate onscene activities.

(6)

If a state of emergency is declared, law enforcement officers will immediately evacuate individuals to an area which
is a safe and appropriate distance from the incident site.

(7)

The senior law enforcement officer at the field command post will determine the routes of evacuation.
Furthermore, in special instances, routes for incoming personnel must be determined so as not to endanger their
lives, or the lives of others, in the process of reporting to their incident site.

(8)

This evacuation procedure must be coordinated with liaison personnel at the field command post to insure the
safety of law enforcement officers' evacuees.

(9)

In addition, if a state of emergency is declared, the emergency operations center will be activated to coordinate the
efforts of other city departments and personnel response.
61/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(10)

When area evacuation is ordered or contemplated, the Red Cross must be notified as soon as possible in order for
them to notify their disaster teams and make shelters ready for evacuated persons.

(b)

Duties and responsibilities.
(1)

(2)

(3)

Lead department (fire department).
a.

Attempt to contain or set a perimeter around the disaster site.

b.

Declaration of state of emergency.

c.

Evacuation order.

d.

Establish forward command post.

e.

Provide rescue services.

Direct support department (police department).
a.

Traffic control.

b.

Evacuation from and control of access into the disaster area.

c.

Notify appropriate agencies or individuals with expertise in handling explosive material.

General support department/agencies:
a.

b.

c.

d.

American Red Cross:
1.

Supervise shelter facilities.

2.

Mass care (including feeding).

County department of emergency management:
1.

Activation of county emergency operations center.

2.

Support of county emergency operation center.

3.

Management of county emergency operations center.

All other city departments:
1.

Remain on standby/alert status.

2.

Render assistance, as required.

3.

Perform duties consistent within areas of responsibility.

All city departments assigned responsibilities in this chapter are responsible for developing or updating
internal action plans that will assure a continuing acceptable degree of operational readiness to carry out their
responsibilities.

(c)

Coordinating instructions/operational procedures for hazardous cargo accidents/spills/incidents.
(1)

In response to a report of hazardous cargo accident/spill/incident, the first arriving emergency unit on the scene
must make an estimate of the situation to determine if a disaster or a potential disaster exists; should either
situation exist, proceed as follows:
a.

Notify parent unit via radio of situation and need for alerting of other emergency units.

b.

Do not approach hazardous material area until a positive identification of the material has been made.

c.

Identify the hazardous materials involved. If positive identification cannot be made, assume the materials to
be dangerous. No cargo warrants the risking of lives.

d.

Assume duties and responsibilities of on-scene commander until properly relieved.

e.

If situation appears critical for impending disaster (explosion, poisonous fumes, high-level radiation, etc.),
assume authority to declare a state of emergency and order immediate evacuation.

(2)

f.

Establish a field command post and advise headquarters of location.

g.

Conduct appropriate rescue, firefighting and containment as situation permits.

State of emergency and key alert list:
a.

Upon arrival at the incident site, the on-scene commander must determine whether a disaster has occurred or
62/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

is imminent and whether a state of emergency should be declared. An order for evacuation will normally
accompany a declaration of a state of emergency. When a declaration of a state of emergency and/or area
evacuation is contemplated, if time permits, the emergency operations supervisor/mayor should be advised of
the contemplated action and recommendation. Normally this will not be the case and for that reason, the
authority to declare a state of emergency and to order evacuations is expressly delegated in this chapter to
the on-scene commander. When this action is taken:

b.

1.

All emergency services will be notified and assistance requested, as required.

2.

City officials concerned will be notified in accordance with the city alert/warning/call out procedure.

Additionally, the following must be notified in all cases of emergency declaration and/or area evacuation:
1.

American Red Cross, for opening and staffing shelters.

2.

The county department of emergency management for coordination of support activities involving
county units.

3.
(3)

Chairman, board of county commissioners, to advise of situation involving countywide matters.

Evacuation and shelter procedures:
a.

When area evacuation is ordered, the endangered area will be identified and law enforcement personnel will
immediately initiate evacuation procedures. An endangered area around explosives will normally be circular in
shape and a safe and approximate distance from the source; whereas endangered area for noxious/toxic
fumes would be downwind for distances of a mile or more and subject to shifting winds.

b.

The police department incident commander with the on-scene commander will determine routes of
evacuation and staging area for evacuees. Once initial immediate evacuation has been implemented, law
enforcement personnel will stand by for evacuation of additional personnel, if required. When the decision for
evacuation is made, the Asheboro chapter of the American Red Cross must be notified immediately to enable
them to alert disaster teams and open shelters for evacuees. The emergency services coordinator will also be
notified for activation of the county emergency operations center and coordination of support actions
involving county units/countywide emergencies.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § V)

Sec. 12-96. - Administration.
The administration of this article will be as provided in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § VI)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 12-97. - Logistics.
Logistics regarding this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § VII)

Sec. 12-98. - Command/control.
(a)

Generally. Command and control provisions regarding this article are outlined in article I of this chapter except where
expanded upon in this section.

(b)

Forward command post (on-scene commander).
(1)

Upon occurrence of a manmade disaster incident, the control of the situation will be assumed by the initial
responding fire department officer who will become the on-scene commander and will be authorized to declare a
state of emergency.

(2)

The on-scene commander will:
63/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

Determine the identity of the manmade disaster hazardous material involved.

b.

Estimate the likely harm associated with the release of any hazardous materials.

c.

Enter into either a containment mode of operation or set perimeters for entry into the area and dependent
upon the chemical and physical properties of such hazardous material, combined with ambient and expected
weather conditions, devise an area of imminent exposure that should be evacuated immediately along with
evacuation of half the distance of the imminent danger area for all other areas surrounding the incident.
Example: If the area of imminent danger is in a southern direction and the distance is calculated at one mile,
then half a mile should be evacuated in the northern, eastern and western directions.

(3)

The on-scene commanding officer will immediately establish a forward command post at a location of his
discretion, taking into account the hazard involved, the accessibility and space requirement to marshal and manage
the personnel and material to combat the hazard.

(4)

The local on-scene fire officer is in total charge of the forward command post and all support units will report to
him and operate under his directions from this fixed position.

(5)

The initial responding fire department officer will remain in charge as on-scene commander of the forward
command post unless relieved by a senior fire official from the appropriate jurisdictional area.

(6)

It is essential that the forward command post management team remain at their established position to coordinate
the on-scene activities.

(c)

Emergency operations center.
(1)

In the event that a manmade disaster hazardous material incident should expand in scope and time that would
require the coordination of community manpower and resources beyond that of the on-duty emergency forces or
at such time that the on-scene commanding officer requests such assistance, the emergency operations center will
be activated to the extent necessary to coordinate the needed backup assistance.

(2)

When a state of emergency is declared, the city emergency operations center's staff will be notified and will respond
to the emergency operations center and commence increased readiness measures to activate the emergency
operations center in the event it is needed.

(3)

All support activities will be coordinated through the emergency operations center, and the on-scene commander
will keep the emergency operations center informed on current conditions and anticipated needs.

(d)

Authority. The ultimate authority to override decisions of the on-scene commander rests solely with the city/county, i.e.,
the following:
(1)

County: Chairman of the commissioners, if not accessible vice-chairman (alternate).

(2)

City: Mayor, if not accessible mayor pro-tem (alternate).

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § VIII)

Sec. 12-99. - Communications.
(a)

Generally. Communications regarding this article shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter except where expanded
upon in this section.

(b)

Emergency support and notification. Designated agencies should be notified in certain instances and/or can provide
material or technical assistance as indicated.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex C, § IX)

Secs. 12-100—12-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - NATURAL DISASTERS

FOOTNOTE(S):
64/228

7/12/2019
(12) Cross

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

reference— Environment, ch. 14.

Sec. 12-121. - Purpose and scope.
(a)

Purpose. To provide a standard operating procedure for emergency conditions in the city.

(b)

Scope. This article will cover the operations plan and the principles/procedures that are applicable in handling the
following natural disasters:
(1)

Hurricanes.

(2)

Thunderstorms.

(3)

Tornadoes.

(4)

Windstorms.

(5)

Snow/ice storms.

(6)

Floods.

(7)

Earthquakes.

The duration and destructive forces of the above natural disasters must require plans to disseminate warnings, provide
safe havens for personnel, minimize damage to structures and material, and provide for emergency actions necessary to
control damage and rescue.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § I)

Sec. 12-122. - Planning factors.
(a)

Authority. The authority for this article is outlined in article I of this chapter.

(b)

References. References for this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.

(c)

Definition of terms. Definition of terms for this article are outlined in the article I of this chapter.

(d)

Assumption. It is assumed that a destructive natural disaster condition will occur in the city.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § II)

Sec. 12-123. - Organization.
(a)

State. Organization for this article shall include all state adopted plans.

(b)

County. Organization for this article shall include the county department of emergency management.

(c)

City. City organization for this article shall be as follows:
(1)

Lead department (public services).

(2)

Direct support departments.

(3)

a.

Police department.

b.

Fire and rescue department.

General support departments (all other city departments).

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § III)

Sec. 12-124. - Situation/resources.
(a)

Situation. The city is located in the Piedmont of North Carolina and has suffered the destructive effects of natural
disasters such as hurricanes and ice storms since the earliest recorded history in the region. Such disasters could cause
extensive damage in the city. The city will become involved in the evacuation as shelter areas are located in the city and
mutual aid may be required.

(b)

Resources. Resources for the natural disasters shall be as provided in article I of this chapter.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § IV)

65/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 12-125. - Execution.
(a)

Concept of operations. Upon notification of a possible natural disaster condition, the city will be put into a condition of
readiness and the emergency operations officer, under the supervision of the emergency operations supervisor, will
assume responsibility as the emergency operations officer and initiate actions designed to deal constructively with the
situation.

(b)

Duties and responsibilities.
(1)

Generally. Duties and responsibilities under this article are outlined in article I of this chapter except where
expanded upon in this section.

(2)

Lead department. The following is a listing of the responsibilities/duties the lead department will accomplish under
each emergency readiness condition:
a.

Severe weather/season:
1.

General:
i.

All personnel will become familiar with the city emergency operations plan.

ii.

All supervisors will be responsible for checking supply of adequate foul weather gear, flashlights,
batteries, etc.

iii.
2.

All alert/warning/call out will be updated.

Public buildings (planning director with the assistance of the building inspector):
i.

Inspect all buildings for material defects, giving special attention to such defects that would permit
wind or rain to enter buildings.

3.

4.

5.

b.

ii.

Check all radio masts, guys, anchors, etc.

iii.

Identify services and list all portable generators.

Garage:
i.

Ensure that all equipment needed for severe weather operations is in good working condition.

ii.

Procure additional spare parts, batteries, tires, etc.

Traffic engineering:
i.

Ensure all road signals and signs are maintained.

ii.

Review the evacuation plan from the city and inspect routes for ease of flow.

Streets:
i.

Review evacuation plan for proper drainage.

ii.

Clean storm drains throughout the city to assure proper drainage.

6.

Sanitation: Review plans for special trash collection to remove old limbs, trees, etc.

7.

Sewer plant:
i.

Test and operate all standby equipment.

ii.

Check fuel supply.

iii.

Check supplies and chemicals.

iv.

Review areas of responsibility using public utilities grid system.

Severe weather advisory, no immediate threat:
1.

General:
i.

Continue general operations.

ii.

Disseminate information concerning approach of severe weather.

iii.

Recheck call lists.

iv.

Clean shop areas to remove unnecessary debris.

v.

Check emergency service gear for completeness and function.
66/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

2.

3.

Public buildings (planning director):
i.

Check conditions of emergency generators.

ii.

Check material for securing public buildings.

Garage:
i.

Service police vehicles requiring sound device checks.

ii.

Have radio systems checked for proper functions.

4.

Traffic engineering: Review traffic signal availability.

5.

Streets: Review drainage plan on city systems.

6.

Sanitation: Review sanitation pick-up plan and coordinate with operator of landfill and incinerator to stay
informed as to status.

7.

c.

Water and wastewater plants:
i.

Render assistance, as required.

ii.

Perform other duties consistent with areas of responsibility.

Severe weather watch, 48 hours to event:
1.

General: Disseminate latest information concerning approaching severe weather.

2.

Public buildings (planning director):
i.

Secure inactive buildings.

ii.

Distribute and install emergency generators to other units of public utilities and assist other
departments of the city.

3.

4.

5.

Garage:
i.

Recall pool vehicles to transportation area (city garage) to check vehicle condition.

ii.

Refuel vehicles, as required.

Traffic engineering:
i.

Collect and review availability of detour and other emergency signs.

ii.

Send sign crews to public buildings.

Streets:
i.

Organize unit into storm damage crews and review work assignments.

ii.

Recall, maintain and gas up all operational vehicles.

iii.

Assist in drainage cleaning of streets, as needed.

6.

Sanitation: Ensure adequate staff is able to render assistance.

7.

Engineering:

8.

9.

i.

Render assistance, as required.

ii.

Perform other duties consistent within areas of responsibility.

iii.

Disseminate information of approaching storm to contractors and permit holders.

iv.

Assist public buildings in preparing city hall for approaching storm.

Water and wastewater plants:
i.

Establish work assignments and review responsibilities.

ii.

Secure and protect plant equipment.

iii.

Conduct clean up of plant grounds and remove/store loose gear.

iv.

Assist public works in preparing city facilities for approaching storm.

Water and wastewater operations:
i.

Establish work assignments and review responsibilities.
67/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

d.

ii.

Clean up lot area and store loose equipment.

iii.

Respond to water/wastewater emergency repairs.

Severe weather warning, 24 hours to event:
1.

General:
i.

Execute alert/warning/call out.

ii.

Secure all loose materials, etc.

iii.

Secure all buildings.

iv.

Fill all available containers with fresh potable water for emergency use.

v.

Prepare public service severe weather shelter to receive personnel.

vi.

The following officials and key personnel will be alerted and placed on duty when severe weather
warning (24 hours to event) is established:

Position

Station

City manager

Emergency operations center

City clerk

Emergency operations center

Chief of police

Emergency operations center

Chief of re

Emergency operations center

Deputy chief of re

Emergency operations center

Planning director

Emergency operations center

Police lieutenant

Emergency operations center

Public works supervisor

City garage

Safety director

Emergency operations center

Wastewater treatment plant superintendent

Wastewater facility

Water treatment plant superintendent

Water facility

Deputy city clerk I

Emergency operations center

Deputy city clerk II

Emergency operations center

2.

Public buildings (public works supervisor):
i.

Secure all utilities machinery in public buildings not necessary for severe weather support.

ii.

Check operation of emergency generating equipment.

iii.

Replenish fuel in vehicles, as required.

iv.

Complete securing operations.
68/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

3.

4.

5.

(3)

b.

(c)

i.

Clear garage work area of vehicles.

ii.

Prepare area for severe weather manning.

iii.

Secure garage building.

Streets:
i.

Assist in tree/limb clearing.

ii.

Conduct drainage system clearing, as required.

Water and wastewater treatment plants:
i.

Secure all unnecessary operations.

ii.

Establish emergency manning of plant.

Direct support departments:
a.

(4)

Garage:

Police department:
1.

Maintain law and order.

2.

Direct traffic on evacuation routes.

Fire department:
1.

Fire and rescue.

2.

Fallen trees.

3.

Wrecks.

4.

Power lines down.

5.

Roofs collapsing.

6.

Flooding, walls collapsing.

General support departments (all other departments):
a.

Perform duties consistent within areas of responsibility.

b.

Render assistance, as required.

c.

Special duties and responsibilities for snow removal operations.

Coordinating instructions.
(1)

The following is a general description of the activities that take place during phases of an emergency, if time
permits. The following is a basic outline and is not all-inclusive.

(2)

Emergency phases.
a.

Pre-emergency:
1.

Establish situation monitoring in city emergency operations center and staff as appropriate. Conduct
communications check.

2.

Alert and brief key officials and department personnel.

3.

Disseminate appropriate warnings to the public and verify warning effectiveness.

4.

Advise utilities, business and industry.

5.

Maintain liaison with local Red Cross and other local relief agencies.

6.

If evacuation is indicated, ensure route markings and shelter designation. Deploy shelter management
teams in conjunction with Red Cross and open shelters for voluntary use when situation permits.

7.

Meet with local news media to review public information policy.

8.

Keep the public informed and provide necessary instructions.

9.

Keep the county/city emergency operations center informed and advise adjacent jurisdictions, if
applicable.
69/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

10.

Maintain liaison with the emergency services coordinator via the county emergency operations center.

11.

Be prepared to proclaim a local state of emergency when warranted.

12.

Building occupants, upon notification of severe weather, to store/secure all outside equipment, tape all
windows with an "X' using masking tape, and take any other precautionary measures deemed necessary.

b.

Emergency:
1.

Take necessary measures to protect life and property as conditions permit.

2.

Report situation to county/city emergency operations center and maintain liaison with area emergency
management coordinator, if applicable.

3.

Maintain contact with adjoining jurisdictions and provide information on own situation to the extent
possible.

4.

Based on own capacity and severity of the situation, activate mutual aid agreements.

5.

If situation is beyond local capabilities, request assistance from next higher level of government.

6.

Keep situation reports and damage assessments current and establish priorities for repair and
restoration of essential services.

c.

7.

Keep the public informed and provide instructions.

8.

Proclaim a local state of emergency if warranted.

Post-emergency-immediate recovery and rehabilitation:
1.

Continue emergency operations as necessary.

2.

Evaluate situation from reports received and initiate damage assessment. Use photography to the extent
feasible.

3.

Determine requirements for outside assistance and request such assistance when beyond local
capabilities.

4.

Keep the county/city emergency operations center and emergency management coordinator informed
using situation and damage reports.

5.

Keep the public informed and provide instructions.

6.

Assemble and maintain records of actions taken and expenditures and obligations incurred.

7.

Commence cleanup, debris removal and utility restoration. Coordinate and facilitate restoration by
private utility companies.

8.

Undertake repair and restoration of essential public facilities and services in accordance with priorities
developed through the situation evaluations.

9.

All traffic, streets, garage, public buildings (planning director), sanitation and public utilities personnel will
return to work as soon as possible.

10.

Crews and vehicles will immediately institute grid clean up systems as directed by streets. Most attention
should be paid to the major thoroughfares. Work should be coordinated with department of
transportation personnel as needed.

11.

Inspection personnel will assist in damage assessment teams as needed.

12.

Traffic personnel will work with the police department, units of Duke Power and units of Carolina Power
and Light Company in getting traffic signals back on line.

13.

Designated personnel will help remove debris from areas, repair building damage and retrieve building
shutter/window protection.

14.

Public utility department will restore/continue water and sewer services.

(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § V)

Sec. 12-126. - Administration.
70/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Administration of this article shall be as outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § VI)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 12-127. - Logistics.
Logistics regarding this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § VII)

Sec. 12-128. - Command and/control/direction.
Command and/control/direction regarding this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § VIII)

Sec. 12-129. - Communications.
Communications regarding this article are outlined in article I of this chapter.
(Policy of 1-4-2000, Annex D, § IX)

Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(13) Cross

reference— Animals, ch. 6; building regulations, ch. 8; house moving, § 10-131; natural disasters, § 12-121 et seq.; floods, ch.

18; solid waste, ch. 24; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; subdivisions, ch. 28; utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 38.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 14-1. - Enforcement of chapter.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be under the supervision of the city manager or his designee.
(Code 1975, § 9-1)

Sec. 14-2. - Interference with enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the city manager or his designee in the lawful discharge of their
duties.
(Code 1975, § 9-2)

Sec. 14-3. - Right of entry.
The city manager or designee shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any premises for the purpose of making the
investigations or inspections as required by this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 9-3)

Secs. 14-4—14-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - NOISE
71/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

FOOTNOTE(S):
(14) State

Law reference— Authority of city to regulate, restrict or prohibit loud noises, G.S. 160A-184.

Sec. 14-31. - Loud and disturbing noises prohibited; express prohibitions enumerated; property owner or tenant deemed responsible.
(a)

Subject to the provisions of this section, the creation of any unreasonably loud and disturbing noise of such character,
intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of any individual is prohibited in the city.

(b)

The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this section, but such
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1)

The use of any loud, boisterous or raucous language or shouting so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.

(2)

The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion,
except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a
danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.

(3)

The keeping of any animal which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose
of any person in the vicinity.

(4)

The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create
loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.

(c)

The presence of the owner or tenant on the premises from which the noise emanates shall be prima facie evidence that
such owner or tenant is the originator of such noise or in control of the device, animal or other thing causing such noise,
and such person shall be the responsible person for such noise.

(Code 1975, § 13-7)

Sec. 14-32. - Operation of radio or other sound reproduction or ampli cation device.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the operating or playing of any radio, stereo, tape player or any similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to create noise at 50 feet from the device or vehicle containing the
device when the device and/or the vehicle is being operated on any public street, place, right-of-way or public vehicular area.
(Ord. of 5-4-1993)

Sec. 14-33. - Penalty.
(a)

Anyone violating this article shall be punishable by a misdemeanor fine of $500.00 or a civil penalty of $100.00 or $100.00
for an infraction violation.

(b)

The fine in subsection (a) of this section has been established by and for the city and is in addition to whatever standard
court costs may be included when this charge is lodged on a uniform traffic citation; and the district attorney has
authorized the city in writing to charge this offense on regular citations.

(Ord. of 5-4-1993)

Secs. 14-34—14-61. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES

Sec. 14-62. - Slaughterhouses prohibited.

72/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

No slaughterhouse shall be conducted in the city, and no cattle, hogs or other stock shall be slaughtered within the city limits.
(Code 1975, § 9-6)

Sec. 14-63. - Removal of weeds, trash and debris.
(a)

The growth and accumulation of noxious weeds, trash and debris, including discarded appliances, furniture, toys and all
other types of discarded property, used building materials, buildings and mobile homes burned beyond ability to repair
and any and all other kinds of trash and debris, human waste and forms of animal and vegetable refuse, and standing
water so as to render the premises dangerous, threaten the economic values of the neighborhood, or prejudicial to the
public health is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

(b)

Every person owning or occupying any premises in the corporate limits shall keep the premises free of all things and
matters set out in subsection (a) of this section.

(c)

If any person shall violate subsection (b) of this section, it shall be the duty of the city manager, or his authorized
representative, to give notice to the owner or person in possession of such premises, that within 15 days from the date
of the notice, the unlawful matter or things be removed from such premises. If the name or the whereabouts of the
owner cannot be located, the notice will be considered properly served if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place on the
property. Any owner so notified may file a written appeal within ten days of the notice disputing such violations with the
city manager or his designee. Any adverse decision made by the city manager or his designee may be timely appealed to
the board of aldermen. Should the owner or occupant fail to comply with the notice, the city manager shall proceed to
have the nuisance removed and shall charge the expense thereof to the owner or occupant. If the charges for removal or
abatement of the public nuisance are not paid within 30 days after the work is completed, such charges may be levied in
the form of a lien against the property.

(Code 1975, § 9-14)

Secs. 14-64—14-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK VEHICLES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(15) Cross

reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 32.

Sec. 14-91. - Administration.
(a)

The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The police
department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned
on the public streets and highways within the city and on property owned by the city. The city manager or his designee
shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles
located on private property.

(b)

The board of aldermen find it necessary and desirable to promote or enhance:
(1)

The quality of urban attractiveness and aesthetic appearance of the city;

(2)

The protection of property values throughout the city;

(3)

The preservation of the liveability and attractiveness of neighborhoods;

(4)

The promotion of tourism, conventions and other opportunities for economic development for the city;

(5)

The attractiveness of city thoroughfares and commercial roads which present the primary, public visibility to visitors
and to passersby of the city; and

(6)

The promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of occupants of property in the vicinity of junked
73/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

motor vehicles.
(c)

The city may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and
dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this article and
applicable state laws. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the city
police department and fire department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(1))

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 14-92. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Abandoned vehicle means as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303, an abandoned motor vehicle is one that:
(1)

Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;

(2)

Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days;

(3)

Is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than 24 hours; or

(4)

Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.

Authorizing official means the supervisory employee of the police department or the city manager, respectively, designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this article.

Junked motor vehicle means as authorized and defined in G.S. 160A-303.2, a vehicle that does not display a current license plate
lawfully upon that vehicle and that:
(1)

Is partially dismantled or wrecked;

(2)

Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was intended to move; or

(3)

Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.00.

Motor vehicle or vehicle means all machines designed or intended to travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any
self-propelled vehicle.

Nuisance vehicle means a vehicle on public or private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a
public nuisance and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
(1)

A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or other pests;

(2)

A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in height;

(3)

A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;

(4)

A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by
odor;

(5)

One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.;

(6)

So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or turning over;

(7)

One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of
any kind;

(8)

One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or

(9)

Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the board of aldermen.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(2))

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
74/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-93. - Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle
to be abandoned.

(b)

Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the city may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and
order the vehicle removed.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(3))

Sec. 14-94. - Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee
or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property
after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.

(b)

Upon investigation, the city manager may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle and order the vehicle removed.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(4))

Sec. 14-95. - Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the
owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle
to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered removed.

(b)

It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle on the premises of public or private property. Single,
permitted junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements of this section.

(c)

It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle or for the owner, lessee,
or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with the locational
requirements or the concealment requirements of this section.

(d)

Subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, upon investigation, the city manager may order the removal of
a junked motor vehicle after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens
imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area
appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:

(e)

(1)

Protection of property values;

(2)

Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;

(3)

Indirect protection of public health and safety;

(4)

Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and

(5)

Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area residents.

Permitted concealment or enclosure of a junked motor vehicle shall be accomplished as follows:
(1)

One vehicle. One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in the rear yard as defined by the city's zoning
ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting
premises by an acceptable covering. The city manager has the authority to determine whether any junked motor
vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this subsection. The covering must remain in good repair and must
not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in
subsection 14-91(b).

(2)

More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle must be kept in a garage or building structure
that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle cannot be seen from a public street or
abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building
75/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in
accordance with all zoning and building code regulations.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(5))

Sec. 14-96. - Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements.
Except as set forth in section 14-97, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after
notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
notice shall be given by first class mail. The person who mails the notice shall retain a written record to show the name and address to
which mailed and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned
motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle, a notice indicating
that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date (no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall
state that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed,
unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property,
nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to
possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in
the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made
to the board of aldermen in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of aldermen and further proceedings to
remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(6))

Sec. 14-97. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement.
(a)

The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as
determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action
to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in
all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of
vehicles without prior notice includes:
(1)

Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, the board of aldermen
hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:

(2)

a.

Obstructing traffic;

b.

Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking;

c.

Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;

d.

Parked in loading zones;

e.

Parked in bus zones; or

f.

Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under Code sections.

Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property
other than the streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior
notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect
and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances
include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a
location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(7))

Sec. 14-98. - Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements.
(a)

Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed may, as directed by the city
76/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

manager, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform
such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing city official shall immediately notify the
last known owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following:

(b)

(1)

The description of the removed vehicle;

(2)

The location where the vehicle is stored;

(3)

The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;

(4)

The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and

(5)

The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the removal.

The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by
telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section, shall also be
mailed to the registered owner's last known address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
agent.

(c)

If the vehicle is registered in this state, notice shall be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state,
notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.

(d)

Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or
registration plates, the authorizing city official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification
number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set forth in
subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(8))

Sec. 14-99. - Right to probable cause hearing before sale or nal disposition of vehicle.
After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to
possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for a
hearing must be filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district judge to receive such hearing requests. The
magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. 20-222, as amended.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(9))

Sec. 14-100. - Redemption of vehicle during proceedings.
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed
vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to
the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or
person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this article.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(10))

Sec. 14-101. - Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle.
Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be
disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out
in coordination with the city and in accordance with the state general statutes.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(11))

Sec. 14-102. - Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property.

77/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could
have the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the city from private property
without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked
motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the city manager. The city may require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, expense or liability incurred
because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(12))

Sec. 14-103. - Protection against criminal or civil liability.
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this article.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(13))

Sec. 14-104. - Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any vehicle:
(1)

Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard as defined in G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the
Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et seq.;

(2)

Which is in an enclosed building;

(3)

Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is
necessary to the operation of the enterprise; or

(4)

Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.

(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(14))

Sec. 14-105. - Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle
which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code unless and until all towing and impoundment fees which are due, or
bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid.
(Code 1975, § 9-9.1(15))

Secs. 14-106—14-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - WATERSHED PROTECTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 14-131. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Agricultural use means the use of waters for stock watering, irrigation and other farm purposes.
Animal unit means a unit of measurement by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that is used to compare different types of
animal operations.
78/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Balance of watershed area means the entire drainage basin upstream of and draining to a WS-II or WS-III watershed critical area
where the risk of water supply pollution is greater than in surrounding areas. Note: Balance of watershed areas are only used for WS-II
or WS-III watershed classifications.

Best management practices (BMP) means a structural or nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in
combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.

Buffer means an area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the
runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured
landward from the normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers.

Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or property. The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport or other
such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them one building.

Built-upon area includes that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including
buildings, pavement, gravel areas (e.g., roads, parking lots, paths), recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts), etc. Note: Wooden slatted
decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.

Cluster development means the grouping of buildings in order to conserve land resources and provide for innovation in the design
of the project. This term includes nonresidential development as well as single-family residential subdivision and multifamily. For the
purpose of this article, planned unit developments and mixed-use developments are considered cluster developments.

Composting facility means a facility in which only stumps, limbs, leaves, grass and untreated wood collected from land clearing or
landscaping operations is deposited.

Critical area means the area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from
the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as extending either one-half mile from the normal pool elevation of
the reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first); or one-half mile upstream from
the intake located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first). Local
governments may extend the critical area as needed. Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate the
outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of one-half mile.

Customary home occupations means any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants of the dwelling,
which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character of
the dwelling. No mechanical equipment shall be installed or used except as is normally used for domestic or professional purposes. Not
over 25 percent of the total floor space of any structure shall be used for the occupation. No home occupation shall be conducted in
any accessory building except for the storage and service of a vehicle that is driven off the site, such as a service repair truck, delivery
truck, etc.

Development means any land disturbing activity, which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover
on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.

Discharging landfill means a facility with liners, monitoring equipment and other measures to detect and/or prevent leachate from
entering the environment and in which the leachate is treated on site and discharged to a receiving stream.

Dwelling unit means a building, or portion of a building, providing complete and permanent living facilities for one family.
Existing development means those projects that are built or those projects that, at a minimum, have established a vested right
under state zoning law as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, based on at least one of the following
criteria:
(1)

Substantial expenditures of resources (time, labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received a
valid local government approval to proceed with the project;
79/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(2)

Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by G.S. 153A-344.1 and G.S. 160A-385.1; or

(3)

Having expended substantial resources (time, labor, money) and having an approved site specific or phased
development plan as authorized by G.S. 153A-344.1 and G.S. 160A-385.1.

Existing lot (lot of record) means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the register of
deeds prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description
of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived.

Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit. Unless all members are related by blood or marriage or
adoption, no such family shall contain over five persons. Domestic servants employed or living on the premises may be housed on the
premises without being counted as a family or families.

Hazardous material means any substance listed as a hazardous material in SARA section 302, Extremely Hazardous Substances,
CERCLA Hazardous Substances, or section 311 of CWA (oil and hazardous substances).

Industrial development means any nonresidential development that requires an NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or
requires the use or storage of any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning or developing
any product or commodity.

Landfill means a facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with G.S. ch. 130A, art. 9. For the
purpose of this article, this term does not include composting facilities.

Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use,
together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.

Major variance means a variance that results in any one or more of the following:
(1)

The complete waiver of a management requirement;

(2)

The relaxation, by a factor of more than ten percent, of any management requirement that takes the form of a
numerical standard; or

(3)

The relaxation of any management requirement that applies to a development proposal intended to qualify under
the high-density option.

Minor variance means a variance that does not qualify as a major variance.
Nonresidential development means all development other than residential development, agriculture and silviculture.
Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided.
Residential development means buildings for residence such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, apartment
complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc., and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos,
etc., and customary home occupations.

Single-family residential means any development where:
(1)

No building contains more than one dwelling unit;

(2)

Every dwelling unit is on a separate lot; and

(3)

Where no lot contains more than one dwelling unit.

Street (road) means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
Structure means anything constructed or erected, including but not limited to buildings, which requires location on the land or
attachment to something having permanent location on the land.

80/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as defined in
this section.

Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of
sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all division of land involving the dedication of a new street
or a change in existing streets. The following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized by
this article:
(1)

The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number
of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this article;

(2)

The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;

(3)

The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets;

(4)

The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three
lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the
standards of this article; and

(5)

The division of a tract into plots or lots used as a cemetery.

Toxic substance means any substance or combination of substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and
upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion
through food chains, has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological
malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organism or their
offspring or other adverse health effects.

Variance means a permission to develop or use property granted by the board of adjustment relaxing or waiving a water supply
watershed management requirement adopted by the environmental management commission that is incorporated into this article.

Water dependent structure means any structure for which the use requires access or proximity to or citing within surface waters to
fulfill its basic purpose, such as boatramps, boathouses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat
supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.

Watershed means the entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific point (e.g., the water supply intake).
Watershed administrator means the city manager who is responsible for administration and enforcement of this article.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 601)

Sec. 14-132. - Word interpretation.
For the purpose of this article, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
(1)

Words in the present tense include the future tense.

(2)

Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular,
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.

(3)

The word "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust and company as well as an individual.

(4)

The word "structure" shall include the word "building."

(5)

The word "lot" shall include the words "plot," "parcel" or "tract."

(6)

The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

(7)

The word "will" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 602)

Sec. 14-133. - Intent.
81/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The intent of this article is to protect surface water supplies whose watersheds are located wholly or partially within the jurisdiction
of the city.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 101)

Sec. 14-134. - Authority and enactment.
Pursuant to authority given to cities in G.S. ch. 160A art. 19, planning and regulation of development, and G.S. 143-214.5, water
supply and watershed protection, the board of aldermen ordains and enacts into law the Watershed Protection Ordinance of
Randleman, North Carolina, from which this article is derived.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 102)

Sec. 14-135. - Jurisdiction.
(a)

The provisions of this article shall apply in those areas within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city designated as public water supply watersheds by the state environmental management commission, and shall be
defined and established on the map entitled "Watershed Protection Map of Randleman, North Carolina" (the watershed
map), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The watershed map and all explanatory matter contained on such map
accompanies and is made a part of this article. The Watershed Protection Ordinance in on file in the office of the city
manager.

(b)

The following public water supply watersheds designated by the state environmental management commission and the
board of aldermen are located within the city:

Watershed

Classi cation

River Basin

Back Creek

WS-II

Yadkin

Polecat Creek

WS-III

Cape Fear

Randleman Lake

WS-IV, Critical Watershed

Cape Fear

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 103)

Sec. 14-136. - Exceptions to applicability.
(a)

Nothing contained in this article shall repeal, modify or amend any federal or state law or regulation, or any ordinance or
regulation pertaining thereto except any ordinance which these regulations specifically replace. However, the adoption of
the ordinance from which this article is derived shall and does amend any and all ordinances, resolutions and regulations
in effect in the city at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived that may be construed
to impair or reduce the effectiveness of this article or to conflict with any of its provisions.

(b)

It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any easement, covenants or other agreements between parties.
However, if the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions or higher standards for the use of a building
or land, then the provisions of these regulations shall control.

(c)

Existing development, as defined in section 14-131, is not subject to the requirements of this article. Expansions to
structures classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this article. However, the built-upon area of
the existing development is not required to be included in the density calculations.

(d)

If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall
not be subject to the development restrictions of this article if it is developed for single-family purposes. See subsection
82/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(b) of section 14-263 regarding the recombination of existing lots.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 104)

Sec. 14-137. - Criminal penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in
accordance with G.S. 14-4. The maximum fine for each offense shall not exceed $500.00. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 105)

Sec. 14-138. - Remedies.
(a)

If any subdivision, development and/or land use is found to be in violation of this article, the board of aldermen may, in
addition to all other remedies available either in law or in equity, institute a civil penalty in the amount of $100.00, action
or proceedings to restrain, correct or abate the violation; to prevent occupancy of the building, structure or land; or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises. In addition, the state environmental
management commission may assess civil penalties in accordance with G.S. 143-215.6(a). Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(b)

If the watershed administrator finds that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to
correct it. He shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or
structures, or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or
shall take any action authorized by this article to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of this article. If a ruling
of the watershed administrator is questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the board of
adjustment.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 106)

Secs. 14-139—14-160. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
Subdivision I. - In General

Secs. 14-161—14-180. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Watershed Administrator

Sec. 14-181. - Duties.
The city manager is appointed as the watershed administrator. The watershed administrator shall:
(1)

Issue watershed protection permits and watershed protection occupancy permits as prescribed in this article. A
record of all permits shall be kept on file and shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours.

(2)

Serve as clerk to the board of adjustment, which sits as the watershed review board.

(3)

Keep records of all amendments to the Cities Water Supply Watershed Protection Ordinance and shall provide
copies of all amendments upon adoption to the division of water quality.

(4)

Keep records of the jurisdiction's utilization of the provision that a maximum of ten percent of the noncritical area
of WS-II-BW, WS-III-BW and WS-IV-PA watersheds may be developed to a maximum of 70 percent built-upon surface
83/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

area. Records for each watershed shall include the total acres of noncritical watershed area, total acres eligible to
be developed under this option, total acres approved for this development option and individual records for each
project with the following information: location, acres, site plan, use, stormwater management plan as applicable
and inventory of hazardous materials as applicable.
(5)

Administer and enforce the provisions of this article, exercising the full police power of the city. The watershed
administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building, structure or premises, as provided by
law, to perform any duty imposed upon him by this article.

(6)

Keep a record of variances to the ordinance from which this article is derived. This record shall be submitted each
calendar year to the division of water quality on or before January 1 of the following calendar year and shall provide
a description of each project receiving a variance and the reasons for granting the variance.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 501)

Sec. 14-182. - Appeal from city manager.
Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the watershed administrator may be appealed to and decided by the
board of adjustment as specified in the city's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 502)

Secs. 14-183—14-200. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Watershed Review Board

Sec. 14-201. - Established.
The board of adjustment shall serve as the watershed review board. The same rules of procedure as specified in the zoning
ordinance shall apply.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 505)

Sec. 14-202. - Powers and duties.
(a)

Administrative review. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from any decision or determination made
by the watershed administrator in the enforcement of this article.

(b)

Variances. The board of adjustment shall have the power to authorize, in specific cases, minor variances from the terms
of this article as will not be contrary to the public interests where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
this article will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this article shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
(1)

Applications for a variance shall be made on the proper form obtainable from the watershed administrator. The
following information, at a minimum, shall be required by the city:
a.

A site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the property lines of the parcel upon which the use is proposed; any
existing or proposed structures; parking areas and other built-upon areas; surface water drainage.

b.

A complete and detailed description of the proposed variance, together with any other pertinent information
which the applicant feels would be helpful to the board of adjustment in considering the application.

c.

The watershed administrator shall notify in writing each local government having jurisdiction in the watershed
and the entity using the water supply for consumption. Such notice shall include a description of the variance
being requested. Local governments receiving notice of the variance request may submit comments to the
watershed administrator prior to a decision by the board of adjustment. Such comments shall become a part
of the record of proceedings of the board of adjustment.
84/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(2)

Before the board of adjustment may grant a variance, it shall make the following three findings, which shall be recorde
permanent record of the case, and shall include the factual reasons on which they are based:
a.

That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this
article. In order to determine that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, the board must find
that the five following conditions exist:
1.

If he complies with the provisions of this article, the applicant can secure no reasonable return from, nor
make reasonable use of, his property. Merely proving that the variance would permit a greater profit to
be made from the property will not be considered adequate to justify the board in granting a variance.
Moreover, the board shall consider whether the variance is the minimum possible deviation from the
terms of this article that will make possible the reasonable use of his property.

2.

The hardship results from the application of this article to the property rather than from other factors
such as deed restrictions or other hardship.

3.

The hardship is due to the physical nature of the applicant's property, such as its size, shape or
topography, which is different from that of neighboring property.

4.

The hardship is not the result of the actions of an applicant who knowingly or unknowingly violates this
article, or who purchases the property after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived, and then comes to the board for relief.

5.

The hardship is peculiar to the applicant's property, rather than the result of conditions that are
widespread. If other properties are equally subject to the hardship created in the restriction, then
granting a variance would be a special privilege denied to others and would not promote equal justice.

b.

That the variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and preserves its spirit.

c.

That in the granting the variance, the public safety and welfare have been assured and substantial justice has
been accomplished. The board shall not grant a variance if it finds that doing so would in any respect impair
the public health, safety or general welfare.

(3)

In granting the variance, the board may attach such conditions regarding the location, character and other features
of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this article. If a
variance for the construction, alteration or use of property is granted, such construction, alteration or use shall be
in accordance with the approved site plan.

(4)

The board of adjustment shall refuse to hear an appeal or an application for a variance previously denied if it finds
that there have been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application.

(5)

A variance issued in accordance with this section shall be considered a watershed protection permit and shall
expire if a building permit or watershed occupancy permit for such use is not obtained by the applicant within six
months from the date of the decision.

(6)

If the application calls for the granting of a major variance, and if the board of adjustment decides in favor of
granting the variance, the board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing with all deliberate speed. The
preliminary record of the hearing shall include:

(7)

a.

The variance application;

b.

The hearing notices;

c.

The evidence presented;

d.

Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence and rulings on them;

e.

Proposed findings and exceptions; and

f.

The proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be added to the permit.

The preliminary record shall be sent to the environmental management commission for its review as follows:
a.

If the commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and
that the property owner can secure no reasonable return from, nor make any practical use of the property
85/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

unless the proposed variance is granted; and the variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat to the
water supply, then the commission shall approve the variance as proposed or approve the proposed variance
with conditions and stipulations. The commission shall prepare a commission decision and send it to the
board of adjustment. If the commission approves the variance as proposed, the board shall prepare a final
decision granting the proposed variance. If the commission approves the variance with conditions and
stipulations, the board shall prepare a final decision, including such conditions and stipulations, granting the
proposed variance.
b.

If the commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and
that the property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make a practical use of the property without
the variance; or the variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the
commission shall deny approval of the variance as proposed. The commission shall prepare a commission
decision and send it to the board of adjustment. The board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance
as proposed.

(c)

Subdivision approval. See section 14-241

(d)

Public health. See sections 14-341 and 14-342

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 506)

Sec. 14-203. - Appeals.
Appeals from the board of adjustment must be filed with the superior court within 30 days from the date of the decision. The
decisions by the superior court will be in the manner of certiorari.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 507)

Secs. 14-204—14-220. - Reserved.
Subdivision IV. - Amendments and Appeals

Sec. 14-221. - Appeal from city manager.
Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the watershed administrator may be appealed to and decided by the
board of adjustment as specified in the city's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 502)

Sec. 14-222. - Changes and amendments.
(a)

The board of aldermen may, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement,
change or modify the watershed regulations and restrictions as described in this article.

(b)

No action shall be taken until the proposal has been submitted to the board of adjustment for review and
recommendations. If no recommendation has been received from the board of adjustment within 45 days after
submission of the proposal to the chairman of the board of adjustment, the board of aldermen may proceed as though a
favorable report has been received.

(c)

Under no circumstances shall the board of aldermen adopt such amendments, supplements or changes that would
cause this article to violate the watershed protection rules as adopted by the state environmental management
commission. All amendments must be filed with the state division of water quality, the state division of environmental
health and the state division of community assistance.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 503)

Sec. 14-223. - Public notice and hearing required.
86/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Before adopting or amending the ordinance from which this article is derived, the board of aldermen shall hold a public hearing on
the proposed changes. A notice of the public hearing shall be given once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper
having general circulation in the area.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 504)

Secs. 14-224—14-240. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - WATERSHED SUBDIVISION

Sec. 14-241. - General provisions.
(a)

No subdivision plat within the public water supply watershed shall be filed or recorded by the register of deeds of the
county until it has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this section and section 14-242. Likewise, the clerk
of superior court shall not order the recording of a plat if the recording of such plat would be in conflict with this section
and section 14-242

(b)

All applications to subdivide land in a designated water supply watershed shall comply with the application, review and
mapping requirements of the subdivision ordinance which is included as chapter 28

(c)

If the planning board approves the application, such approval shall be indicated on both copies of the plat by the
following certificate and signed by the chairman or other authorized member of the board:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF RECORDING

This subdivision plat has been found to comply with the Subdivision Ordinance of Randleman, North Carolina, provided that it is
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds within 60 days of final approval by the Planning Board.

_____

_____

Date Approved by Planning Board

Watershed Administrator

Notice: This property is located within a Public Water Supply Watershed—Development restrictions may apply.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 201)

Sec. 14-242. - Standards and required improvements.
(a)

Subdivisions in any designated drinking supply watershed shall comply with general requirements and minimum
standards of design of the city's subdivision ordinance as well as the requirements specified in this section.

(b)

All lots shall provide adequate building space in accordance with the development standards contained in division 4 of
this article. Lots which are smaller than the minimum required for residential lots may be developed using built-upon
area criteria in accordance with division 4 of this article.

(c)

For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the
project is to be developed.

(d)

The application shall be accompanied by a description of the proposed method of providing stormwater drainage. The
subdivider shall provide a drainage system that diverts stormwater runoff away from surface waters and incorporates
best management practices to minimize water quality impacts.

(e)

The application shall, where required, be accompanied by a written statement that a sedimentation and erosion control
plan has been submitted to and approved by the state division of land quality.

(f)

Where possible, roads should be located outside of critical areas and watershed buffer areas. Roads constructed within
87/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

these areas shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize their impact on water quality.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 203)

Secs. 14-243—14-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - DEVELOPMENT
Subdivision I. - In General

Sec. 14-261. - Rules governing the interpretation of watershed area boundaries.
When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the watershed areas, as shown on the watershed map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1)

Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following either street, alley, railroad or highway lines or
centerlines thereof, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.

(2)

Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries. However, a surveyed plat prepared by a registered land surveyor may be submitted to the city as
evidence that one or more properties along these boundaries do not lie within the watershed area.

(3)

Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance more than 25 feet from any parallel lot line, the
location of watershed area boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the watershed map.

(4)

Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance of 25 feet or less from any parallel lot line, the
location of watershed area boundaries shall be construed to be the lot line.

(5)

Where other uncertainty exists, the watershed administrator shall interpret the watershed map as to location of
such boundaries. The decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 307)

Sec. 14-262. - Application of regulations.
(a)

No building or land shall hereafter be used and no development shall take place except in conformity with the
regulations specified in this article for the watershed area in which the building or land is located.

(b)

No area required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this article shall be included in the area required
for another building.

(c)

If a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being allowed in a watershed area, such use or class of use is
prohibited.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 308)

Sec. 14-263. - Existing development.
(a)

Generally. Any existing development as defined in section 14-131 may be continued and maintained subject to the
provisions provided in this section. Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet the
requirements of this article. However, the built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in
the density calculations.

(b)

Uses of land. This category consists of uses existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is
derived where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter in the watershed area in which it is
located. Such uses may be continued except as follows:
(1)

When such use of land has been changed to an allowed use, it shall not thereafter revert to any prohibited use.

(2)

Such use of land shall be changed only to an allowed use.
88/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(3)
(c)

When such use ceases for a period of at least one year, it shall not be reestablished.

Reconstruction of buildings on built-upon areas. Any existing building or built-upon area not in conformance with the
restrictions of this article that has been damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its
replacement cost or bulk, exclusively of foundations and land value may be repaired and/or reconstructed, except that
there are no restrictions on single-family residential development, provided that:
(1)

Repair or reconstruction is initiated within 12 months and completed within two years of such damage.

(2)

The total amount of space devoted to built-upon area may not be increased unless stormwater control that equals
or exceeds the previous development is provided.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 309)

Sec. 14-264. - Watershed protection permit.
(a)

Except where a single-family residence is constructed on a lot deeded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, no building or built-upon area shall be erected, moved, enlarged or structurally altered, nor
shall any building permit be issued, nor shall any change in the use of any building or land be made until a watershed
protection permit has been issued by the watershed administrator. No watershed protection permit shall be issued
except in conformity with the provisions of this article.

(b)

Watershed protection permit applications shall be filed with the watershed administrator. The application shall include a
completed application form and supporting documentation deemed necessary by the city manager.

(c)

Prior to issuance of a watershed protection permit, the watershed administrator may consult with qualified personnel for
assistance to determine if the application meets the requirements of this article.

(d)

A watershed protection permit shall expire if a building permit or watershed occupancy permit for such use is not
obtained by the applicant within 12 months from the date of issuance.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 310)

Sec. 14-265. - Building permit required.
After receiving a watershed protection permit, a building permit shall be obtained from the county inspection department for
construction or alteration of any building or structure pursuant to the procedures of the county inspections department.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 311)

Sec. 14-266. - Watershed protection occupancy permit.
(a)

The watershed administrator shall issue a watershed protection occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this
article have been met prior to the occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered or moved and/or prior to the
change of use of any building or land.

(b)

A watershed protection occupancy permit, either for the whole or part of a building, shall be applied for at the same time
as the application for a watershed protection permit and shall be issued or denied within ten days after the erection or
structural alterations of the building.

(c)

When only a change in use of land or existing building occurs, the watershed administrator shall issue a watershed
protection occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this article have been met at the same time the
watershed protection permit is issued.

(d)

If the watershed protection occupancy permit is denied, the watershed administrator shall notify the applicant in writing
stating the reasons for denial.

(e)

No building or structure which has been erected, moved or structurally altered may be occupied until the watershed
administrator has approved and issued a watershed protection occupancy permit.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 312)

Secs. 14-267—14-280. - Reserved.
89/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Subdivision II. - Overlay Districts

Sec. 14-281. - Establishment.
To provide an additional layer of protection for drinking water supply watersheds, watershed overlay districts are established in the
city. Within each watershed shall be two tiers of control. The area nearest the water supply shall have the higher level of regulation
because proximity to the intake creates higher risk of contamination. The remaining part of the watershed balance of the watershed
shall have less restrictions because the greater distance from the point of intake lowers risk of contamination. The following overlay
districts shall apply to the watersheds in the city:
(1)

Back Creek, WS-II-BW (balance of watershed).

(2)

Polecat Creek, WS-III-BW (balance of watershed).

(3)

Polecat Creek, WS-III-CA (critical area).

(4)

Randleman Lake, WS-IV-PA (protected area).

(5)

Randleman Lake, WS-IV-CA (critical area).

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 301)

Sec. 14-282. - Back Creek Lake watershed, WS-II-BW (balance of watershed).
(a)

Intent. In order to maintain a predominantly undeveloped land use intensity pattern, single-family residential uses shall
be allowed at a maximum of one dwelling unit per acre. All other residential and nonresidential development shall be
allowed a maximum of 12 percent built-upon area. In addition, new development and expansions to existing
development uses may occupy ten percent of the balance of the watershed which is outside the critical area, with a 70
percent built-upon area when approved as a special intensity allocation (SIA). The city manager is authorized to approve
SIAs consistent with the provisions of this article. Projects must minimize built-upon surface area, direct stormwater
away from surface waters and incorporate best management practices to minimize water quality impacts.
Nondischarging landfills and sludge application sites are allowed.

(b)

Permitted uses.
(1)

All uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts where the watershed is located, subject to the modifications in
subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, except those specifically prohibited in subsection (c) of this section.

(2)

Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and
Trade Act of 1990.

(3)

Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
1I.6101-.0209).

(c)

Prohibited uses.
(1)

Discharging landfills.

(2)

New underground fuel or chemical storage tanks.

(3)

Storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan approved by the county planning
department is implemented.

(d)

Density and built-upon limits.
(1)

In single-family residential districts, development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per acre on a project-by-project
basis. No residential lot shall be less than one acre, except within an approved cluster development.

(2)

New development and expansions to existing development shall not exceed 12 percent built-upon area on a project
by project basis except that up to ten percent of the balance of the watershed may be developed for uses to 70
percent built-upon area on a project-by-project basis. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project
90/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed.
(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 302)

Sec. 14-283. - Polecat Creek watershed, WS-III-CA, and Randleman Lake watershed, WS-III-CA (critical area).
(a)

Intent. In order to maintain a low land use intensity pattern, single-family residential uses are allowed at a maximum of
one dwelling unit per two acres. All other residential and nonresidential development shall be allowed to a maximum of
six percent built-upon area.

(b)

Permitted uses.
(1)

All uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts where the watershed is located, subject to the modifications
noted in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section unless prohibited in subsection (c) of this section.

(2)

Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and
Trade Act of 1990. Agricultural activities conducted after January 1, 1993, shall maintain a minimum ten-foot
vegetative buffer, or equivalent control as determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission, along all
perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as
determined by local government studies. Animal operations greater than 100 animal units shall employ best
management practices by July 1, 1994, recommended by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission.

(3)

Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
1I.6101-.0209).

(c)

Prohibited uses.
(1)

Storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan approved by the watershed administrator
is implemented.

(2)

Landfills or incinerators.

(3)

Sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.

(4)

Commercial uses, which sell, store or distribute motor fuels or other hazardous materials.

(5)

Airports.

(6)

Industrial uses.

(7)

Metal salvage facilities including junkyards.

(8)

Manufacture, use or storage of any hazardous or toxic materials waste as listed on the EPA hazardous material list
or determined by the county board of commissioners.

(9)

Public or private sewage disposal systems except for subsurface septic tanks. Public community sewage treatment
facilities may only be allowed if the health department determines that an existing public health problem can be
alleviated by constructing sewage facilities.

(d)

Density and built-upon limits.
(1)

Single-family residential. Development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per two acres on a project-by-project
basis. No residential lot shall be less than two acres, except within an approved cluster development.

(2)

All other residential and nonresidential. Development shall not exceed six percent built-upon area on a project-byproject basis. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, the total project area shall include total acreage in the
tract on which the project is to be developed.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 303)

Sec. 14-284. - Polecat Creek watershed, WS-III-BW (balance of watershed).
(a)

Intent. In order to maintain a low to moderate land use intensity pattern, single-family detached uses shall develop at a
maximum of one dwelling unit per acre. All other residential and nonresidential development shall be allowed a
maximum of 24 percent built-upon area. In addition, new development and expansions to existing development may
occupy ten percent of the watershed with a 70 percent built-upon area when approved as a special intensity allocation
91/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(SIA). The city manager is authorized to approve SIAs consistent with the provisions of this article. Projects must minimize
built-upon surface area, direct stormwater away from surface waters and incorporate best management practices to
minimize water quality impacts. Nondischarging landfills and sludge application sites are allowed.
(b)

Permitted uses.
(1)

All uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts where the watershed is located, subject to the modifications
below, unless specifically prohibited in subsection (c) of this section.

(2)

Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and
Trade Act of 1990.

(3)

Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
1I.6101-.0209).

(c)

Prohibited uses.
(1)

Discharging landfills.

(2)

New underground fuel or chemical storage tanks.

(3)

Storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan approved by the planning department is
implemented.

(d)

Density and built-upon limits.
(1)

Single-family residential. Development shall not exceed two dwelling units per acre, as defined on a project-byproject basis. No residential lot shall be less than one-half acre, except within an approved cluster development. In
the absence of public sewer, however, all waste treatment must be permitted by the county health department, in
which case the minimum lot size is 40,000 square feet.

(2)

New development and expansions to existing development. Development shall not exceed 24 percent built-upon
area on a project-by-project basis except that up to ten percent of the balance of the watershed may be developed
for uses to 70 percent built-upon area on a project-by-project basis. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area,
total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 304a)

Sec. 14-285. - Randleman Lake critical watershed, WS-IV-PA (protected area).
(a)

Intent. In order to maintain a low to moderate land use intensity pattern, single-family detached uses shall develop at a
maximum of one dwelling unit per acre. All other residential and nonresidential development shall be allowed a
maximum of 12 percent built-upon area. In addition, new development and expansions to existing development may
occupy ten percent of the protected area with a 70 percent built-upon area when approved as a special intensity
allocation (SIA). The city manager is authorized to approve SIAs consistent with the provisions of this article. Projects
must minimize built-upon surface area, direct stormwater away from surface waters and incorporate best management
practices to minimize water quality impacts. Nondischarging landfills and sludge applications sites are allowed.

(b)

Permitted uses.
(1)

All uses permitted in the underlying zoning districts where the watershed is located, subject to the modifications in
subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, unless specifically prohibited in subsection (c) of this section.

(2)

Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and
Trade Act of 1990.

(3)

Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
II.6101-.0209).

(c)

Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses are discharging landfills.

(d)

Density and built-upon limits.
(1)

Single-family residential. Development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per acre, as defined on a project-byproject basis. No residential lot shall be less than one acre, except within an approved cluster development.
92/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(2)

New development and expansions to existing development. Development shall not exceed 12 percent built-upon on a
project basis except that up to ten percent of the protected area may be developed for uses to 70 percent built-upon a
by-project basis. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the trac
project is to be developed.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 304b)

Secs. 14-286—14-300. - Reserved.
Subdivision III. - Cluster Development

Sec. 14-301. - Back Creek and Polecat Creek watersheds.
Clustering of development is allowed in all watershed areas under the following conditions:
(1)

Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster development projects. However, the total number of
lots shall not exceed the number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments in section 14-282. Builtupon area of the project shall not exceed that allowed for the critical area or balance of watershed, whichever
applies.

(2)

All built-upon area shall be designed and located to minimize stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and
minimize concentrated stormwater flow.

(3)

The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural state. The title to the open space area shall be
conveyed to an incorporated homeowners' association for management; to a local government for preservation as
a park or upon space; or to a conservation organization for preservation in a permanent easement. Where a
property association is not incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be filed with the property deeds.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 305a)

Sec. 14-302. - Randleman Lake critical watershed.
(a)

Overall density of the project shall meet associated density or stormwater control requirements of section 14-282

(b)

Buffers shall meet the minimum statewide water supply watershed protection requirements and those specified for the
Randleman Lake watershed riparian areas in section 14-322

(c)

Built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters, minimize
concentrated stormwater flow, maximize the use of sheet flow through vegetated areas, and maximize the flow length
through vegetated areas.

(d)

Areas of concentrated development shall be located in upland areas and away, to the maximum extent practicable, from
surface waters and drainageways.

(e)

The remainder of tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural state. The area in the vegetated or natural state may be
conveyed to a property owners' association, a local government for preservation as a park or greenway, a conservation
organization or placed in a permanent conservation or farmland preservation easement.

(f)

Cluster development that meets the applicable low density option requirements shall transport stormwater runoff from
the development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable.

(g)

Areas of concentrated development shall be located in upland areas and away, to the maximum extent practicable, from
surface waters and drainageways.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 305b)

Secs. 14-303—14-320. - Reserved.
Subdivision IV. - Bu er Areas
93/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-321. - Required—Back Creek and Polecat Creek watersheds.
(a)

A minimum 100-foot vegetative buffer is required for all new development activities that exceed the low density option.
Otherwise, a minimum of 50-foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required along all perennial waters
indicated on the most recent versions of USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local
government studies. Desirable artificial streambank or shoreline stabilization is permitted.

(b)

No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent structures and public projects such as road
crossings and greenways where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area,
direct runoff away from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of stormwater best management practices.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 306a)

Sec. 14-322. - Same—Randleman Lake critical watershed.
(a)

A minimum 50-foot riparian buffer for all new development activities is required on all sides of surface waters in the
Randleman Lake watershed, such as intermittent streams, perennial streams, lakes and ponds, as indicated on the most
recent versions of either the USGS 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) topographic maps or the soil survey maps developed by
U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service, or other site-specific evidence that indicates to
the division of water quality the presence of waters not shown on either of these two maps or evidence that no actual
stream or waterbody exists.

(b)

Maintenance of the riparian areas shall be such that, to the maximum extent possible, sheet flow of surface water is
achieved. All riparian protection areas shall be recorded on new or modified plats. No building permits shall be issued
and no new development shall take place in violation of this rule.

(c)

The following waterbodies and land uses are exempt from the riparian area protection requirements:
(1)

Ditches and manmade conveyances, other than modified natural streams, which under normal conditions do not
receive drainage from any tributary ditches, canals or streams, unless the ditch or manmade conveyance delivers
runoff directly to waters classified in accordance with 15A NCAC 2B .0100.

(2)

Areas mapped as intermittent streams, perennial streams, lakes, ponds or estuaries on the most recent versions of
USGS 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute quadrangle) topographic maps or soil survey maps where no perennial waterbody,
intermittent waterbody, lake, pond or estuary actually exists on the ground.

(3)

Ponds and lakes created for animal watering, irrigation or other agricultural uses that are not part of a natural
drainage way that is classified in accordance with 15A NCAC 2B .0100.

(4)

Water dependent structures as defined in 15A NCAC 2B. 0202, provided they are located, designed, constructed and
maintained to provide maximum nutrient removal, to have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat and
to protect water quality.

(5)

The following uses where no practical alternative exists. A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by
demonstrating that, considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration or density of the proposed
activity and all alternative designs, the basic project purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a manner which
would avoid or result in less adverse impact to surface waters. Also, these structures shall be located, designed,
constructed and maintained to have minimal disturbance, provide maximum nutrient removal and erosion
protection, have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum
extent practical through the use of best management practices:
a.

Road crossings, railroad crossings, bridges, airport facilities and utility crossings if the conditions of subsection
(c)(5) of this section are met.

b.

Stormwater management facilities and ponds, and utility construction and maintenance corridors for utilities
such as water, sewer or gas, in zone 2 of the riparian area as long as the conditions specified in subsection (c)
(5) of this section are met and they are located at least 30 feet from the top of bank or mean high-water line.
94/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Additional requirements for utility construction and maintenance corridors are listed in subsection (c)(6) of the
section.
(6)

A corridor for the construction and maintenance of utility lines, such as water, sewer or gas (including access roads
and stockpiling of materials) running parallel to the stream and located within zone 2 of the riparian area, as long as
no practical alternative exists, as defined in subsection (c)(5) of this section, and best management practices are
installed to minimize runoff and maximize water quality protection to the maximum extent practicable. Permanent,
maintained access corridors shall be restricted to the minimum width practicable and shall not exceed ten feet in
width except at manhole locations. A ten-foot by ten-foot perpendicular vehicle turnaround shall be allowed
provided they are spaced at least 500 feet apart along the riparian area.

(7)

Stream restoration projects, scientific studies, stream gauging, water wells, passive recreation facilities such as
boardwalks, trails, pathways, historic preservation and archaeological activities, provided that they are located in
zone 2 and are at least 30 feet from the top of bank or mean high-water line and are designed, constructed and
maintained to provide the maximum nutrient removal and erosion protection, have the least adverse effects on
aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent practical through the use of best
management practices. Activities that must cross the stream or be located within zone 1 are allowed as long as all
other requirements of this subsection are met.

(8)

Stream crossings associated with timber harvesting, if performed in accordance with the Forest Practices Guidelines
Related to Water Quality (15A NCAC 1J .0201-.0209).

(d)

The projected riparian area shall have two zones as follows:
(1)

Zone 1 is intended to be an undisturbed area of vegetation.
a.

Zone 1 begins at the top of bank for intermittent streams and perennial streams and extends landward a
distance of 30 feet on all sides of the waterbody, measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the
waterbody. For all other waterbodies, zone 1 begins at the top of bank or mean high-water line and extends
landward a distance of 30 feet, measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the waterbody.

b.

The following practices an activities are allowed in zone 1:
1.

Natural regeneration of forest vegetation and planting vegetation to enhance the riparian area if
disturbance is minimize, provided that any plantings shall primarily consist of locally native trees and
shrubs;

2.

Selective cutting of individual trees in zone 1, where forest vegetation as defined in 15A NCAC 1J .0202, as
long as the following conditions are met every 100 feet on each side of the stream:
i.

Of existing trees with 12 inches and greater diameter breast height (dbh), a minimum of five trees
must remain uncut;

ii.

Number of trees harvested

Trees with 12 inches and greater dbh may be harvested based on the following equation:

=

(Total
number
of trees
greater
than
12-inch
dbh - 5)
2

iii.

No trees less than 12-inch dbh may be harvested unless exceptions provided in this article are met;
95/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

iv.

Trees may not be harvested more frequently than every ten years; and

v.

No tracked or wheeled equipment are allowed.

3.

Horticulture or silvicultural practices to maintain the health of individual trees;

4.

Removal of individual trees which are in danger of causing damage to dwellings, other structures or the
stream channel;

5.

Removal of dead trees and other timber-cutting techniques necessary to prevent extensive pest or
disease infestation if recommended by the director, division of forest resources, and approved by the
director, division of water quality; and

6.
c.

Ongoing agricultural operations provided that existing forest vegetation is protected.

The following practices are not allowed in zone 1:
1.

Land disturbing activities and placement of fill and other materials, other than those allowed in
subsection (d)(1)b. of this section;

2.

New development, except as provided in subsections (c)(4) and (c)(5) of this section;

3.

New on-site sanitary sewage systems which use ground adsorption;

4.

The application of fertilizer; and

5.

Any activity that threatens the health and function of the vegetation including, but not limited to,
application of chemicals in amount exceeding the manufacturer's recommended rate, uncontrolled
sediment sources on adjacent lands and the creation of any areas with bare soil.

(2)

Zone 2 is intended to provide protection through a vegetated zone which provides for diffusion and infiltration of
runoff and filtering of pollutants.
a.

Zone 2 begins at the outer edge of zone 1 and extends landward a minimum of 20 feet as measured
horizontally on a line perpendicular to the waterbody. The combined minimum width of zones 1 and 2 shall be
50 feet on all sides of the waterbody.

b.

The following practices and activities are allowed in zone 2 in addition to those allowed in zone 1:
1.

Periodic mowing and removal of plant products such as timber, nuts and fruit is allowed provided the
intended purpose of the riparian area is not compromised by harvesting, disturbance, or loss of forest or
herbaceous ground cover; and

2.

Grading and timber harvesting provided that vegetated ground cover be established immediately
following completion of the land disturbing activity.

c.

The following practices and activities are not allowed in zone 2:
1.

New development, except as provided in subsections (c)(5) and (c)(6) of this section;

2.

New on-site sanitary sewage systems which use ground adsorption; and

3.

Any activity that threatens the health and function of the vegetation including, but not limited to,
application of chemicals in amounts exceeding the manufacturer's recommended rate, uncontrolled
sediment sources on adjacent lands, and the creation of any areas with bare soil.

(e)

Timber removal and skidding of trees shall be directed away from the watercourse or waterbody. Skidding shall be done
in a manner to prevent the creation of ephemeral channels perpendicular to the waterbody. Any tree removal must be
performed in a manner that does not compromise the intended purpose of the riparian area and is in accordance with
the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15A NCAC 1J .0201-.0209).

(f)

Maintenance of sheet flow in zones 1 and 2 is required in accordance with subsections (f)(1) and (f)(2) of this section.
(1)

Sheet flow must be maintained to the maximum extent practical through dispersing concentrated flow and
reestablishment of vegetation to maintain the effectiveness of the riparian area.

(2)

Concentrated runoff from new ditches or manmade conveyances must be dispersed into sheet flow before the
runoff enters zone 2 of the riparian area. Existing ditches and manmade conveyances, as specified in subsection (c)
(1) of this section, are exempt from this requirement. However, care shall be taken to minimize pollutant loading
96/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

through these existing ditches and manmade conveyances from fertilizer application or erosion.
(3)

Periodic corrective action to restore sheet flow shall be taken by the landowner if necessary to impede the
formation of erosion gullies which allow concentrated flow to bypass treatment in the riparian area.

(g)

Periodic maintenance of modified natural streams such as canals is allowed provided that disturbance is minimized and
the structure and function of the riparian area is not compromised. A grassed travelway is allowed on one side of the
waterbody when alternative forms of maintenance access are not practical. The width and specifications of the travelway
shall be only that needed for equipment access and operation. The travelway shall be located to maximize stream
shading.

(h)

Where the standards and management requirements for riparian areas are in conflict with other laws, regulations and
permits regarding streams, steep slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, floodplains, forest harvesting, surface mining, land
disturbance activities or other environmental protection areas, the more protective shall apply.

(i)

The existing water supply requirement in Rule 15A NCAC 2B .0216(3)(b) that stipulates a 100-foot vegetation buffer,
adjacent to perennial streams, for all new development activities which utilize the high-density option, applies to the
entire Randleman Lake watershed. The first 50 feet of these riparian areas on either side of these waters must also be
protected in accordance with all the requirements of this rule.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 306b)

Secs. 14-323—14-340. - Reserved.
Subdivision V. - Public Health

Sec. 14-341. - Generally.
No activity, situation, structure or land use shall be allowed within the watershed, which poses a threat to water quality and the
public health, safety and welfare. Such conditions may arise from:
(1)

Inadequate on-site sewage systems which utilize ground absorption;

(2)

Inadequate sedimentation and erosion control measures;

(3)

The improper storage or disposal of junk, trash or other refuse within a buffer area;

(4)

The absence or improper implementation of a spill containment plan for toxic and hazardous materials;

(5)

The improper management of stormwater runoff; or

(6)

Any other situation found to pose a threat to water quality.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 401)

Sec. 14-342. - Abatement.
(a)

The watershed administrator shall monitor land use activities within the watershed areas to identify situations that may
pose a threat to water quality.

(b)

The watershed administrator shall report all findings to the board of adjustment. The watershed administrator may
consult with any public agency or official and request recommendations.

(c)

When the board of adjustment finds a threat to water quality and the public health, safety and welfare, the board shall
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or abate the condition and/or violation.

(Ord. of 12-7-1999, § 402)

Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
FOOTNOTE(S):

97/228

7/12/2019
(16) Cross

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

reference— Building regulations, ch. 8; civil emergencies, ch. 12; throwing, burning trash, etc, § 26-6.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 16-1. - Fire lanes.
To prevent undue access problems to buildings, hydrants, Siamese connections, standpipe connections, etc., fire lanes shall be
established. To establish fire lanes the following procedures shall be followed:
(1)

Fire lanes may be designated on public property from time to time as deemed necessary.

(2)

Fire lanes shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this section on private property used for assembly,
mercantile, educational, industrial, institutional and multifamily dwellings as deemed necessary. No fire lane shall
be established upon private property developed prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this
section is derived upon which identified parking spaces are deleted without the prior approval of the board of
aldermen.

(3)

Fire lanes shall be designated in accordance with the provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code Volume V
—Fire Prevention Code, Chapter 6, section 602.6, Access to Buildings by Fire Apparatus, and other stated references
therein.

(4)

Fire lanes shall be located where necessary to provide fire protection to all proximately located buildings and
property, including buildings and property located upon the parcel of land where the fire lane is located, and also
any buildings or property located on adjacent property.

(5)

Where designated, fire lanes shall be 20 feet wide at any point and curves and corners shall be wide enough to
permit the passage or operation of all fire equipment owned by the city. The surface of the fire lanes shall be an allweather surface and shall be of sufficient strength to support all firefighting apparatus used by the fire department
of the city.

(6)

Areas where fire lanes are deemed necessary shall be measured. Maps shall be drawn giving reference points for
the beginning, end and width of the lane. The tax department shall be contacted to confirm that property is public
property if so stated. A legal description shall be drawn up of the fire lane. The signatures of the fire chief and the
city manager will be required on the completed documentation to establish a fire lane.

(7)

No parking shall be permitted at any time on any fire lane, and no parking shall be permitted at any location which
would prevent immediate access to any fire lane, fire hydrant, fire department sprinkler connection and/or control
valve, or any other device used by the fire department. The allowable use of a fire lane by other than emergency
vehicles shall be as follows: Vehicles shall be allowed to stand in a fire lane only as long as it takes to load parcels
into the vehicle from a shopping cart. The vehicle must stay operational and the operator with the vehicle at all
times while in the fire lane. The term "parcels" is defined as items in a shopping cart that are too large or too
numerous to be carried by hand to vehicles in marked parking spaces.

(8)

Signs shall be placed at the fire lane indicating the beginning, end and continuance of the fire lane, with no more
than 75 feet between signs. Signs shall contain the words "NO PARKING," "FIRE LANE," and indicating arrows, "FINE
$25.00" or "TOW AWAY ZONE," to warn persons against parking in, or blocking access to fire lanes at any time.
Pavement shall be marked as per fire department guidelines.

(9)

The owner of any private areas where a fire lane is required shall post approved signs in accordance with fire
department guidelines. The city shall post approved signs indicating fire lanes on public property in accordance with
fire department guidelines.

(10)

Approved signs shall comply with the standards set forth by the fire department and adopted by policy of the fire
department and regularly used by the city. Such policy and sign information shall be available at the office of the
fire marshal.

(11)

Private property owners shall remove snow and/or ice from any fire lane as soon as reasonably possible upon any
98/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

accumulation. The city shall remove snow and/or ice from public area fire lanes as soon as reasonably possible
upon any accumulation.
(12)

Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00. The sworn fire
marshal, sworn code enforcement officials of the city and officers of the city police department are hereby
authorized to issue citations for violations of this section. Any violation of this section shall also constitute a general
misdemeanor. Any violation of the "NO PARKING" requirements set forth in this section shall subject the vehicle to
be towed in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 20-162 and the procedures of the city police department.

(Code 1975, § 8-17; Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-28)

Sec. 16-2. - Penalty for violation of state re prevention code.
The schedule of civil penalties imposed for the violation of the state fire prevention code will be as adopted by the city council from
time to time and is on file in the city clerk's office.
Sec. 16-3. - Violations and penalties.
(a)

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted in this article or who shall fail to comply with any
judicial warrant, lawful order or regulation made thereunder or who builds in violation of any specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder or any permit issued thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the name of the city, the city fire chief, his authorized
representative, through the city attorney, may enjoin the construction or erection of any facility, building or structure,
which does not conform to the provisions of the code.

(b)

This code may be enforced by any of the remedies set forth in G.S. 160A-174, in addition to others specifically set out in
this article or in the city.

(c)

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this code and does not remedy the violation in such given time shall be
subject to a civil penalty for each violation in the amount established by ordinance of the board of aldermen. The civil
penalty schedule shall be filed with the city clerk and in the fire marshal's office for public inspection.

(d)

Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.

(e)

Civil penalties must be paid within 72 hours after a citation has been issued by the fire chief or his authorized
representative for a violation. The fire chief or his authorized representative is authorized to issue written citations in the
name of the city for violations.

(f)

If any person shall violate this chapter or any provision thereof, they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.

(g)

There shall be a delinquency notice mailed by certified mail to the violator informing him that a criminal summons will be
issued against him if the specified penalty is not paid within the 72 hours of issuance of the citation.

(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-22)

Secs. 16-4—16-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sec. 16-36. - Mission.
The fire department's mission is to minimize the risk of fire and other hazards to the life and property of the citizens of the city by
maintaining the highest standard of professionalism and excellence in service. To accomplish this mission, the department shall provide
effective fire prevention, fire suppression, fire investigation, arson mitigation, rescue and medical responder services.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-1)

99/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 16-37. - Organization.
The fire department shall consist of the chief of the department and a sufficient number of firefighters (paid (full-time/part-time),
volunteers) to maintain and operate the department.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-2)

Sec. 16-38. - Service outside the city.
(a)

The fire chief shall dispatch fire vehicles for service outside the city limits as needed to fulfill the city's contract with the
county.

(b)

The fire chief shall dispatch fire vehicles for service outside the city according to mutual-aid agreements with other
departments.

(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-3)

Secs. 16-39—16-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Sec. 16-61. - Title.
This section shall be known as the Fire Prevention and Protection Code of the City of Randleman, North Carolina, and may be cited
as such and referred to in this article as the code.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-12)

Sec. 16-62. - Intent.
The code shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or
reinspection authorized in this article or failure to inspect or reinspect or the permits issued or denied as provided in this article or by
reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized in this article.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-13)

Sec. 16-63. - Enforcement.
The fire prevention and protection code of the city shall be enforced by the fire chief or his authorized representative or as
otherwise provided in this article.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-14)

Sec. 16-64. - Adoption of technical codes and standards by reference; copies on le.
(a)

There is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein that certain code known as and entitled Volume V—Fire
Prevention of the North Carolina State Building Code, 1991 edition. Copies of the fire prevention and protection code and
all technical codes and standards adopted by reference shall be filed with, and available for public inspection in the office
of the fire marshal.

(b)

Amendments to codes and standards adopted by reference herein which are adopted and published by the state
building code council shall be effective in the city at the time such amendments become part of Volume V—Fire
Prevention of the North Carolina Building Code.

(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-15)

Sec. 16-65. - Bureau of re prevention.
100/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

There shall be established a bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which shall be operated under the
supervision of the chief of the fire department.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-16)

Sec. 16-66. - Fire marshal.
The fire marshal, in charge of the bureau of fire prevention, shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-17)

Sec. 16-67. - Inspection schedule.
In order to preserve and to protect public health and safety and to satisfy the requirements of the North Carolina State Building
Code, Volume V—Fire Prevention, inspections to identify activities and conditions in buildings, structures and premises that may impose
dangers of fire, explosion or related hazards shall be conducted. The minimum frequency of inspections shall be as follows:
(1)

Once every year for hazardous, institutional, high rise, assembly and residential (except one-family and two-family
dwellings) and only interior common areas of dwelling units of multifamily occupancies.

(2)

Once every two years for industrial, educational (except public schools which shall be done two times a year).

(3)

Once every three years for business, mercantile, storage, churches and synagogues.

In no case may inspection be conducted less frequently than required by the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V
—Fire Prevention. Nothing in this fire prevention code is intended to prevent more frequent inspections when necessary or
desirable.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-18)

Sec. 16-68. - Inspection of buildings and premises.
Subject to the limitations and conditions stated in the state building code, it shall be the duty of the fire chief or his authorized
representative to inspect or cause to be inspected as often as deemed necessary and appropriate, all buildings, structures and premises
within his jurisdiction for the purposes of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition which may cause fire or explosion,
endanger life from fire or hazards, or any violation of the provisions of the code, or any other ordinances pertaining to fire or explosion
hazards.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-19)

Sec. 16-69. - Service of orders or notices.
The service of orders or notices for the correction of violations of the code shall be made upon the owner, occupant, or other
person responsible for the conditions, either by personally delivering a copy of the order or notice to such person or by delivering the
order or notice to, and leaving it with, any person in charge of the premises or by sending a copy of the order or notice by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-20)

Sec. 16-70. - Fee schedule.
(a)

Fees for inspections required by this code shall be determined by resolution of the board of aldermen of the city. An
inspection fee schedule shall be filed with the clerk of the city and the fire marshal's office for public inspection.

(b)

Inspection fees shall be paid within the number of days specified in the billing or notice of the amount of the fee.

(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-21)

Sec. 16-71. - Removal of obstructions; prohibited parking.
101/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Any vehicle found obstructing any fire hydrant, fire protection equipment, designated and marked fire lane or fire station may be
removed or towed away by or under the direction of the fire chief or his authorized representative to a storage area or garage. The
owner of such vehicle shall be deemed to have appointed the fire chief as his agent for the purpose of arranging for the transportation
and safe storage of the vehicle. The owner of such vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof shall pay all reasonable cost incidental
to the removal and storage of the vehicle due for the violation of prohibited parking.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-23)

Sec. 16-72. - Emergency entry.
The fire chief or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter any building or premises without permission or warrant
in the event of any emergency situation constituting a threat to human life, property or the public safety for the purpose of eliminating,
controlling or abating the dangerous conditions or situation.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-24)

Sec. 16-73. - Investigation of res.
(a)

The fire marshal's office shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the fire district
which is of a suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons, or when circumstances warrant. Such
investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin.
The fire marshal shall be immediately notified and coordinate investigation activities with the proper agencies when
needed. Any information obtained pursuant to any such investigation shall be confidential as authorized by law.

(b)

The police department, upon request from the fire chief or his authorized representatives, may render such assistance as
necessary in the investigation of any fire determined to be of suspicious origin.

(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-25)

Sec. 16-74. - Fire records.
The fire marshal's office shall keep a record of all fires, including the extent of such fires and the damages caused thereby. All such
records shall be deemed public except as provided in section 16-73.
(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-26)

Sec. 16-75. - Key boxes.
(a)

The fire chief or his authorized representatives shall have the authority to require rapid response key boxes to be
installed in a location approved by the fire chief or his authorized representative. The key box shall be of a type and of
the manufacturer approved by the fire chief or his authorized representative.

(b)

When a building within the city fire district is protected by an automatic fire suppression or standpipe system it shall be
equipped with a key box.

(c)

When a building within the city fire district is protected by an automatic alarm system and/or access to or within a
building, or an area within that building, is unduly difficult because of secured openings, and where immediate access is
necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes it shall be equipped with a key box.

(d)

When a property is protected by a locked fence or gate and where immediate access to the property is necessary for life
safety or firefighting purposes, the fire chief or his authorized representative may require a security padlock or key
switch device of type and of the manufacturer approved by the fire chief or his authorized representative.

(e)

This section shall be modified when in the opinion of the fire chief or his authorized representative there is adequate
access within the structure in the event of a life saving or firefighting purpose.

(f)

The required key box shall contain the keys necessary to gain access to all areas as required by the fire chief or his
authorized representative. The operator of the building shall immediately notify the fire marshal's office and provide new
102/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

keys any time a lock is changed, rekeyed or a new tenant occupies the building, and the new keys to that lock shall be
secured in the key box.
(g)

The key box shall contain a card containing the emergency contact people and phone numbers for such building. In
addition, floor plans of the rooms within the building may be required.

(h)

Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person or business owner from installing a key box on any building, as long as it
is installed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

(Ord. of 5-8-2001, § 8-27)

Chapter 18 - FLOODS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(17) Cross

reference— Building regulations, ch. 8; environment, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; subdivisions,

ch. 28; utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 38; FP (O) floodplain district (overlay), § 38-110.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 18-31. - Statutory authorization.
The state legislature has, in G.S. 143-215.51 et seq., delegated the responsibility to the local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of their citizenry. Therefore, the board of aldermen has
enacted the provisions of this article.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-1)

Sec. 18-32. - Legislative ndings.
(a)

The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.

(b)

These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights
and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-2)

Sec. 18-33. - Purposes of article.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1)

Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2)

Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage
103/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

at the time of initial construction;
(3)

Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in
the accommodation of floodwaters;

(4)

Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion of flood damage; and

(5)

Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-3)

Sec. 18-34. - Objectives of article.
The objectives of this article are:
(1)

To protect human life and health;

(2)

To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3)

To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;

(4)

To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5)

To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines and bridges located in floodplains;

(6)

To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a
manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and

(7)

To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-4)

Sec. 18-35. - De nitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section; provided, that unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meanings they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application:

Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is
connected by a common load bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is
separated by independent perimeter load bearing walls is new construction.

Appeal means a request for a review of the city's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.

Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill,
solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls.

Flood or flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
104/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(1)

The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
(2)

The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the areas
of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement); i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction
or the top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.

Functionally dependent facilities means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in
close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding,
ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.

Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel
trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.

Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various
elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).

New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance
from which this article is derived.

Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub.
L-97-348), "start of construction" includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of manufactured
home on a foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or
other manmade facilities or infrastructures.

Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which, equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure either (i) before the improvement or repair is started, or (ii) if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (i) any project for
improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions, or (ii) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of
historic places. The effects of "substantial improvement" shall be cumulative for 20 years.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-5)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
105/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-36. - Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-6)

Sec. 18-37. - Basis for establishing areas of special ood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its flood insurance rate map (FIRM) No.
370199, dated July 1, 1987, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-7)

Sec. 18-38. - Compliance with article and other applicable regulations.
No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-8)

Sec. 18-39. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where
this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-9)

Sec. 18-40. - Interpretation of article.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1)

Considered as minimum requirements;

(2)

Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3)

Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-10)

Sec. 18-41. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-11)

Sec. 18-42. - Violations and penalties.
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of
$1,000.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing
contained in this article shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Code 1975, § 8.1-12)

Sec. 18-43. - Planning director designated enforcement o cer; duties.
106/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The planning director is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties of the planning director shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)

Permit review.
a.

Review all development permits pursuant to G.S. 143-215.57 to determine that the permit requirements of this
article have been satisfied.

b.

Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required and, if specific federal or state
permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
development permit.

c.

Review all development permits to determine if proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying
capacity of the floodplain. For the purposes of this article, the term "adversely affect" means to damage
adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel and the
adjacent overbank areas.
1.

If it is determined that there is no adverse effect, and the development is not a building, the permit shall
be granted without further consideration.

2.

If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, technical justification (i.e., a professional engineering
analysis) for the proposed development shall be required.

3.
(2)

If the proposed development is a building, the provisions of this article shall apply.

Use of available base flood elevation or floodway data. When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not
been provided in accordance with section 18-37, the city manager shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer
section 18-62

(3)

Records.
a.

Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new or substantially improved structures.

b.

Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed. Certification of such floodproofing shall be obtained in
accordance with subsection 18-62(2).

c.
(4)

Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in his office, open for public inspection.

Alteration or relocation of watercourses.
a.

Notify adjacent communities and the state department of crime control and public safety, division of
emergency management prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

b.

Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the
flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.

(5)

Interpretation of mapped boundaries. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual physical conditions), the city manager shall make the necessary interpretation.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-13)

Sec. 18-44. - Development permit.
(a)

A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article.

(b)

Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager on forms furnished by him and may include, but
not be limited to, the following: Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the
107/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1)

Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed structures.

(2)

Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.

(3)

Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets
the floodproofing criteria in subsection 18-62(2).

(4)

Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.

(5)

Floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed. Upon placement of the lowest floor
or floodproofing by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the city manager a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation,
whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Such certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the registered land
surveyor or professional engineer. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, such certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the professional
engineer or architect. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's
risk. The city manager shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to
proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make such corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a
stop work order for the project.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-14)

Secs. 18-45—18-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION

Sec. 18-61. - Standards applicable to all areas of special ood hazard.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
(1)

Anchoring.
a.

New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure.

b.

Manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on the community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

(2)

Construction materials and methods.
a.

New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.

b.

New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.

c.

Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.

(3)

Utilities.

108/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters

b.

New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.

c.

On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.

(4)

Subdivision proposals.
a.

Subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

b.

Subdivision proposals shall have public utilities facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located
and constructed to minimize flood damage.

c.

Subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

d.

Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which
is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.

(5)

Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development shall not adversely affect the area of special
flood hazard. This determination is to be made in accordance with subsection 18-43(1)c.

(Code 1975, § 8.1-15)

Sec. 18-62. - Standards for areas of special ood hazard where base ood elevation data provided.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 18-44, the following
provisions are required:
(1)

Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure, including
manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.

(2)

Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure, including manufactured homes, shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection 18-44(b)(3).

(Code 1975, § 8.1-16)

Chapter 20 - LIBRARY

FOOTNOTE(S):
(18) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26.

Sec. 20-1. - Established.
Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. 153A-261 et seq., there is hereby established a free public library in the city to be known
as the Randleman Public Library.
(Code 1975, § 10-1)

Sec. 20-2. - Trustees—Number; quali cations; term; vacancies; compensation.
109/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

For the government of the library, there shall be a board of six trustees appointed by the board of aldermen, chosen from the
citizens at large with reference to their fitness for such office. Not more than one member of the board of aldermen shall be a member
of the library board of trustees at any one time, but this shall not be construed to mean that a member of the board of aldermen must
be a member of the library board of trustees. The terms of the initial trustees shall be staggered. Thereafter, the terms of the members
shall be six years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. All vacancies shall be immediately reported by the trustees to
the board of aldermen which shall fill each vacancy for the unexpired term. The board of aldermen may remove any trustee for
incapacity, unfitness, misconduct or for neglect of duty. Members of the library board of trustees shall serve without compensation.
(Code 1975, § 10-2)

Sec. 20-3. - Same—O cers generally; powers and duties.
The library board of trustees shall organize immediately after appointment and shall elect one of its members as chairman, one as
secretary and such other officers as it may deem necessary. The board of trustees shall have the following powers:
(1)

To adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the library as may be
necessary and in conformity with law.

(2)

With the consent of the board of aldermen, to lease and occupy, and to erect upon lands acquired by gifts, devise or
purchase, an appropriate building or buildings.

(3)

To supervise and care for the rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for library purposes.

(Code 1975, § 10-3)

Sec. 20-4. - Gifts, grants and other donations.
With the consent of the board of aldermen, expressed in each case by an appropriate resolution or ordinance, the library board of
trustees may accept any gift, grant, devise or bequest made or offered by any person for library purposes and may carry out the
conditions of such donations.
(Code 1975, § 10-4)

Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(19) Cross

reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 32.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BREACHES AGAINST PROPERTY

Sec. 22-31. - Climbing water towers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb up the steps or ladder leading to any water tank or tower of the city except the person
or persons in charge of the water tank or tower, or doing so under the direction of the proper city officials.
(Code 1975, § 13-1)

Sec. 22-32. - Municipal lakes; rules and regulations.
110/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(a)

The use of the municipal lakes for fishing and other purposes, the use of property abutting such lakes and the activity of pe
such lakes shall be governed by the rules and regulations promulgated from time to time by resolution by the board of alde
which shall, when passed, be placed on file with the city clerk and have the force and effect of an ordinance.

(b)

The rules and regulations of the board of aldermen governing the lakes and abutting property shall be displayed in the
boat house and other conspicuous places on the lakes and shall direct all persons to read such rules before using the
lakes and surrounding premises for any purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
such rules or regulations.

(Code 1975, § 13-9.1)

Sec. 22-33. - Closing hours of parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate, sit, stand or be on, or to otherwise appear on or be about the premises and
grounds of the public parks or recreational facilities of the city between 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., inclusive.
(Code 1975, § 13-10.1)

Sec. 22-34. - Smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles.
(a)

Smoking regulated in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar
or pipe in any building or facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied,
managed or controlled by the city, except in specially designated smoking areas. The city manager/board of aldermen
shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within each building or facility. An area within any building or facility
may be designated as a smoking area only if the ventilation of such area is sufficient, any adverse impact on municipal
employees and members of the public is minimal, and no fire or other safety hazard will be created by smoking in such
area.

(b)

Smoking regulated in municipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar or
pipe in any city vehicle unless the vehicle is individually assigned and only if all occupants consent.

(c)

Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00. Any violation subjects
the offender to a civil penalty of $500.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt in accordance with G.S. 14-4.

(Ord. No. 93-01, §§ 1—3, 10-5-1993)

Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 8.
Secs. 22-35—22-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - WEAPONS

Sec. 22-61. - Discharge of rearms prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm of any type within the corporate limits, except a peace officer in the
performance of his duty or except in the case of defense of persons or property or pursuant to lawful directions of a peace officer.
(Code 1975, § 13-4)

State law reference— Authority of city to regulate firearms, G.S. 160A-189.
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(20) Cross

reference— Building regulations, ch. 8; environment, ch. 14; utilities, ch. 34.

111/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 24-1. - De nitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:

Garbage means all refuse, animal, fruit and other vegetable matter, all tin cans, glassware and crockery in which any such matter
has been put up or stored, and all rags, waste paper, floor sweepings and other combustible refuse, except building material scraps and
tree trimmings.
(Code 1975, § 9-1)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 24-2—24-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL

Sec. 24-31. - Collection generally.
Garbage collection for the various customer groups in the city shall be as follows:
(1)

Residential customers. Residential customers shall have their garbage collected at the curbside by the city
sanitation department once a week (excluding holidays). A fee as set from time to time and contained in the
schedule of fees and charges on file in the city clerk's office shall be added to every water bill as a special garbage
collection fee. Any dwelling unit which has been lived in or has had the water turned on for any portion of the
previous two-month period shall be charged the fee.

(2)

Businesses (without dumpsters). Businesses which are not required to install dumpsters by the city shall have their
garbage picked up at least two times a week (excluding holidays) by the city sanitation department. A fee as set
from time to time and contained in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the city clerk's office shall be added
to every water bill as a special garbage collection fee.

(3)

Businesses (with dumpsters). Businesses which are required to install dumpsters by the city shall do so at their own
expense. The city shall pay up to the fee as set from time to time and contained in the schedule of fees and charges
on file in the city clerk's office for each eight-yard dumpster emptied (up to two times per week). In addition the city
shall pay a private hauler up to the fee as set from time to time and contained in the schedule of fees and charges
on file in the city clerk's office for each 40 yard dumpster which is emptied (up to two times per month). The
business shall pay all other costs associated with garbage disposal.

(4)

Apartments (without dumpsters). Apartments without dumpsters shall have their garbage collected once a week by
the city sanitation department. A fee as set from time to time and contained in the schedule of fees and charges on
file in the city clerk's office per dwelling unit will be added to the owner's water bill as a special garbage collection
fee. Tenants shall not be billed individually by the city, rather the realty company or apartment owner shall be
responsible for payment of all garbage collection fees.

(5)

Apartments (with dumpsters). Owners of apartment complexes with dumpsters are responsible for dumpster rental
or purchase. The city shall pay up to the fee as set from time to time and contained in the schedule of fees and
charges on file in the city clerk's office for each eight-yard dumpster emptied (up to two times per week). The realtor
or apartment complex owner will be responsible for all other costs associated with their garbage disposal. Tenants
shall not be billed individually by the city for garbage collection fees.

(6)

Industrial/manufacturers. Each industry or manufacturer in the city limits shall be responsible for their garbage
112/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

disposal.
(Code 1975, § 9-12.1)

Sec. 24-32. - Sanitation; brush policy.
The city shall pick up limbs and brush subject to the following conditions:
(1)

Limbs shall not be over six feet in length.

(2)

Average diameter of limbs shall not exceed six inches.

(3)

Limbs shall be neatly stacked beside the road with the "butt ends" facing the road.

(4)

The city will not pick up an unusual amount of brush per household per year (generally defined as the equivalent of
two trees per year) as determined by the city manager.

(5)

The city will not pick up limbs or brush left by professional developers or development companies.

(6)

In the event the city is required to pick up more than the allowable amount, the homeowner shall be charged to
cover the city's expense.

(Code 1975, § 9-13)

Chapter 26 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(21) Cross

reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or

public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such
improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 19(14); building regulations, ch. 8; house moving, § 10-131; environment, ch. 14; floods, ch. 18; library, ch. 20; subdivisions, ch. 28;
telecommunications, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 32; stop before entering a through street, § 32-10; traffic on sidewalks, § 32-12;
utilities, ch. 34; vehicles for hire, ch. 36; zoning, ch. 38; obstructions to vision at street intersections, § 38-16.
(21) State

Law reference— Authority of city to establish and control streets and sidewalks, G.S. 160A-296.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 26-1. - Penalties.
Any misdemeanor violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $500.00 fine plus restitution. Any violation of this chapter
subjects the offender to a civil penalty of $100.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
Sec. 26-2. - Damaging bridges and culverts.
No person shall injure or damage any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch, drain or other property belonging to or used by the city, or
place or cause to be placed any obstruction in any culvert, ditch, gutter, street, sidewalk or drain within the city so as to prevent the free
flow of water along and through the culvert, ditch, gutter, street, sidewalk or drain.
(Code 1975, § 17-5)

Sec. 26-3. - Lights, signs, etc.
No person shall injure, tamper with, remove or paint upon or deface any sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal, bulletin board or
any other city property upon the streets and sidewalks within the city, except employees of the city in the performance of their duties.
(Code 1975, § 17-6)

113/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 26-4. - Assemblies.
All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so as to obstruct any sidewalk or street, and all persons so
collecting and standing shall disperse and move upon the demand of any police officer.
(Code 1975, § 17-8)

Sec. 26-5. - Use for display and otherwise.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to store, pile, deposit, erect, keep or place, or cause, permit or suffer to be stored,
piled, deposited, erected, kept or placed upon any sidewalk or street in the city any rubbish, wood, coal, boxes, barrels,
stone, brick, lumber, dirt, merchandise, shipping case, stand, stall, booth or showcase or other obstruction of any kind,
except as provided in this section or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.

(b)

It shall be unlawful for any person to place or set out for exhibition any goods, wares or merchandise directly connected
with the business transacted by him on the sidewalk in front of a place of business, store or building owned, controlled
or occupied by him.

(c)

Any person erecting or repairing a building may, with permission from the city, place building materials for immediate
use on the streets, alley ways or sidewalks, if the building materials are placed in such a way as not to interfere with the
normal vehicular and pedestrian traffic.

(Code 1975, § 17-9)

Sec. 26-6. - Throwing, burning trash, etc.
No paper, straw, lemon peel, banana peel, watermelon rind or any trash of any kind shall be thrown or swept upon any sidewalk or
street of the city; nor shall any trash, refuse or rubbish be burned upon any sidewalk or street of the city.
(Code 1975, § 17-10)

Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 16.
Sec. 26-7. - Tree trimmings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any tree trimmings or shrubbery on any street or sidewalk of the
city.
(Code 1975, § 17-11)

Sec. 26-8. - Snow and ice removal.
Every occupant of a store building in front of which the sidewalk is paved with stone, brick, asphalt or cement shall remove snow,
ice or other obstructions from such sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as the weather permits.
(Code 1975, § 17-12)

Sec. 26-9. - Playing ball.
No person shall play ball or bat or catch ball on any of the streets or sidewalks of the city.
(Code 1975, § 17-14)

Sec. 26-10. - Use of skateboards, inline skates and similar toy vehicles prohibited in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, toy vehicle, coaster scooter, inline skates, rollerblades, or similar
device in the following areas within the city:
(1)

All sidewalks.
114/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(2)

All city streets.

(3)

All city parking lots.

(Ord. of 1-9-1990)

Secs. 26-11—26-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS

Sec. 26-31. - Excavation of streets—Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch or excavation of any kind whatsoever on any street, sidewalk or alley in the
city without first securing a permit therefor in writing from the city clerk.
(Code 1975, § 17-1)

Sec. 26-32. - Same—Repair to original condition.
It shall be the duty of every person who shall open or dig a ditch, trench or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of the city to
put such street, public alley or sidewalk in as good condition in all respects as it was before.
(Code 1975, § 17-2)

Sec. 26-33. - Same—Required safety measures.
It shall be unlawful for any person making any excavation for any purpose whatsoever in any of the streets, public alleys or
sidewalks of the city to fail to securely cover such excavation with planks or place ropes around the excavation three feet from the
ground or to fail to place a sufficient number of red lights, weather proof flares or pots around such excavation before dark and to keep
such lights burning all night every night such excavation shall be open.
(Code 1975, § 17-3)

Sec. 26-34. - Damage to streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, run, operate or cause to be dragged, run or operated any harrow or other implement,
engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other permanently paved street, alley or sidewalk of the city which
might in any way injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in a similar manner.
(Code 1975, § 17-4)

Sec. 26-35. - Blockades.
It shall be unlawful to tear down any poles, plank or other material erected as a blockade or barricade to close streets under
construction, or for other legitimate purposes. Nor shall anyone operate an automobile, truck or other vehicle upon any street that has
been blockaded or barricaded by the person in charge of building or repairing such street, proper law enforcement officers, or any
other authorized person.
(Code 1975, § 17-16)

Secs. 26-36—26-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STREET NUMBERING

115/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 26-61. - Required; duty of owner.
Each and every owner of a house or building within the corporate limits, or one which utilizes the city's water or sewer utilities, shall
at all times post the current official assigned street number conforming to the requirements of this article.
(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-22)

Sec. 26-62. - Assigned street numbers; responsibility.
The city shall be responsible for assigning each house or building an official street number. As conditions merit, such official street
number may be changed upon proper official notice to the property owner and public agencies.
(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-23)

Sec. 26-63. - Compliance with requirements.
(a)

Existing house or building. All existing houses or buildings shall comply with the requirements of this article.

(b)

New house or building. All new houses or buildings shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this article
immediately upon completion.

(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-24)

Sec. 26-64. - Standards; house and building numbers.
(a)

Material and color. All house numbers shall be constructed of a durable material. The color of the number shall contrast
with the color scheme of the house or building. If mounted on glass, the number shall contrast with the background and
be clearly visible.

(b)

Size. The standard minimum size of a street number for a typical residential or nonresidential house or building shall be
three inches in height. The standard minimum size of a street number for a larger residential or nonresidential house or
building such as an apartment, townhouse or condominium complex, or large commercial or industrial building or
complex shall be six inches in height. Minimum sizes larger than standard shall be required in any situation where the
standard size would not provide necessary identification deemed appropriate by the city.

(c)

Location. In typical situations where three inch standard size house building numbers are required, such street number
shall be included within a two square foot surface area located on the face of the house or building within a four-foot
perimeter of the front entrance. In typical situations where six inch standard size house or building numbers are
required, such number shall be located in the approximate center of the face of the building which fronts on the public
or private street providing primary vehicular access to the structure. In every situation the house or building number
shall be located so that it is clearly visible from the public or private street or parking lot which provides vehicular access
to the structure.

(d)

Number. Every house or building shall be posted with official assigned street number in at least one location in
conformance with this article. Additional posting of street numbers shall be required in the following situations:
(1)

All commercial or industrial buildings which have a rear or side door that is used for deliveries, public entry
purposes or as a required exit shall be posted with the official assigned street number at such door.

(2)

Any building or house which is located more than 75 feet from the public or private street which provides primary
vehicular access to the structure, or in any situation where the topography or landscaping of the lot is such that the
street number posted on the structure cannot be seen from the public or private street providing primary vehicular
access, shall also be posted with the official assigned street number located on a name plate sign at or near the
property line at a driveway or walkway to the structure.

(3)

In any situation where, in the opinion of the city manager, additional posting of street numbers is required to clearly
identify the location of a house or building.

(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-25)

116/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 26-65. - Posting on street curbing not acceptable.
In no situation does the posting of an official assigned street number on street curbing satisfy any of the requirements of this
article. Such posting of street numbers on street curbing is permitted as optional to the property owner. Where such street numbers
are posted they shall at all times be consistent with the current official assigned street number for the property.
(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-26)

Sec. 26-66. - Temporary posting during construction.
Immediately following the issuance of a building permit (building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing), and before the related work
is begun, the owner, contractor or agent of the owner shall post the official assigned street number at or adjacent to the entrance of the
property or job site at the public or private street providing primary vehicular access to the structure. The temporary number shall be of
sufficient size and posted in such a manner so as to be clearly visible from the street. Additional posting shall be required to suit the job
site conditions. Temporary posting of street numbers shall be maintained until the permanent official assigned street number
conforming with the requirements of this article are in place and are approved.
(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-27)

Sec. 26-67. - Violation; failure to post street number conforming to article.
Failure to post official assigned street numbers on any house or building in full compliance with the requirements of this article and
shall be deemed a violation of this Code and subject the offender to a civil penalty of $100.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
(Ord. of 9-3-1991, § 8-28)

Chapter 28 - SUBDIVISIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(22) Cross

reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-9(10); building regulations, ch.

8; environment, ch. 14; floods, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 38.
(22) State

Law reference— Subdivision regulations generally, G.S. 160A-371 et seq.

Sec. 28-1. - Provisions saved from repeal.
The 1977 subdivision ordinance and subsequent amendments are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a
revision of the subject matter by the city.
Chapter 30 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(23) Cross

reference— Businesses, ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 38.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 30-1. - Penalties.
Any misdemeanor violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $500.00 fine. Any violation of this chapter subjects the
offender to a civil penalty of $500.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.

117/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Secs. 30-2—30-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION

FOOTNOTE(S):
(24) State

Law reference— Authority of city to grant franchises to cable television companies and impose annual franchise tax, G.S.

160A-214, 160A-319.
Sec. 30-31. - Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Randleman Ordinance for Regulation of Cable Communications."
(Code 1975, § 5.1-1)

Sec. 30-32. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Access channels means those channels which, by the terms of this article or the franchise agreement, are required to be kept
available by the franchisee for partial or total dedication to public access, educational access or local government access.

Cable communication system, cable system, CATV or system mean a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and
equipment, used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via
cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission and distribution of voices, sound signals,
pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses,
whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air.

Franchise means both the franchise granted pursuant to this article and the franchise agreement, and all rights, powers and
privileges thereunder.

Franchise agreement means the separate agreement by which the franchise is granted to the franchisee, as required by this article.
Franchisee means any person having any rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities or obligations under this article and the
franchise agreement (herein collectively called the franchise), and any person having or claiming any title or interest in or to the system,
whether by reason of the franchise itself or any subcontract, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, security
agreement, management agreement or operating agreement, or otherwise arising or created.

Gross subscriber revenues means those revenues derived from the service charges, installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees
and fees for regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels, if any. The term
"gross subscriber revenues" does not include revenues derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel revenues,
advertising revenues or any other income derived from the system.

Pay TV means an arrangement under which a charge is made to a subscriber for receiving a particular television program or series
of programs.

Public agency means an agency which is supported wholly or substantially by public funds.
Subscriber means a person or organization whose premises are physically wired to receive any transmission from the system.
Subscriber service drop means the extension wiring from the franchisee's distribution lines to a subscriber's building.
User means a person utilizing a system channel as a producer, for purpose of production and/or transmission of material, or as a
subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material.
118/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Code 1975, § 5.1-2)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 30-33. - Franchise required.
No person shall own or operate a CATV system, or other system, in the city, except by franchise granted by the city, in the form of a
franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee, which shall comply with all of the specifications of this article.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-3)

Sec. 30-34. - Selection of franchisee.
(a)

In selecting a franchisee pursuant to this article, the city shall prepare a request for proposal to seek bids for a cable
communication system to be established under franchise by the city. This request for proposal will contain information
and instructions relating to the preparation and filing of proposals; conditions regarding the installation, operation and
maintenance of a CATV system under city franchise; and the criteria to be used in evaluating application proposals.

(b)

Applicants will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
(1)

Installation plan. Preference may be given to an installation plan that would provide flexibility needed to adjust to
new developments, maintenance practices and services that would be available to the subscriber and the
community immediately and in the future.

(2)

Rate schedule. Preference maybe given to applicants with the most reasonable installation and subscriber rate
schedule.

(3)

Financial soundness and capability. The evidence of financial ability required in the applicant's proposal shall be
such as to assure ability to complete the entire system within a minimum of two years of the date the franchisee
receives the Federal Communications Commission certificate of compliance.

(4)

Demonstrated experience in operating CATV system under city franchise. Preference may be given upon evidence
of the applicant's experience in operating a CATV system under city franchise, where such evidence would show or
tend to show or confirm the ability of the applicant to furnish sufficient and dependable service to the potential
public and private users.

(c)

The board of aldermen shall award a franchise to an applicant only after a public hearing on the applications and
proposal, notice of which hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the county, at
least 20 days before the date of the hearing.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-4)

Sec. 30-35. - Franchise fee.
(a)

During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the franchisee shall pay to the city, for the use of its
streets, public places and other facilities, as well as the maintenance, improvements and supervision thereof, an annual
franchise fee in an amount equal to three percent of the annual gross subscriber revenues received by it from operations
conducted within the city. This payment shall be in addition to any other tax or payment owed to the city by the
franchisee.

(b)

Sales tax or other taxes levied directly on a per-subscription basis and collected by the franchisee shall be deducted from
the gross subscriber revenues before computation of sums due the city is made. Payments due the city under the terms
of this article shall be computed quarterly, as of September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, for the preceding
quarter and shall be paid on or before the 30th calendar day from each such computation date at the office of the city
clerk during regular business hours. The city shall be furnished a statement with each payment, certified as correct by
the franchisee, reflecting the total amount of gross subscriber revenues and the above charges, deductions and
computations for the three month payment period covered by the payment. With the payment each year for the quarter
ending on December 31, a statement prepared by a certified public accountant shall be submitted, certifying that the
statements filed and payments made by the franchisee for the preceding year were correct.
119/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(c)

No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may
have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the performance of any other
obligation under this article.

(d)

Failure to pay any fees required by this section shall result in automatic suspension of the franchise granted, and
reinstatement thereof may be had only upon resolution by the board of aldermen as may be required by the resolution.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-5)

Sec. 30-36. - Term and renewal; termination and cancellation by city.
(a)

No franchise granted under this article, and no renewal thereof, shall be for a term of more than 15 years. A renewal may
be granted not more than two years prior to the expiration of any existing term.

(b)

In addition to all other rights and powers of the city by virtue of the franchise or this article, the city may terminate and
cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee thereunder in the event that the franchisee:
(1)

Substantially violates any provision of the franchise or this article or any rule, order or determination of the board
of aldermen made pursuant thereto, where such violation shall remain uncured for a period of 30 days subsequent
to receipt by the franchisee of written notice of such violation, except where such violation is not the fault of the
franchisee or is due to excusable neglect;

(2)

Attempts to dispose of any of the facilities or property of its CATV business to prevent the city from purchasing the
facilities or property, as provided for in this article; or

(3)

Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this article or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit
upon the city.

(c)

Such termination and cancellation shall be made by resolution of the board of aldermen duly adopted after 60 days'
notice to the franchisee and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under the franchise or any provisions of law;
provided, that before the franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this section, the franchisee shall be provided
with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before the board of aldermen, upon 30 days' written notice to the
franchisee of the time and place of the public hearing. Such notice shall affirmatively cite the reasons alleged to
constitute cause for revocation and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 20 days
before the date of the hearing.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-6)

Sec. 30-37. - Franchise provisions generally.
All franchises granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to, and shall expressly indicate that they are subject to, the following
provisions:
(1)

Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the right of the city, by resolution of its board of aldermen, to
revoke the franchise for cause shown, pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of section 30-36

(2)

Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable provisions of city codes and any amendments
thereto. Should the Federal Communications Commission modify the provisions of its rules and regulations relating
to federal-local regulatory relationships, the city shall then amend this article, within six months of the effective date
of the modification, to be in conformance with such modification.

(3)

Any franchise granted under this article shall be subject to the right of the city:
a.

To repeal the franchise for misuse, nonuse or the failure to comply with the provisions of this article, or any
other local, state or federal laws or Federal Communications Commission rules or regulations.

b.

To require proper and adequate extension of the plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest
practicable standard of efficiency. The city shall require extension of subscriber service to 50 percent of the
residents of the city within 12 months of the franchisee's receipt of the Federal Communications Commission
certificate of compliance, and the city shall further require extension of subscriber service to all residents of
the city within two years of the date of the franchisee's receipt of the Federal Communications Commission
120/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

certificate of compliance. Any area annexed by the city subsequent to the grant of a franchise shall be served
by the franchisee within one year from the effective date of annexation or within the initial two-year service
period specified above, whichever last occurs; provided, that in any annexed area where there are less than 40
residences per mile of proposed cable route, such period shall commence on the date such area or any part
thereof is developed to the extent that there exist at least 40 residences per mile of proposed cable route.
c.

To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and to prevent unjust discrimination in
service or rates.

d.

To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public, in accordance with the terms of the franchise,
throughout the entire period thereof.

e.

To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the board of aldermen to be conducive to the
safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.

f.

To control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and public places and the space above and
beneath them. Every franchisee shall pay such part of the cost of repair of streets, alleys, bridges and public
places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising
from such use. The franchisee may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and
appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and public places of the city by the city and other utilities, insofar
as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor; provided,
that in the absence of agreement, upon application by any franchisee, the board of aldermen shall provide for
arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which
award shall be final.

g.

Through its appropriately designated representatives, to inspect all construction or installation work
performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and this article, and to make such inspections as it shall
find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise, this article and other pertinent provisions
of law.

h.

At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted or upon the termination and cancellation as
provided therein, to require the franchisee to remove at its own expense any and all portions of the CATV
system from the public ways within the city.

i.

To require the franchisee to pay the costs of publication of this article; provided, that such publication is
required by law.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-7)

Sec. 30-38. - Franchise agreement.
(a)

The applicant awarded a franchise by resolution of the board of aldermen shall execute a franchise agreement, agreeing
to the terms and provisions of the franchise and request for proposal. In addition, the franchisee shall, within 30 days of
the date of execution of the franchise agreement, submit its filing of an application for a certificate of compliance with
the Federal Communications Commission. Failure of the selected applicant to execute such an agreement within 30 days
of the city's demand therefor, or failure to file an application for a certificate of compliance within the time required in
this article, shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any rights the applicant may have in the franchise.

(b)

In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this article to be included in the franchise agreement, it must contain
the express representations by the franchisee that:
(1)

It accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this article and any supplementary specifications as to construction,
operation or maintenance of the system which the city may include in the franchise agreement.

(2)

It has examined all of the provisions of this article and waives any claims that any provisions hereof are
unreasonable, arbitrary or void.

(3)

It recognizes the right of the city to make reasonable amendments to this article during the term of the franchise,
upon 60 days' prior notice to the franchisee or without notice with respect to emergency amendments. It further
121/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

recognizes and agrees that the city shall in no way be bound to renew the franchise at the end of any franchise
term.
(4)

It recognizes and agrees that it may be considered a licensee for the purposes of this article.

(c)

No franchise shall be exclusive.

(d)

Every franchise shall specifically delineate the territorial extent of the city in which the franchisee is authorized to
operate.

(e)

(f)

Every franchise shall specifically set forth standards which the franchisee must maintain in respect to the following:
(1)

Signal quality requirements; and

(2)

Technical standards of construction, operation and maintenance of the system.

The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be included in the request for
proposal or negotiated between the city and the franchisee; except, that no such conditions or provisions shall be such
as to conflict with any provisions of this article or other law. In case of such conflict or ambiguity between any terms or
provisions of the franchise agreement and this article, the words of this article shall control.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-8)

Sec. 30-39. - Breach of franchise to constitute violation of article; franchisee to reimburse city for cost of litigation.
(a)

A breach by the franchisee of the franchise agreement, in addition to constituting a breach of contract, shall constitute a
violation of this article.

(b)

The cost of any litigation incurred by the city to enforce this article or the franchise granted pursuant hereto, or the
franchise agreement, or in relation to the cancellation or termination of a franchise, shall be reimbursed to the city by
the franchisee. Such cost shall include filing fees, costs of depositions, discovery and expert witnesses, all other expenses
of the suit and a reasonable attorney's fee.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-9)

Sec. 30-40. - Number of channels.
The franchisee's distribution system shall initially be capable of carrying at least 20 channels of television breadth.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-10)

Sec. 30-41. - State of the art facilities, equipment and service required.
Each franchisee shall upgrade its facilities, equipment and service so that its system is as advanced as the current state of
production technology will allow. Each franchisee shall install additional channel capacity as required to keep channel capacity in excess
of the demand therefor by users. At all times, each cable system shall be no less advanced than any other system of comparable size,
excepting only systems which are experimental, pilot or demonstration. The board of aldermen shall order a franchisee to comply with
this section in case of specific violations, which it may investigate upon complaint or on its own motion.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-11)

Sec. 30-42. - Access channels and studio.
(a)

In conformance with Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations, certain of the franchisee' s channels
shall be dedicated as access channels, and charges for use thereof shall also be in conformance with Federal
Communications Commission rules and regulations.

(b)

The franchisee shall provide one access studio in the City of Asheboro or County of Randolph, which studio shall be
equipped to cablecast or videotape programs simultaneously for use in producing programs for access channels and
shall include appropriate equipment. Cost of maintenance of the studio and equipment shall be borne by the franchisee.

(c)

The franchisee is encouraged to employ a program and production consultant to promote public use of the access
channels and to advise such public users.
122/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Code 1975, § 5.1-12)

Sec. 30-43. - Public service installations.
The franchisee shall, without charge for installation, maintenance or service, make single installations of its standard community,
antenna service facilities at each fire and police station and public school located within the area in which such service facilities are
available. The franchisee shall, without charge for installation, maintenance or service, make single installations of its standard
community antenna service to the city hall and all public libraries. Such installations shall be made at such reasonable locations as shall
be requested by the respective units of government or educational institutions. Any charge for relocations at the same location may be
made at cost plus ten percent. No monthly service charges shall be made for distribution of the franchisee's signals within such publicly
owned buildings.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-13)

Sec. 30-44. - Restrictions concerning other business activities of franchisee.
Subject to the right of the board of aldermen to change this policy if it deems such change necessary, neither the franchisee under
this article nor any agency, subsidiary or allied corporation of the franchisee shall engage in the business of selling, repairing or
installing television receivers, radio receivers or accessories for such receivers within the city during the term of the franchise, and the
franchisee shall not allow any of its agencies, subsidiaries or allied corporations to so engage in any such business, except upon
application to and approval by the board of aldermen; provided, that nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the franchisee,
at the customer's request and without payment, from examining and adjusting a customer's receiver set to determine whether
reception difficulties originate in the set or in the franchisee' s system. The franchise granted pursuant to this article authorizes only the
operation of a system as provided for therein and does not take the place of any other franchise, license or permit which might be
required by law of the franchise.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-14)

Sec. 30-45. - Interconnections.
The franchisee shall, at the request of the board of aldermen, interconnect its cable system with all other contiguous cable systems,
and the franchisee may interconnect with any other system or service.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-15)

Sec. 30-46. - Construction standards and requirements.
(a)

All of the franchisee's plants and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, head-end and distribution
system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be
installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in
accordance with good engineering practices and performed by experienced pole line construction crews and so as to not
endanger or interfere with the safety of any person or property, or to interfere with improvements the city may deem
proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the right of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on city properties. Further, all such plant and equipment and all construction shall
meet all relevant specifications of the Federal Communications Commission, and other applicable federal, state and local
regulations.

(b)

Any opening or obstruction in or disturbance of the streets, public ways or other city properties made by the franchisee
in the exercise of its rights under a franchise agreement shall be done in compliance with city codes which regulate work
in the public ways of the city; except, that any bond requirements therein may be waived on cognizance of the bond
requirements of this article. Further, the city shall require the franchisee to install the cable system underground in the
city where other public utilities have been or will be installed underground.

(c)

The franchisee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other
public place or city property or remove from the street or other public place or city property any property of the
123/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

franchisee when required by the board of aldermen or its designee by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water
pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies.
(d)

The franchisee shall, on the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily
raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of moving the
building or structure shall be paid by the party requesting the moving of such building or structure.

(e)

Upon failure of the franchisee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this
article to be done in any street or other public place or city property, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of
the board of aldermen or its designee, the board of aldermen or its designee may, at its option, cause such work to be
done, and the franchisee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in itemized amounts, reported by the board of aldermen or
its designee to the franchisee, within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-16)

Sec. 30-47. - Payments to owners, etc., of multifamily units not to a ect subscriber rates and charges.
The subscriber rates and charges imposed by the franchisee with respect to service to multifamily units shall not be increased or
affected, either directly or indirectly, by reason of any payment which the franchisee may make to the owner of any multiple-family unit
or any other person for the privilege of installing service or access to such multifamily units.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-17)

Sec. 30-48. - Property damage by franchisee.
Any damage caused to the property of building owners or users or any other person by the franchisee's negligence shall be
repaired fully by the franchisee.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-18)

Sec. 30-49. - Removal of facilities and equipment upon termination of service and subscriber request.
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the franchisee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the
premises of such subscriber upon his written request.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-19)

Sec. 30-50. - Right of city to purchase system.
Upon expiration of the term of the franchise, or upon any other termination thereof, as provided for in this article or by law, or
upon receipt of an application for prior approval of acquisition or transfer as set forth in section 30-51, the city, at its election and upon
the payment to the franchise of a price equal to the fair market value of the system, shall have the right to purchase and take over the
system. The above price shall not include, and the franchisee shall not receive, anything for the valuation of goodwill or of any right or
privilege under the franchise. However, in determining fair market value, the salvage value, depreciated book value and replacement
cost of the system may be considered. Upon the exercise of this option by the city and its service of an official notice of such action
upon the franchisee, and upon payment of the purchase price, the franchisee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and title
to all facilities and property, real and personal, of the CATV business, free from any and all encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by
the city in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth in this section, and the franchisee shall execute such warranty deeds or
other instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary for this purpose. The franchisee shall make it a condition of each
contract entered into by it with reference to its operations under the franchise that the contract shall be subject to the exercise of this
option by the city and that the city shall have the right to succeed to all privileges and obligations thereof upon the exercise of such
option; provided, that the city shall have the right unilaterally to increase the purchase price provided for above, should it so elect, by an
ordinance amendatory thereto; however, such right, shall not be construed as giving the franchisee a right to any price in excess of that
set forth in this section.
124/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Code 1975, § 5.1-20)

Sec. 30-51. - General provisions concerning transactions a ecting ownership, facilities.
(a)

To protect the interests of the city under any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the franchisee shall not make,
execute or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales contract, loan, lease, pledge, pole
agreement or any other agreement concerning any of the facilities or property, real or personal, of the system, where
such transaction would be inimical to the rights of the city under any franchise granted pursuant to this article, if
consummated without adherence to the following provisions:
(1)

Without the express approval of the board of aldermen which shall not be unreasonably withheld; and

(2)

Without a written assent filed with the board of aldermen, binding upon the person in whom any right, power,
privilege, duty, title, interest, claim or demand in or to the franchise or the system is created or vested, to the effect
that such right, power, privilege, duty, title, interest, claim or demand is and shall be held and exercised subject to
all of the terms and provisions of the franchise, including this provision. The board of aldermen may require such
written assent to be contained in the instrument or document creating or vesting such right, power, privilege, duty,
title, interest, claim or demand; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to the disposition of wornout or
obsolete facilities or personal property in the normal course of carrying on the CATV business. The board of
aldermen may determine what transactions may be inimical to the rights of the city if consummated without
adherence to these provisions.

(b)

Prior approval of the board of alderman shall be required where ownership or control of 25 percent or more of such
right of control or interest, singularly or collectively, is involved.

(c)

No franchise granted hereunder may be transferred, unless such transaction is first approved by the board of aldermen,
by resolution, after a public hearing.

(d)

By its acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee specifically concedes and agrees that any acquisition or transfer as set
forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, without prior approval of the board of aldermen, as may be required, shall
constitute a violation of the franchise and this article by the franchisee.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-21)

Sec. 30-52. - Receivership, foreclosure, etc.
(a)

The franchise granted pursuant to this article shall, at the option of the board of aldermen or its designee, cease and
terminate 120 days after the appointment of receivers or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the
franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership
or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such 120 days, or unless:
(1)

Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all of
the terms and provisions of this article and the franchise granted pursuant, hereto, and the receivers or trustees,
within the 120 days, shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and

(2)

Such receivers or trustees shall, within 120 days, execute an agreement, duly approved by the court having
jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every
term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted pursuant to this article.

(b)

In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the franchisee, or any part
thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the board of aldermen or its designee may serve notice of termination
upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted and all rights and
privileges of the franchisee thereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless:
(1)

The board of aldermen shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner provided in this
article; and

(2)

Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by all of the terms
and conditions of the franchise.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-22)

125/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 30-53. - City's right of intervention in suits or proceedings involving franchisee.
The franchisee shall not oppose intervention by the city in any suit or proceeding to which the franchisee is a party.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-23)

Sec. 30-54. - Discriminatory or preferential practices prohibited.
(a)

The franchisee shall not, in its rates or charges, in making available the services or facilities or its system, in its rules and
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber to
the system, or to any user or potential user of the system, and shall not subject any such person to any prejudice or
disadvantage.

(b)

This section shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the system or other
legitimate uses thereof, nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification shall be entitled.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-24)

Sec. 30-55. - Open access to services.
The entire system of the franchisee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and equal accessibility
of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies or other entities having a
legitimate use for the system. No one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of use of such facilities shall be made
according to the rules or decisions of regulatory agencies affecting the use of such facilities, and where such rules or decisions are not
effective to resolve a dispute between conflicting users or potential users, the matter shall be submitted for resolution by the board of
aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-25)

Sec. 30-56. - Maintenance personnel and services.
(a)

The franchisee shall maintain a force of agents or employees at all times and shall have sufficient employees to provide
safe, adequate and prompt service of its facilities.

(b)

In addition, the franchisee shall maintain a convenient service in the city during normal business hours for the receipt of
sums due by its subscribers; shall provide for regular billing of accounts; and shall further maintain a maintenance
service which shall be promptly available to subscribers 24 hours a day, upon telephone request.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-26)

Sec. 30-57. - Emergency use of facilities.
The franchisee shall, in the case of any emergency or disaster, make its entire system available without charge to the city or to any
other governmental or civil defense agency that the city shall designate.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-27)

Sec. 30-58. - Submission of copies of lings and communications with regulatory agencies.
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the franchisee to the Federal Communications Commission,
Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to
any matters affecting CATV operations authorized pursuant to the franchise shall be submitted simultaneously to the board of
aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-28)

126/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 30-59. - Permits and authorizations.
The franchisee or applicant for a franchise shall diligently apply for all necessary permits and authorizations required in the conduct
of its business and shall diligently pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment contracts, necessary
authorizations from the Federal Aviation Agency to construct such receiving antenna towers as may be required and any necessary
authorizations or waivers from the Federal Communications Commission, and when any such permit, authorization, contract or waiver
is obtained, a copy thereof shall be promptly filed by the franchisee with the board of aldermen. After the franchisee has diligently
pursued the acquisition of necessary pole attachment contracts or other necessary easements, and where such necessary contracts
have not been entered or easements obtained after a reasonable period of time, the franchisee may submit the matter to the board of
aldermen, and the board of aldermen will thereupon provide assistance as may be necessary to arrive at a solution, so that the
scheduled construction of the system will not be impaired.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-29)

Sec. 30-60. - Reports, records, etc.
(a)

Each franchisee shall file with the board of aldermen annual reports of gross subscriber revenues, signed by a certified
public accountant and prepared in accordance with regulations of the board of aldermen. Each franchisee shall also
allow the board of aldermen to audit all of its accounting and financial records upon reasonable notice and make
available all of its plans, contracts and engineering, statistical, customer and service records relating to its system and all
other records required by this article or the franchise.

(b)

Each franchisee shall file annually with the board of aldermen an ownership report indicating all persons who, at any
time during the preceding year, did control or benefit from an interest in the franchise of one percent or more and all
creditors, secured and unsecured, in excess of $1,000.00.

(c)

Each franchisee shall also file annually with the board of aldermen copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions
which it has adopted for the conduct of its business.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-30)

Sec. 30-61. - Emergency alert system.
The system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system to allow authorized officials to automatically override the "audio"
signal on all channels and transmit and report emergency information. In the event of any such use by the city, the city will hold
harmless and indemnify the franchisee from any damages or penalties resulting from the use of this service.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-31)

Sec. 30-62. - Safety and nuisance prevention requirements.
The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and
devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-32)

Sec. 30-63. - Amendment of article or franchise to re ect new developments.
The board of aldermen may amend this article or the franchise whenever necessary to enable the franchisee to take advantage of
any developments in the field of transmission of communication signals which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively,
efficiently or economically serve its customers; provided, that this section shall not be construed to require the city to make any such
amendment.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-33)

Sec. 30-64. - Liability of franchise and indemni cation of city; bond and insurance requirements.

127/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(a)

Liability for damages, etc., and indemnification of city. The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city at all times
term of the franchise granted pursuant to this article and specifically agrees that it shall pay all damages and penalties whic
may be legally required to pay as a result of granting the franchise. Such damages and penalties shall include, but not be lim
damages arising out of copyright infringements and other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance
CATV system authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. In case suit shall be filed against the city, either independen
jointly with the franchisee, to recover for any claim or damages, the franchisee, upon notice to it by the city, shall defend the
against the action, and in the event of a final judgment being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with t
franchisee, solely by reason of the acts of the franchisee, the franchisee shall pay such judgment and all costs and hold the
harmless therefrom.

(b)

Performance bond. The franchisee shall, concurrently with its acceptance of the franchise, file with the city clerk, at the
franchisee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a responsible company licensed to do business in the state in the
amount as set from time to time by the board of aldermen and on file in the office of the city clerk, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the franchisee to have service to 50 percent of the residents of the city within 12 months of
receipt of the Federal Communications Commission certificate of compliance and to have service to all residents of the
city within two years thereof. Upon successful completion of service to 50 percent of the residents of the city within such
12-month period, and to all residents within the prescribed two-year period, such bond shall be cancelled.

(c)

Insurance.
(1)

The franchisee shall be required to maintain insurance in such forms and in such companies as shall be approved
by the city, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld, to protect the city and the franchisee from and against
any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction,
erection, operation or maintenance of any aspect of the system. The amount of such insurance shall be set from
time to time by the board of aldermen and is on file in the city clerk's office.

(2)

Workmen's compensation insurance shall also be provided, as required by the laws of the state.

(3)

All such insurance coverage shall provide a 30-day notice to the city clerk in the event of material alteration or
cancellation of any coverage afforded in such policies, prior to the date such material alteration or cancellation shall
become effective.

(4)

Copies of all policies required hereunder shall be furnished to and filed with the city clerk, prior to the
commencement of operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be.

(d)

Nonwaiver of responsibilities of franchisee. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bonds accepted by the city
pursuant thereto, nor any damage recovered by the city thereunder shall be construed to excuse unfaithful performance
by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under this article or the franchise for damages, either to the full
amount of the bond or otherwise.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-34)

Sec. 30-65. - Additional operational standards.
The technical standards for operation of the system shall, in addition to meeting the requirements specified in this article, conform
to all further requirements specified in the franchise agreement, which is to be in conformance with the request for proposal, and any
other standards or codes therefor as may be adopted by the board of aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-35)

Sec. 30-66. - General restrictions on charges.
The charges made to subscribers for services of the franchisee under this article shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than
necessary to meet all costs of the service (assuming efficient and economical management) and provide a fair return on the original
cost, less depreciation, of the properties devoted to such service, without regard to any subsequent sale or transfer price or cost of such
properties. The franchisee shall receive no consideration whatsoever from its subscribers for or in connection with its service to its
subscribers, other than in accordance with this article, without approval of the board of aldermen.
128/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Code 1975, § 5.1-36)

Sec. 30-67. - Authority to enforce rates and charges.
The board of aldermen shall have the power, authority and right to cause the franchise rates and charges to conform to the
provisions of section 30-66, and for this purpose, after a public hearing affording proper notice to the franchisee and any other
interested parties, it may deny increases or order reductions in such rates and charges when it determines that, in the absence of such
action on its part, the franchisee's rates and charges or proposed increased rates and charges will not conform to section 30-66.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-37)

Sec. 30-68. - Rate schedule generally.
An applicant for a franchise shall include in its proposal rates and charges according to the following schedule, which shall be
approved by the board of aldermen and shall not be increased without approval of the board of aldermen:
(1)

Standard rates and charges.
a.

b.

(2)

Charges for the following services must be specified:
1.

Initial tap-in and connection charges (television and/or radio, residential or commercial).

2.

Subsequent connection.

3.

Additional installation at same location, each.

4.

Each repositioning at same location ("relocation").

Monthly rates:
1.

First television or television/radio outlet, residential or commercial.

2.

Additional television or television/radio outlets, each.

Hotels, motels, rest homes and hospitals. Hotels, motels, rest homes and hospitals containing more than ten rental
units to which service is provided.

(3)

a.

Cost of installing service to building and units contained therein.

b.

Monthly rates.

Multiple dwelling units. Multiple dwelling units, contained within one structure or group of structures located in one
complex, where all service is billed to one customer.
a.

Cost of installing service to building and units contained therein.

b.

Monthly rates, per television outlet, according to the following schedule, based upon the number of dwelling
units served:
Up to 5
6 through 39
50 through 99
100 and over

(4)

Disconnection. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any of the aforementioned installments or
connections. If a subscriber has failed to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee 60 days after the due date of
such fee, the franchisee may cause disconnection of the subscriber's cable installation; however, upon payment in
full of the delinquent monthly subscriber's fee, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable
service, upon payment of a charge for reconnection from the subscriber to the franchisee.

(Code 1975, § 5.1-38)

Sec. 30-69. - Advance payments.
129/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The franchisee shall be permitted to require advance payment for installation fees and for one month's advance subscriber fee. The
franchisee shall require no other deposit, advance payment or penalty from any subscriber or potential subscriber without prior
approval of the board of aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-39)

Sec. 30-70. - Refunds.
If any subscriber terminates service because of the franchisee's failure to render service to such subscriber of a type and quality
and in the manner provided for in this article, or if the franchisee ceases to operate the system authorized in this article for any reason
except expiration of the franchise, the franchisee shall refund to such subscriber a portion of the initial connection charges which
corresponds to the fraction obtained by dividing the number of months of service received by the subscriber by 12.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-40)

Sec. 30-71. - E ect of future state or federal regulation of rates.
If, in the future, the state or the United States government, or any regulatory agency thereof, regulates the rates of the franchisee
for the service provided for in the franchise, this article shall be of no effect during such regulations, to the extent of any conflict
therewith.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-41)

Sec. 30-72. - Nonenforcement not estoppel.
The franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of the franchise by any failure of
the city to enforce prompt compliance.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-42)

Sec. 30-73. - Liability for violations.
All persons, including officers of the franchisee, causing, participating in or permitting any violation of any provision of this article
shall be severally or jointly liable therefor.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-43)

Sec. 30-74. - Franchisee to have no recourse against city.
The franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city or its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any
loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the franchise or because of its enforcement.
(Code 1975, § 5.1-44)

Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(25) Cross

reference— Junk vehicles, § 14-91 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public

places, ch. 26; vehicles for hire, ch. 36; obstructions to vision at street intersections, § 38-16.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 32-1. - Police o cer's authority in emergencies.

130/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct
traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-2)

State law reference— Authority of town to regulate traffic, G.S. 20-169, 160A-300.
Sec. 32-2. - Required; term; fee.
Every motor vehicle owned by a resident of the city and regularly operated within the city, and every motor vehicle owned by a
person not a resident of the city but regularly operated within the city, except motor vehicles temporarily operated for a period or
periods of time not exceeding a total of 30 days during any one year, and except motor vehicles operated for display or exhibition
purposes by manufacturers or dealers and displaying dealers' license plates issued by the state, shall be registered with the city clerk.
The period of registration shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. The fee for registration shall be as set from time to time
and contained in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the city clerk's office; except, that for all motor vehicles which become
subject to this section after July 1 of any year, the fee shall be as set from time to time by the general assembly.
(Code 1975, § 12-4)

State law reference— Authority of municipalities to impose an annual license tax on motor vehicles, G.S. 160A-213; limits upon tax
levied, G.S. 20-97.
Sec. 32-3. - Compliance with tra c-control devices; enforcement.
(a)

The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in
accordance with the traffic regulations of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions
granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter.

(b)

No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective
without signs being placed to give notice thereof.

(Code 1975, § 12-7)

Sec. 32-4. - No-turn signs and turning markers.
Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating that no right or left turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of any such sign, and when authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be travelled by vehicles traversing or turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indications.
(Code 1975, § 12-8)

State law reference— Power of city as to turning at intersections, G.S. 20-153.
Sec. 32-5. - Yield at intersection so marked.
When yield signs are placed, erected or installed at the entrance to any intersection of two streets, every driver of a vehicle
approaching such yield sign shall yield the right-of-way to traffic on the dominant or intersecting street and shall not enter such
intersection until he has ascertained that such movement may be made in safety and no conflict with traffic will be involved.
(Code 1975, § 12-10)

Sec. 32-6. - Quiet zone.

131/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within
any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle, except in an emergency.
(Code 1975, § 12-11)

Sec. 32-7. - School zones.
Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating any street or parts thereof as school zones, all drivers of
motor vehicles using such street, or parts thereof, shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon such streets or part thereof for the
protection of children.
(Code 1975, § 12-12)

Sec. 32-8. - Signal legends—Generally.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution," or "stop," or exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be used, and such terms and lights shall indicate the following:
(1)

Green alone or "go".
a.

Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.

b.
(2)

Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.

Yellow alone or "caution" when shown following the green or "go" signal.
a.

Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if
such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.

b.

Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any
pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.

(3)

Red alone or "stop."
a.

Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such
other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown
alone; provided, that any vehicle, after coming to a complete stop for a red light facing the vehicle, may make a
right turn after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles, as provided by G.S. 20-158.

b.

No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering
with any vehicular traffic.

(4)

Red with green arrow.
a.

Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection, only to continue the movement in the
direction indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic.

b.

No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering
with any vehicular traffic.

(Code 1975, § 12-13)

State law reference— Arrangement of traffic lights, G.S. 20-158, 20-169.
Sec. 32-9. - Same—Flashing signals.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1)

Flashing red—stop signal. When a red lens is illuminated by intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the right to proceed
132/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(2)

Flashing yellow—caution sign. When yellow lenses are illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may
proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.

(Code 1975, § 12-14)

Sec. 32-10. - Stop before entering a through street.
When stop signs are placed, erected or installed upon streets or highways intersecting a through street at the entrance thereto, or
at the entrance to any street intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to such signs before entering the intersection
and shall not proceed into, or across, the through street until he has first determined that no conflict with traffic will be involved.
(Code 1975, § 12-24)

Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26.
Sec. 32-11. - Stop when tra c obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(Code 1975, § 12-25)

Sec. 32-12. - On sidewalks.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Code 1975, § 12-27)

Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26.
Sec. 32-13. - Clinging to moving vehicles.
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or toy vehicle or himself to any public conveyance or any moving vehicle upon any such street or
roadway.
(Code 1975, § 12-28)

Sec. 32-14. - Limitations on backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle into any intersection, or over a crosswalk, and shall not in any event, or at any
place, back a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety, and he shall have given ample warning to those who maybe behind,
by hand and horn or other signal.
(Code 1975, § 12-31)

Sec. 32-15. - On roadways laned for tra c.
All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with lanes for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practicable
entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be
made with safety.
(Code 1975, § 12-32)

Sec. 32-16. - Number of persons in front seat.
133/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor vehicle to permit more than three persons (including driver)
to ride in the front or driver's seat of a motor vehicle.
(Code 1975, § 12-33)

State law reference— Overcrowding of vehicles, G.S. 20-140.2.
Sec. 32-17. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion.
(Code 1975, § 12-34)

Sec. 32-18. - Unlawful riding.
(a)

No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle or any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons
riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.

(b)

No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle without the consent of the owner or driver of
such vehicle.

(c)

No person when riding shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he is riding,
except to give such signals as may by law be required, and no person shall hang onto any vehicle whatsoever.

(Code 1975, § 12-35)

Sec. 32-19. - Leaving vehicle unattended.
Leaving any motor vehicle unattended with engine running on any street or highway of the city is prohibited subject to penalty
provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-45)

Sec. 32-20. - U-turns.
Making U-turns between or at street intersections is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-46)

Sec. 32-21. - Failure to obey stop signs.
Failure to stop in accordance with street stop signs is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-47)

Sec. 32-22. - Applicability of article.
The regulations in this article shall apply only to vehicles on the streets, highways and other public places of the city, and shall have
no application to any vehicle as long as it remains on private premises.
(Code 1975, § 12-48)

Secs. 32-23—32-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING

FOOTNOTE(S):
134/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(26) Cross

reference— Parking and loading, § 38-191.

(26) State

Law reference— Authority of city to regulate parking, G.S. 160A-301

Sec. 32-51. - No-parking zone and safety markers.
Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed indicating no parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the regulations in connection therewith.
(Code 1975, § 12-9)

Sec. 32-52. - Generally prohibition.
No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made
necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, ambulance or police car, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is given
the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the giving of traffic signals, the passing of some other vehicles, or a
pedestrian, or by some emergency; and in any case covered by these exceptions such vehicle shall not stop so as to obstruct any
footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection, if such obstruction can be reasonably avoided.
(Code 1975, § 12-15)

Sec. 32-53. - Prohibited in speci c places.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
(1)

On a sidewalk.

(2)

On a crosswalk.

(3)

Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street or roadway.

(4)

Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct
traffic.

(5)

Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass structure.

(6)

On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge or curb of a street.

(Code 1975, § 12-16)

Sec. 32-54. - Vehicles not to obstruct passage of other vehicles.
No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.
(Code 1975, § 12-17)

Sec. 32-55. - Parking prohibited in designated places.
When signs are placed, erected or installed, giving notice thereof, or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no
person shall park a vehicle at any time in disregard of any such sign or marking.
(Code 1975, § 12-18)

Sec. 32-56. - Parking to be parallel to curb generally.
When not otherwise indicated by this chapter and where the street is not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall
park parallel to the curb with neither front nor back wheel more than 12 inches from the curb.
(Code 1975, § 12-19)

135/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 32-57. - Parking within lines where provided.
On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for cars, any such car shall be parked within such lines.
(Code 1975, § 12-20)

Sec. 32-58. - Standing or parking vehicles for advertising.
No person shall stand or park any vehicle upon any street for the primary purpose of advertising.
(Code 1975, § 12-21)

Sec. 32-59. - Moving of vehicles by other operators into restricted areas prohibited.
No person shall move a vehicle, not owned or ordinarily operated by such person, into any prohibited area or away from a curb.
(Code 1975, § 12-22)

Sec. 32-60. - Unlawful parking.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street of the city for the principal purposes of:
(1)

Displaying such vehicle for sale.

(2)

Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(3)

Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use and
operation of such vehicle.

(4)

Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit has been disconnected, or for the purpose of
transferring merchandise, or freight, from one vehicle to another.

(Code 1975, § 12-23)

Sec. 32-61. - Two-hour parking in certain areas of city parking lot.
Parking shall be limited to two hours in the areas of the city parking lot as designated in the restricted parking schedule on file in
the city clerk's office.
(Code 1975, § 12-23.1)

Sec. 32-62. - Fifteen minute parking.
When the board of aldermen authorizes signs to be placed, erected or installed, giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer that 15 minutes upon any of the parking spaces within the area so designated.
(Ord. of 4-7-1992, § 12-23.2)

Sec. 32-63. - Moving of vehicle to evade parking requirements.
No person shall move a vehicle from one parking space directly to another parking space within the same city block to evade
parking regulations. The movement of a vehicle from one parking space directly to another parking space within the same block shall be
deemed as continuous parking period.
(Ord. of 4-7-1992, § 12-23.3)

Sec. 32-64. - Loading zone.
When the board of aldermen authorizes signs and/or markings to be erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in
a designated loading zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
136/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. O-4-5-94, § 12-23.4, 4-5-1994)

Sec. 32-65. - Unlawful parking—Overtime.
Overtime parking, that is, parking beyond the time limited by the street signs that have been or may hereafter be erected as
authorized and directed by the board of aldermen, is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-36)

Sec. 32-66. - Same—Incorrect.
In parking any motor vehicle the following limitations shall be observed and no such vehicle shall be otherwise parked: Every
vehicle in parking shall be parked parallel to the curb and with both front and rear wheels not more than 12 inches from the curb, and
parking lines shall be observed so that the vehicle shall not extend beyond the space marked for parking, or so as to occupy (in whole or
in part) more than one parking space. Parking contrary to this section shall be deemed incorrect parking and subject to penalty
provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-37)

Sec. 32-67. - Same—In nonparking zone.
Parking in a space marked or defined as a nonparking space is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-40)

Sec. 32-68. - Same—Driveways and alleys.
Parking so as to wholly or partly block entrance to a driveway or alley is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-41)

Sec. 32-69. - Same—Double.
Parking with another vehicle parked or with sufficient space for another vehicle to park, between the motor vehicle in question and
the curb, is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-42)

Sec. 32-70. - Obstructing tra c lanes.
Obstructing traffic by unnecessarily stopping vehicle in traffic lane is prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-43)

Sec. 32-71. - Obstructing sidewalks, etc.
Obstructing traffic by unnecessarily stopping vehicle across or on (in whole or in part) any sidewalk or crosswalk for pedestrians is
prohibited subject to penalty provided in this chapter.
(Code 1975, § 12-44)

Secs. 32-72—32-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BICYCLES

Sec. 32-101. - Riding bicycle or motorcycle with passengers on handlebars, tank, etc.
137/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The operator of any motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of any
such vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
(Code 1975, § 12-29)

State law reference— Operation of motorcycles, G.S. 20-146.1; overcrowded vehicles, G.S. 20-140.2.
Sec. 32-102. - Riding without hands on handlebars.
No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle upon any street of the city without having his hands upon the handlebars of such
vehicle.
(Code 1975, § 12-30)

Chapter 34 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(27)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; building regulations, ch. 8; businesses, ch. 10; environment, ch. 14; floods, ch. 18; solid

waste, ch. 24; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; subdivisions, ch. 28; telecommunications, ch. 30; utility substations,
transformer stations, telephone exchanges, and pump and lift stations, § 38-1.
(27)

State Law reference— Authority of city with regard to water and sewers, G.S. 160A-311 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 34-1. - Penalties.
Any misdemeanor violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $500.00 fine. Any violation of this chapter subjects the
offender to a civil penalty of $1,000.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
Sec. 34-2. - Board of aldermen to regulate.
The water and sewer system of the city shall be under the control of, and the duty of prescribing and enforcing a full compliance
with, all the rules and regulations governing all connections with the public water and sewer system shall be vested in the board of
aldermen or its authorized agent.
(Code 1975, § 20-1)

Sec. 34-3. - Maintenance of water connections.
The piping and connections beyond the meter or meter connections, including that within the meter box, shall be kept in repair by
the owner of the premises.
(Code 1975, § 20-2)

Sec. 34-4. - Separate connections.
Each consumer of water from the water system of the city, and each user of the sewer system, shall be required to have separate
connections and meters with the exception of building sewers which are controlled by the provisions of section 34-54; provided, that
upon application properly made in writing, exceptions to this section may from time to time be granted by the city manager as to
apartment houses, boardinghouses and business buildings housing or containing more than one consumer or user under the same
roof or in the same building.
(Code 1975, § 20-3)

138/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 34-5. - Unlawful connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the duly designated employees of the city to connect any premises with the water or
sewer systems of the city.
(Code 1975, § 20-4)

Sec. 34-6. - Permits for water connections.
No person shall connect, or attempt to connect, any premises with the water system of the city until a permit has been issued in
accordance with the following procedure: An application must be made in writing by the person to be charged with the responsibility for
the subsequent use of the premises, upon blanks to be furnished by the city, such application to be filed with the official in charge of
the city hall, or with such other official as subsequently may be designated by the board of aldermen, and no such application shall be
filed or accepted until the required tapping or connection fees have been tendered and paid. After each such application is made, the
premises and the proposed use thereof, and structures thereon or proposed to be constructed or placed thereon, shall be examined
and inspected by the city plumbing inspector, who shall report in writing his findings to the official in charge of the city hall or to such
other official as subsequently may be designated by the board of aldermen. If such official shall determine that the proposed
connection is not in violation of any ordinance of the city or any zoning or other regulation adopted for the health, welfare, protection
and general good of the residents of the city or provisions of this Code, a written permit for such connection may be issued; but if such
proposed connection is in violation of any ordinance of the city, or is in violation of any zoning or other regulation, or if the official is in
doubt as to whether such proposed connection is in violation of any ordinance, zoning or other regulation or provision of this Code,
then no such permit shall be issued, and the matter shall be submitted to the board of aldermen, or such other board or committee as
may now or in the future be charged with the responsibility of making decisions pertaining to such matter, which shall consider the
matter at its next regular meeting and render within a reasonable time its decision as to whether or not a permit shall be issued for the
proposed connection. The connection between the water main and the meter within the curb line, including the meter installation, shall
be made only by the city, with the costs of such work, including all materials and meters, to be paid for by the applicant for such
connection. If any of the provisions of this section, or any other ordinance of the city is violated, the city shall have the right to sever or
disconnect the premises from the water service until such violation is corrected, and the owner of the premises shall be charged with
the normal disconnect and reconnect charges.
(Code 1975, § 20-5)

Sec. 34-7. - Injury to systems.
It shall be unlawful for any person to touch, tamper with, manipulate, deface or injure any house, reservoir, valve cock, wheel,
fireplug or other fixture connected with or pertaining to the water system or the sewer system, or to place any building material,
rubbish or other matter or substance on any valve, stop cock, meter box, water main or service pipe or to obstruct access to any fixture
connected with the water system or the sewer system, except when due authority has been given therefor by the city. No person shall
throw or deposit, or allow to be thrown or deposited any material or substance into any water or sewer line that may in any manner
obstructor damage such line.
(Code 1975, § 20-6)

Sec. 34-8. - Water and sewer service outside corporate limits.
All applications for connection with the water system or the sewer system for property situated outside of the corporate limits of
the city shall be made upon blanks provided by the city. All information required by the blanks shall be furnished. The applicant shall
agree in such application to be governed by all regulations made by the board of aldermen for the control, maintenance and protection
of its water system and sewer system in force at the time such application is submitted. Every permit issued for water or sewer
connections outside of the city limits shall provide that all risks shall be assumed by the applicant and the owners of the property and
the city shall not be responsible for any damage or injury to persons or property by reason of the water or sewer system, its
construction, maintenance or repairs; that the city shall not be liable to anyone for failure to supply water or for the character thereof;
139/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

that the water system or sewer system together with the fixtures, equipment, easements, rights and privileges pertaining thereto shall
become the property of the city whenever the territory in which such system is located shall be incorporated within the city limits, and if
the whole of such system shall not be within the territory so incorporated, then so much thereof shall become the property of the city
as lies within the territory; that the city reserves the right to discontinue the service to such system or to any connection therewith at
any time within its discretion.
(Code 1975, § 20-7)

Sec. 34-9. - Water rates.
Water rates and charges for water connections shall be determined from time to time by the board of aldermen and shall be kept
on file in the city hall. Charges for connections and rates for customers outside the city limits may be more than those inside the city
limits. Statements for water charges shall be issued at such periods of time as the board of aldermen may from time to time determine.
The policy on disconnections for failure to pay water charges, and the amount, if any, to be charged for making reconnections, shall be
such as is determined by the board of aldermen from time to time.
(Code 1975, § 20-8)

Sec. 34-10. - Required deposits.
The following deposits are to be required from certain water and sewer customers:
(1)

From all nonowner accounts, whether residential, business, manufacturing or other, a deposit is required as set
from time to time and on file in the city clerk's office. The estimated average monthly consumption, including sewer
charges, is to be arrived at as nearly as possible by officials of the water department and the consumer, but any
decision of the water department officials shall be final.

(2)

The unused portion of any such deposit shall be refunded to the person or persons or corporation entitled to the
refund upon the closing out of the account, and after all water and sewer charges of the particular account have
been paid.

(3)

Deposits required from consumers outside the city limits shall be based on the usual outside charges for water
consumption.

(Code 1975, § 20-9)

Sec. 34-11. - Work on water and sewer systems.
All work on the water and sewer systems, including all repairs and all connections or disconnections thereto, shall be performed by
the authorized employees of the city or plumbers or contractors approved by the city.
(Code 1975, § 20-12)

Secs. 34-12—34-31. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 34-32. - Scope, objectives, applicability and administration.
(a)

This article sets forth uniform requirements for discharges to the POTW and enables the local government to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws and pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are to:
(1)

Prevent discharges to the POTW which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting
140/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

sludge;
(2)

Prevent discharges to the POTW which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or
the atmosphere;

(b)

(3)

Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and

(4)

Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the wastewater disposal system.

This article provides for the regulation of discharges to the POTW through the issuance of permits and enforcement of
general requirements, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of expenditures. This article shall apply to the city and to persons who are, by contract or
agreement with the local government, users of the POTW. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the
superintendent shall administer the provisions of this article.

(Code 1975, § 20-13)

Sec. 34-33. - Legislative authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by G.S. ch. 160A.
(Code 1975, § 20-14)

Sec. 34-34. - De nitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:

Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended.
Authorized representative of industrial user means:
(1)

A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation;

(2)

A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or

(3)

A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates.

Billable biochemical oxygen demand means the discharge in pounds of BOD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of
BOD in the wastewater in excess of 250 mg/l.

Billable chemical oxygen demand means the discharge in pounds of COD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of
COD in the wastewater in excess of 750 mg/l.

Billable flow means recorded water usage as determined by the appropriate water utility, plus measured water from wells and
other sources, and less any sewer-exempt measured water, times the local government approved percentage factor for wastewater
entering the wastewater disposal system. Alternatively, industrial users may have their billable flow determined by continuously
measuring their discharge in a manner approved by the local government. Residential users on unmetered wells shall have their billable
flow estimated by averaging the billable flow of all other residential users.

Billable total Kjeldahl nitrogen means the discharge in pounds of TKN calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TKN in
the wastewater in excess of 40 mg/l.

Billable total suspended solids means the discharge in pounds of TSS calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in
the wastewater in excess of 250 mg/l.

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius.

141/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives wastewater only and is located
inside the walls of a building and conveys the wastewater to the building sewer, which begins five feet outside the building wall.

Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the sanitary sewer or other discharge location.
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the total amount of oxygen required to oxidize the organic matter in a waste as described
in standard methods.

Compatible pollutant means BOD, TSS, pH and fecal coliform bacteria plus any additional pollutants identified in the POTW NPDES
permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the
NPDES permit.

Cooling water means the water used for air conditioning, refrigeration or other cooling applications.
Direct discharge means the discharge of wastewater directly to the waters of the state.
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater.
Garbage means the animal or vegetable wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce.

Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and
vacuum pump tank trucks.

Incompatible pollutants means all pollutants other than compatible pollutants.
Indirect discharge means the discharge of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act
(33 USC 1317) to the POTW.

Infiltration means the extraneous groundwater entering the wastewater disposal system through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.

Inflow means the surface water entering the wastewater disposal system from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders;
cellar, yard and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole
covers; cross connections from storm sewers and/or combined sewers; catch basins; stormwaters; surface runoff; street wash waters;
or drainage.

Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of
any requirements of the POTW's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
POTW.

Local government means the city, acting through its mayor and board of aldermen.
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users.

National pollutant discharge elimination system permit means a permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination
system for discharge to the navigable waters of the United States.

Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other surface water or groundwater.

142/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

New source means any wastewater source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations
prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter
promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal,
a "new source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.

Operation and maintenance costs means all costs, direct and indirect, not including debt service and capital related expenditures,
but inclusive of expenditures attributable to administration, monitoring, inspections, reviewing applications, maintenance of equipment
and treatment and collection of wastewaters, necessary to assure adequate wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis
which conforms to applicable regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management.

pH means the term used to express the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution as determined by standard methods.
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging such pollutants to the POTW. The reduction
or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes of other means, except as prohibited by
40 CFR 403.6(d).

Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.

Private sewer means a sewer which is not owned by the city.
Public sewer means a sewer which is owned and controlled by the city and is separate from and does not include sewers owned by
other governmental units.

Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is
owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.

Qualified laboratory means a laboratory currently certified by the state to perform wastewater analyses.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries wastewater.
Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the POTW who (i) is subject to pretreatment standards; (ii) discharges more
than 50,000 gallons per day to the POTW; (iii) discharges more than five percent of any design capacity of the POTW; or (iv) is found by
the local government, DEM or the EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on
the wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, the receiving stream or air emissions generated by
the system.

Slug means any discharge of wastewater which exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation or which causes interference.

Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.

Standard methods means the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association
and Water Pollution Control Federation, or any other procedures recognized by the DEM and EPA.

Storm sewer means a sewer that carries only stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash and drainage, and to which wastewater is
not intentionally admitted.

Superintendent means the authorized representative of the city.

143/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the sum of organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen content of a wastewater, as determined by
standard methods.

Total suspended solids (TSS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension with water,
wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration as described in standard methods.

Toxic substances means any substances, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which, when discharged to the POTW in sufficient
quantities, may tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process or to constitute a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters
of the effluent from the POTW. These substances include, but are not limited to, those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
EPA under the provisions of the Clean Water Act 307(a) or other acts.

Unpolluted water means water of sufficient quality that it would not be in violation of federal or state water quality standards if
such water were discharged to waters of the state.

User means any person who discharges, or causes or permits the discharge of, wastewater to the POTW.
User charge system means the system of charges levied on users for the cost of operation and maintenance of the wastewater
disposal system.

Wastewater means the combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions, including polluted cooling water, holding tank waste and infiltration/inflow.
(1)

Sanitary wastewater. The combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary
plumbing facilities.

(2)

Industrial wastewater. A combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from any industrial
establishment and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment, including the wastes from
pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.

Wastewater disposal system means the structures, equipment and processes owned and controlled by the city (unless specified
otherwise) required to collect, transport and treat wastewater and to dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.

Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(Code 1975, § 20-15)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 34-35. - Abbreviations.
For the purposes of this article, the following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
CWA — Clean Water Act.
DEM — Division of environmental management, department of natural resources and community development of the state.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
144/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act.
TKN — Total Kjeldahl nitrogen.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
USC — United States Code.
(Code 1975, § 20-16)

Secs. 34-36—34-51. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - USE REGULATIONS GENERALLY

Sec. 34-52. - Unlawful waste or wastewater disposal generally; public sewer connections required.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property in areas under the jurisdiction of the local government any human or animal excrement, garbage or
objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet in areas under the jurisdiction of the local
government any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this article and with regulations of the DEM. Except as provided in this article, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater.

(b)

The owner of each house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes,
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required, at the expense
of the owner, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this article, within 120 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that such
public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line.

(Code 1975, § 20-17)

Sec. 34-53. - Private wastewater disposal systems.
(a)

Where a sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of this article. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain written approval by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the local government, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
and other information as deemed necessary by the superintendent. Approval for a private wastewater disposal system
shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The
superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. The type, capacities, location and layout
of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the county health department and the
DEM. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to a natural outlet. The owner shall operate and maintain the private
wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the local government.

(b)

At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system,
a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 120 days. Under unusual or special circumstances, the local
government may waive this provision.

(Code 1975, § 20-18)

145/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 34-54. - Building sewers and connections.
(a)

No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer
or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written approval from the superintendent. All costs and expenses
incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the local government from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer; provided, that such indemnification shall not extend to loss or damage due solely to
willful misconduct or negligence on the part of the local government. Excluding industrial plant sites or other sites which
have written approval from the superintendent for single discharge points, a separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or
driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer;
however, the local government does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and testing by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. Existing
building sewers may be kept in service if, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are in acceptable structural condition
and operate satisfactorily. All new building sewers, including any necessary replacement of existing building sewers,
must comply with the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing.

(b)

No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of
infiltration/inflow to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.

(c)

It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to keep and maintain the building sewer connected to the public
sewer in good repair. The owner shall be responsible for making necessary repairs, at his own expense, to the building
sewer within five days after receiving written notification by the local government that such repairs are necessary.

(d)

Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable oil in excessive amounts, sand or other harmful ingredients;
except, that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be
of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his
expense in continuously efficient operation at all times. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the state, the county or the superintendent.
Any removal and hauling of collected materials must be performed according to applicable state, federal and local
regulations.

(Code 1975, § 20-19)

Sec. 34-55. - Prohibited discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW.
These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to pretreatment standards or any
other federal, state or local regulations. A user shall not discharge the following substances to the POTW:
(1)

Unpolluted waters such as infiltration/inflow to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by
the superintendent and DEM. Unpolluted cooling water or process waters may be discharged on approval of the
superintendent and DEM to a storm sewer or natural outlet.

(2)

Liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by
interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the
operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
146/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

discharge into the system, or at any point in the system, be more than five percent or any single reading over ten
percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. Materials specifically prohibited from discharge into the POTW
include gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil and any other substance which the local government, the state or the
EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
(3)

Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the
operation of the POTW, such as, but not limited to, floatable oil, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in
any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.

(4)

Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the POTW.

(5)

Wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, which
will cause interference, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of
the POTW.

(6)

Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient
to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance
and repair.

(7)

Wastewater, liquid or vapors having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.

(8)

Wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits
established by applicable federal or state regulations.

(9)

Wastewater which constitutes a slug as defined in this article.

(Code 1975, § 20-20)

Sec. 34-56. - E ect of promulgation of pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of pretreatment standards for an industrial subcategory, each pretreatment standard, if more stringent
than the corresponding limitation imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this article. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under
40 CFR 403.12.
(Code 1975, § 20-21)

Sec. 34-57. - Speci c pollutant limitations.
When 66 percent or more of the sample measurements taken during a period of six months exceed any parameter limitation
(except flow and pH) in this section or a discharge permit, whichever is applicable, the user shall be in significant violation. When 33
percent or more of the sample measurements taken during a period of six months exceed (i) the limitation for BOD, TSS or oil and
grease by more than 40 percent, or (ii) the limitation for any other parameter (except flow and pH) by more than 20 percent, the user
shall be in significant violation. The following specific pollutant limitations shall apply:
Cadmium .....0.15 mg/l
Copper .....1.0 mg/l.
Lead .....0.8 mg/l
Nickel .....0.4 mg/l
Total chromium .....1.2 mg/l

147/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Zinc .....2.5 mg/l
BOD .....250 mg/l
TSS .....250 mg/l
(Code 1975, § 20-22)

Sec. 34-58. - Applicability of state requirements and limitations.
State requirements and limitations shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than pretreatment requirements and
standards or limitations in this article.
(Code 1975, § 20-23)

Sec. 34-59. - Dilution prohibited as substitute for adequate treatment.
No user shall deliberately increase the use of process water or, in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the pretreatment standards or other
limitations developed by the local government or state.
(Code 1975, § 20-24)

Sec. 34-60. - Accidental discharges.
Users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the expense of the owner.
Detailed plans, showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection, shall be submitted to the superintendent for
review and shall be approved by the local government before construction of the facility. No person who commences discharge to the
POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to discharge until accidental
discharge procedures have been approved by the local government. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the superintendent of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental
discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report, describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater disposal system, fish kills or any other damage to person
or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article
or other applicable law.
(Code 1975, § 20-25)

Secs. 34-61—34-76. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGES

Sec. 34-77. - Permit—Required; application; issuance.
(a)

Any person desiring to discharge industrial wastewater shall complete an official application and file it with the local
government. Approval shall be evidenced by written notice from the superintendent.

(b)

The person shall provide all data required by the current official application, copies of which shall be obtained from the
superintendent. The superintendent will evaluate the data and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data provided, the superintendent may grant permission to discharge, subject to the terms and
148/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

conditions provided in this article. The superintendent may issue a permit with specific limitations different from those
listed in section 34-57, if he determines that the discharge will otherwise comply with the remaining provisions of this
article. Significant industrial users which, through changes in the use of the premises or water usage, cause a significant
change in wastewater volume, strength or characteristics shall be required to file a new application prior to making the
change or alteration.
(Code 1975, § 20-26)

Sec. 34-78. - Same—Modi cation, etc., upon promulgation of applicable pretreatment standards.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permits of users subject to such
standard shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user
subject to a pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for a permit, the user shall apply for a permit within 180
days after the promulgation of the pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing permit shall submit to the local
government, within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable pretreatment standard, information regarding the nature and
concentration of the regulated pollutant and a schedule for providing additional pretreatment, if necessary.
(Code 1975, § 20-27)

Sec. 34-79. - Control structure.
When required by the local government, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastewater shall
build a control structure in the building sewer from his premises, just prior to the entrance of the building sewer into the public sewer,
suitable for sampling and measuring his wastewater. Plans for this structure shall be approved by the local government. There shall be
ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate flow measurement, sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility and the sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the owner.
(Code 1975, § 20-28)

Sec. 34-80. - Notice of interruption of operation, process change, etc.
Notice by the user shall be given to the superintendent in advance or at the earliest possible time when normal operations of the
industry will be interrupted for 48 hours or longer, when wastewater will not be discharged or prior to implementation of a process
change which will alter demands on the POTW.
(Code 1975, § 20-29)

Sec. 34-81. - User records.
Users shall maintain and retain for three years all plant records as specified by the local government and afford the local
government access thereto. These records include, but are not limited to, wastewater self-monitoring records, records related to
compliance with pretreatment standards and other state and EPA required records.
(Code 1975, § 20-30)

Sec. 34-82. - Con dentiality of information and data.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, discharge applications and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the local government that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing the
report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public. It will, however, be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES
permit or the pretreatment program. The information shall be available for use by the state in judicial review or enforcement
149/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

proceedings involving the person furnishing the information. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be recognized as
confidential information. Information accepted as confidential shall not be given to any governmental agency until and unless a ten-day
notification is given to the user.
(Code 1975, § 20-31)

Sec. 34-83. - Pretreatment and pretreatment facilities generally.
Users shall provide pretreatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment
standards within the specified time limitations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be constructed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the owner. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the superintendent. Submittal of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the local government under the provisions of
this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the local government
prior to the initiation of the changes.
(Code 1975, § 20-32)

Sec. 34-84. - Special provisions concerning discharges by contractors.
Any person engaging in the activities permitted by this section shall be referred to as a "contractor." Contractors (who have been
permitted by the county health department) shall be permitted to discharge holding tank waste at the designated structure located at
the wastewater treatment plant. This discharge is subject to the following limitations and conditions:
(1)

The contractor shall empty all wastewater only at the designated structure at the wastewater treatment plant and
shall keep this area maintained and clean.

(2)

The contractor shall provide accurate and complete information as to the origin of the wastewater.

(3)

Discharge of any wastewater other than from residential septic tanks is forbidden without special permission from
the local government and shall be permitted only after laboratory analyses of the waste. The cost of the laboratory
analyses shall be paid by the contractor.

(4)

Spot checks shall be made at the discretion of the superintendent and laboratory analyses performed. Should any
wastewater be found in violation of this article the following penalties shall be assessed the contractor: First
offense, $500.00 misdemeanor fine or a $1,000.00 civil penalty; second offense, permission to discharge to the
POTW to be revoked.

(Code 1975, § 20-33)

Secs. 34-85—34-101. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - SAMPLING AND MONITORING

Sec. 34-102. - Right of entry of local government personnel.
Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of this article, and upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, local
government personnel shall be permitted to enter upon any property of users for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling or testing in the area of the control structure. Any user completing and filing an application to discharge
wastewater shall thereby grant the local government permission to enter his premises for such purposes. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into his premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with his security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, local government personnel shall
be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(Code 1975, § 20-34)

150/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 34-103. - Compliance determination; annual publication of list of signi cant violators; "signi cant violation" de ned.
(a)

Compliance determinations with respect to the prohibitions and limitations contained in this article shall be made on the
basis of composite and discrete samples of wastewater. Composite samples maybe taken over a 24-hour period or over
a different time span, as determined necessary by the superintendent to meet the needs of specific circumstances.

(b)

The local government shall annually provide public notification, in the largest local daily newspaper, of industrial users
which, during the previous 12 months, were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards and state and local
limitations or requirements. A "significant violation" is a violation:
(1)

As defined in section 34-57

(2)

Of section 34-55 or section 34-59

(3)

Which involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance (in reference to self-monitoring);

(4)

Of compliance schedule milestones (contained in a discharge permit or enforcement order) for starting
construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance, by 90 days or more after the scheduled date;

(5)

Which involves a failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring
reports, 90-day compliance reports and periodic compliance reports, within 30 days of the due date; or

(6)

Which results in the revocation of permission to discharge to the wastewater disposal system.

(Code 1975, § 20-35)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 34-104. - Standards for measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics or properties of wastewater to which reference is made in this article
shall be made in accordance with standard methods and shall be performed by a qualified laboratory.
(Code 1975, § 20-36)

Sec. 34-105. - Sampling frequency.
Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to the prohibitions and limitations
contained in this article shall be done at such intervals as the superintendent may designate. However, it is the intention of the local
government to conduct compliance sampling or to cause such sampling to be conducted for all significant industrial users at least twice
in every one-year period.
(Code 1975, § 20-37)

Secs. 34-106—34-121. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT

Sec. 34-122. - Revocation of discharge permission—Generally.
The local government may order that a permission to discharge be revoked upon finding that the discharger has violated a permit
condition or a provision of this article. A user whose permission to discharge has been revoked shall immediately stop all discharges.
The local government may disconnect or permanently block from the wastewater disposal system the private sewer of any discharger
whose permission to discharge has been revoked, if such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order of revocation. A user
whose permission to discharge has been revoked may apply for a new permission to discharge and shall pay all delinquent fees,
charges, penalties and such other sums as maybe due to the local government. Costs incurred to revoke the prior permission to
discharge and disconnecting the private sewer shall be paid for by the discharger before new permission to discharge shall be granted.

151/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Code 1975, § 20-39)

Sec. 34-123. - Same—Grounds.
The following conditions or any violation by a user of applicable state and federal regulations shall subject such user to having his
permission to discharge revoked in accordance with the procedures in section 34-122:
(1)

Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;

(2)

Failure of a user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents or characteristics;

(3)

Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or

(4)

Violation of a permit condition or of sections 34-55, 34-57, 34-59 or 34-60

(Code 1975, § 20-40)

Secs. 34-124—34-141. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - FEES AND CHARGES

Sec. 34-142. - Generally.
Fees shall be assessed to users for discharges to the POTW and for executing or enforcing the provisions of this article. These
charges shall be developed by the superintendent and approved by the local government no less frequently than biennially in
accordance with the user charge system and other ordinances and policies of the local government and applicable statutes of the state.
Charges shall be developed for the following purposes:
(1)

Industrial monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.

(2)

Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.

(3)

Reviewing permit applications.

(4)

Reviewing appeals.

(5)

Special industrial discharges.

(6)

Recovering capital related expenditures.

(7)

Other charges, including user charges based on billable flow and excessive pollutant discharges to the POTW,
necessary to recover the operation and maintenance costs of the wastewater disposal system. Charges for items in
subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section shall be based on the actual cost to the local government for each
specific user or incident. However, a fixed rate maybe proposed by the superintendent, subject to local government
approval, for those procedures that are repetitive and do not differ substantially within each class of users. Charges
for items in subsections (a)(5) through (7) of this section shall be developed and assessed in accordance with the
user charge system. The local government may, under applicable state statutes and local government ordinances,
levy ad valorem taxes for general obligation bond principal and interest payments, and any other purpose provided
by law, nor related to the operation and maintenance costs of the wastewater disposal system. The charges and
fees developed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be presented to the local government for
approval in the form of a sewer rate ordinance.

(Code 1975, § 20-41)

Secs. 34-143—34-161. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - WATER USE

152/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 34-162. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of official phases of water supply shortage situations and the
implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the city in the event a shortage is declared.
(Ord. No. O-11-98, § 1, 11-3-1998)

Sec. 34-163. - Declaration of mandatory conservation.
Whenever the board of aldermen finds raw water supplies (i.e., streamflow, reservoir levels or groundwater levels) to be
consistently below seasonal averages, and if they continue to decline and may not be adequate to meet normal needs, it shall be
empowered to declare by adoption of an ordinance that mandatory conservation conditions exist. The city shall continue to encourage
voluntary water conservation measures defined under the voluntary conservation declaration, and further shall impose a ban on all
Class 3 water uses for the duration of the shortage until it is declared ended by ordinance of the board of aldermen.
(Ord. No. O-11-98, § 1, 11-3-1998)

Sec. 34-164. - Class 3 water uses; nonessential uses of water.
Class 3 water uses, nonessential uses of water, shall be as follows:
(1)

Ornamental purposes: Fountains, reflecting pools and artificial waterfalls.

(2)

Outdoor noncommercial water (public or private):

(3)

a.

Filling and operation of recreational swimming pools which serve fewer than 25 dwellings.

b.

Noncommercial washing of motor vehicles.

c.

Serving water in restaurants, clubs, or eating places except by specific request.

d.

Air conditioning: refilling cooling towers after draining except as in Class 1.

Public use:
a.

Fire hydrants: any purpose, including use of sprinkler caps and testing fire apparatus and for fire department
drills, except as listed in Class 1.

b.

Flushing of sewers and hydrants except as listed in Class 1.

(Ord. No. O-11-98, § 1, 11-3-1998)

Sec. 34-165. - Class 1 water uses; necessary to sustain life; maintain minimum standard of hygiene and sanitation.
(a)

Class 1 water uses are water uses necessary to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets, and to maintain
minimum standard of hygiene and sanitation.

(b)

If the mayor, city manager, water superintendent or other municipal official or officials charged with implementation and
enforcement of this article or a water supply shortage resolution learns of any violation of any water use restriction
imposed pursuant to this article, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property where the violation
occurred and mailed to the customer of record and to any other person known to the city who is responsible for the
violation or its correction. Such notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated
immediately or within such specified time as the city determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is
not complied with, the city may terminate water service to the customer subject to the following procedures. The city
shall give the customer notice, due to the violation, the second violation will be a fine of $100.00 civil penalty to be
recovered in the nature of a debt, and the third violation the city will disconnect water service.

(Ord. No. O-11-98, § 1, 11-3-1998)

Chapter 36 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE
FOOTNOTE(S):
153/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(28) Cross

reference— Businesses, ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 32.

(28) State

Law reference— Authority of city to regulate taxicabs, G.S. 160A-304.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 36-1. - Penalties.
Any misdemeanor violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $500.00 fine. Any violation of this chapter subjects the
offender to a civil penalty of $500.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
Secs. 36-2—36-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS

Sec. 36-31. - "Taxicab" de ned.
When used in this article the term "taxicab" shall be defined as any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers operated upon
any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between such points along
streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported, and shall not include motor vehicles or
motor vehicle carriers as defined in the general statutes as being other than taxicabs.
(Code 1975, § 19-1)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 36-32. - Permit—Required; fee.
No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire from place to place within the corporate limits or the territorial
jurisdiction of the city unless that person shall have first applied to and secured by the board of aldermen a permit to operate a taxicab;
and an amount as set from time to time and on file in the city clerk's office shall be charged for each and every license permit issued.
(Code 1975, § 19-3)

Sec. 36-33. - Same—Application.
(a)

The application required of applicants to drive a taxicab, as provided in this chapter, shall be made upon blanks
furnished by the city for such purpose and shall, among other things, state the name, address, physical condition,
physical description, former employers, court record and state chauffeur's license number of the applicant. Such
application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.

(b)

Upon the request of the chief of police, the mayor, or any two members of the board of aldermen, the applicant for such
permit may be required to appear before the board for questioning before such permit is granted, and may thereafter
be required by the board to submit fingerprints and photograph.

(Code 1975, § 19-4)

Sec. 36-34. - Duty of chief of police to investigate permit application.
The chief of police is hereby charged with the duty of investigating the facts stated in such application, and shall report his findings
and recommendations to the board of aldermen.
(Code 1975, § 19-5)

154/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 36-35. - Refusal to issue permit.
If the board of aldermen finds that the applicant has been convicted of: A felony; a violation of any federal or state statute relating
to the use, possession or sale of intoxicating liquors; a violation of any federal or state statute relating to prostitution; a violation of any
federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of narcotic or barbiturate drugs; or finds that the applicant is not a citizen
of the United States; or finds that the applicant is a habitual violator of traffic laws; or otherwise finds that in the opinion of the board of
aldermen the granting of such a permit would not be in the best interest of the citizens of the city, the board of aldermen may, in its
discretion, refuse to grant such a permit.
(Code 1975, § 19-6)

Sec. 36-36. - Right of board to continue hearings.
The board of aldermen shall have the right and power, by majority vote, to continue any hearing called for in this article, from time
to time, to a date and time certain.
(Code 1975, § 19-7)

Sec. 36-37. - Revocation of permit.
At any time after the issuance of a permit to any person to drive a taxicab, the board of aldermen may revoke such permit, if the
person holding such permit is convicted of: A felony; a violation of any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of
intoxicating liquors; a violation of any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of narcotic drugs; repeated violation
of traffic laws or ordinances; a violation of any state or federal statute relating to prostitution; or if such person becomes a habitual user
of intoxicating liquors or narcotic or barbiturate drugs.
(Code 1975, § 19-8)

Sec. 36-38. - Display of permit.
The driver of every taxicab shall, at all times while operating such taxicab, prominently post and display in such taxicab, so as to be
visible to the passenger therein, his permit to drive a taxicab, with his photograph attached.
(Code 1975, § 19-9)

Sec. 36-39. - Rates to be displayed.
Every taxicab operated within the corporate limits or within the territorial jurisdiction of the city shall have at all times prominently
posted and displayed in such taxicab, so as to be visible to the passengers therein, the rates and/or fares for the use of such cab; and
the board of aldermen reserve the right to establish and determine the rates to be charged by taxicabs for the transportation of
persons and/or property, including trips within the city, trips going outside the city and waiting times. However, the displaying and
posting of such rates and/or fares shall not be required in taxicabs using regular meters.
(Code 1975, § 19-10)

Sec. 36-40. - License required.
Every person, before operating any taxicab or taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city or within the territorial jurisdiction of
the city, shall apply to and secure from the city clerk at the city hall an annual license for the privilege of operating each such taxicab,
and shall pay for such annual license for each taxicab operated such sum as may be determined from time to time by the board of
aldermen and included in the schedule of privilege licenses on file at the city hall.
(Code 1975, § 19-11)

Sec. 36-41. - Certi cate of convenience and necessity—Required.

155/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the city without first having applied for and
secured from the city a certificate of convenience and necessity as set out in this article.
(Code 1975, § 19-12)

Sec. 36-42. - Same—Application.
Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the city shall file on form supplied at the city hall an
application for a certificate of convenience and necessity.
(Code 1975, § 19-13)

Sec. 36-43. - Same—Issuance.
The board of aldermen shall have power and it shall be its duty to order certificates of convenience and necessity issued or to
refuse to issue certain certificates or to issue certificates for a partial exercise only of the privileges sought, and it may attach to the
exercise of the rights granted by such certificate such terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience and necessity may
require.
(Code 1975, § 19-14)

Sec. 36-44. - Same—Duration.
(a)

A certificate of convenience and necessity shall constitute a franchise from the city for the operation of taxicabs within
the city for an indefinite period, unless a specific period of time is specified in the certificate. Such certificate of
convenience and necessity shall be deemed to run from July 1 to June 30 of each year, and no application for renewal
shall be necessary unless and until a protest to the renewal of the of certificate convenience and necessity shall be filed
with the city at least 30 days prior to July 1 of any particular year.

(b)

In order for such a protest to be considered valid it must be in writing and signed by at least 25 adult residents of the
city. If such a protest is filed, a hearing shall be called and held in accordance with the provisions of section 36-46. By a
majority vote the board of aldermen shall also, on its own motion, have a right to call such a hearing. In case such a
hearing is held, either as the result of a written protest or the board's own motion, the current holder of a certificate shall
be considered, and treated as, an applicant.

(Code 1975, § 19-15)

Sec. 36-45. - Determination of convenience and necessity—Generally.
In determining whether the public convenience and necessity requires the franchise of such taxicab or taxicabs, the board of
aldermen shall, among other things, take into consideration the following factors:
(1)

Whether or not the public convenience and necessity requires such proposed or additional taxicab service within
the city.

(2)

The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent,
responsible and satisfactory.

(3)

The number and condition of the equipment proposed to be used.

(4)

The schedule of proposed rates to be charged.

(5)

The number of taxicabs then being operated and the demand for increased service, if any, and whether or not the
safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or not adequate
provision has been made for off-street parking of such taxicab or taxicabs.

(6)

The experience of the applicant in the taxicab business.

(7)

Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable. Before making any decision with respect to
156/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

the issuance of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the board of aldermen, or a committee thereof, shall
make a full and complete investigation of all facts, and may, if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the
service of the police department of any other officer or employee of the city.
(Code 1975, § 19-16)

Sec. 36-46. - Same—Hearings; notices; burden of proof.
(a)

Each application for a certificate of convenience and necessity shall be scheduled for a hearing not later than 35 days
after the application is filed, and the applicant shall be notified by the proper official of the city by mail to the business
address set forth in the application of the date and time of such hearing, such notification to be sent at least ten days
before the date set for the hearing. The proper city official shall also, within the same period of time, notify all persons
who at that time hold certificates of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the city, of the date
and time of such hearing and the name of the applicant. In addition, the proper city official shall cause to be published at
least once in a newspaper having general circulation within the city at least ten days before such hearing, a notice setting
forth the name of the applicant and the date and time of the hearing. The cost of such publication shall be paid for by the
applicant.

(b)

The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the
operation of the taxicab or taxicabs specified in his application and all other facts required for the granting of a
certificate.

(Code 1975, § 19-17)

Sec. 36-47. - Failure to begin operations.
If a certificate of convenience and necessity is granted to an applicant, and such applicant shall fail, in accordance with the
provisions of the certificate, to begin operations within 60 days after the date of such certificate, then such certificate shall become null
and void.
(Code 1975, § 19-18)

Sec. 36-48. - Transfer of certi cate of convenience and necessity.
A certificate of convenience and necessity is not transferable without the consent of the board of aldermen. Applications for a
permit to transfer a certificate of convenience and necessity shall be filed in the same manner as an original application for a certificate
of convenience and necessity. No public hearing shall be necessary concerning the proposed transfer of a certificate of convenience and
necessity, unless a protest is filed as provided in section 36-44, or unless the board of aldermen calls for such a hearing on its own
motion. Any such hearing shall be called and held in accordance with the provisions of section 36-46, and the proceedings upon such
application for a transfer shall thereafter be the same as those prescribed for the original issuance of a certificate of convenience and
necessity; except, that the question of public convenience and necessity need not be proved.
(Code 1975, § 19-19)

Sec. 36-49. - Revocation of certi cate of convenience and necessity.
(a)

The board of aldermen may at any time after a public hearing revoke any certificate issued by authority of this article for
any one, or more, of the following causes:
(1)

Failure to operate the taxicabs specified in the certificate in such manner as to serve the public adequately and
efficiently.

(2)

Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair.

(3)

Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by this article.

(4)

Failure to pay to the city the annual taxes or license fees imposed upon such taxicabs.

(5)

Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic and safety ordinances, or state laws relating to
157/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

alcoholic beverages or prostitution.
(6)

Failure to report accidents.

(7)

Wilful failure to comply with any provisions of this article or other ordinances or state laws relating to the operation
of taxicabs.

(b)

The public hearing provided for in this article shall be called and held in accordance with the provisions and procedures
set out in section 36-46, and no certificate of convenience and necessity shall be revoked until the procedures provided
for in section 36-46 shall have been complied with; except, that the cost of the publication of the notice in the newspaper
shall be borne by the city. If, after the hearing, it is found that the owner or holder of the certificate of convenience and
necessity is guilty of one or more of the offenses listed in this section, the board of aldermen shall have the power to
revoke the certificate of convenience and necessity, or to condition a revocation upon compliance with the provisions of
such order as it may enter within any time fixed by it.

(Code 1975, § 19-20)

Sec. 36-50. - Substitution of vehicles.
The person to whom a certificate of convenience and necessity has been issued may, by appropriate endorsement thereon by the
proper city official, substitute another vehicle or other vehicles for the vehicle or vehicles for which the certificate was granted. In such
instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to each such substitute vehicle or vehicles.
(Code 1975, § 19-21)

Chapter 38 - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
(29)

Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 8; environment, ch. 14; floods, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26;

subdivisions, ch. 28; telecommunications, ch. 30.
(29)

State Law reference— Municipal zoning regulations, G.S. 160A-381 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 38-1. - Authority and enactment.
In pursuance of authority granted by state law, the city may enforce zoning regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare; to promote the orderly development of the community; to lessen congestion on the roads and streets; to secure
safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
facilities, all in accordance with a well considered comprehensive plan.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. I, § 1)

Sec. 38-2. - Short title.
This chapter shall be known as The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Randleman, North Carolina and may be referred to as the
zoning ordinance or this chapter. The map which is identified by the title Official Zoning Map, Randleman, North Carolina, may be
referred to in this chapter as the zoning map.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. I, § 2)

Sec. 38-3. - Jurisdiction.

158/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the city and within the territory beyond such corporate limits
as shown on the zoning map and/or described in the extraterritorial zoning resolution. The extraterritorial boundary will follow physical
features when possible, but at no point will the outside boundary extend more than one mile from the corporate limits in any direction.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. I, § 3)

Sec. 38-4. - Incorporation of the zoning map.
The zoning map and all notations, references and other information shown on the map are hereby incorporated by reference and
made a part of this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. I, § 4)

Sec. 38-5. - Exceptions to applicability.
This chapter shall not prevent the construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has been secured prior to
the effective date of this chapter so long as the permit has not been revoked (pursuant to G.S. 160A-422) or allowed to expire. However,
once constructed, any structure so erected will be subject to any and all regulations set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. I, § 5)

Sec. 38-6. - Relation to other ordinances.
It is not intended that these regulations shall in any way repeal, annul or interfere with the existing provisions of any other law or
ordinance except any ordinance which these regulations specifically replace. It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. However, if the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions
or higher standards for the use of a building or land, then the provisions of these regulations shall control.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. II, § 1)

Sec. 38-7. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Abandonment of use means when a use has stopped and there is no intent to restart it in the future.
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
such principal use or building.

Adult day care center means a day care facility in which day care is provided to seven or more adolescents, or disabled, or older
adults in a place other than their usual place of residence on less than a 24 hour basis.

Adult day care home means a day care facility in which day care is provided for up to six adolescents, or disabled, or older adults on
less than a 24-hour basis.

Adult entertainment means adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult live entertainment businesses or massage
businesses defined by state law.

Alteration means and shall include the following:
(1)

Any addition to the height or depth of a building or structure;

(2)

Any change in the location of any of the exterior walls of a building or structure; or

(3)

Any increase in the interior accommodations of a building or structure.

159/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Apartment means a dwelling unit within an apartment building consisting of a room or rooms intended, designed or used as a
rental residence.

Apartment house means a building or portion thereof used or designed as a rental residence and consisting of three or more
dwelling units including apartment hotels, apartment houses and group housing projects.

Appraised value means an estimate or opinion of the value of real or personal property or an interest or estate in that property as
determined by a qualified appraiser.

Assessed value means the market value which has been last determined by the county for ad valorem tax purposes.
Basement means that portion of any structure located partly or entirely below the average finished lot grade.
Bed and breakfast inn means an establishment in a private dwelling that supplies temporary accommodations to overnight guests
for a fee.

Best management practices (BMP) means a structural or nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in
combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.

Billboard means an outdoor structure or display, pictorial or otherwise, either freestanding or attached to a building, which
advertises or attracts attention to a business, commodity, service, or other activity, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere other than on
the premises on which such structure or display is located.

Board of adjustment means the zoning board of adjustment of the city.
Bona fide farm means agricultural, horticultural and forest land as defined by G.S. 105.277(1), (2), (3) and G.S. 105.277.3.
Buffer means a horizontal distance from the property line which may only be occupied by screening, utilities, access ways and/or
landscaping materials.

Buffer stream means an area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that
the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is
measured landward from the normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers.

Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, equipment, machinery or materials. The connection of two or more buildings by means of an open porch,
breezeway, passageway, carport or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall be deemed to make them one building. This
term does not apply to camping trailers, motorized homes, pickup campers, travel trailers or self-contained travel trailers.

Building, accessory, means a use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the main or principal building and located
on the same lot therewith.

Building, principal. See "structure, principal."
Building height means the vertical distance from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the front of a building to the
highest point of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip,
gambrel and pitch roofs.

Building line means a line fixed parallel to a lot line beyond which a principal building cannot extend under the terms of this
chapter. Included are front, side and rear building lines.

Built-upon area means that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including
buildings, pavement, gravel roads, gravel parking lots, gravel paths, recreation facilities (e.g. tennis courts), etc. (Note: Wooden slatted
decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.)

Cessation of use means when a use is inactive but the ability to restart it remains present.
160/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Child care center means a day care facility in which day care is provided for 13 or more children when any child is preschool-age or
16 or more children when all children are school-age.

Child day care A means any child care arrangement wherein five or fewer children less than 13 years of age receive care away from
their primary residence by persons other than their parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles, brothers, sisters, first cousins, guardians or
full-time custodians, or in the child's primary residence where other unrelated children are in care. Care must be provided on a regular
basis at least once per week for more than four hours per day.

Child day care B means any child care arrangement wherein not less than six nor more than 12 children less than 13 years of age
receive care away from their primary residence by persons other than their parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles, brothers, sisters, first
cousins, guardians or fulltime custodians, or in the child's primary residence where other unrelated children are in care. Care must be
provided on a regular basis at least once per week for more than four hours per day.

Clear vision area means the triangular area formed by joining points, using straight lines, of the centerlines of intersecting or
intercepting streets 60 feet from their intersection or interception. This area shall provide an unobstructed view between a height of
three feet and 7½ feet.

Club or lodge, private, means an incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary,
political, recreational or like activities operated on a nonprofit basis for the benefit of its members.

Cluster development means a grouping of buildings in order to conserve land resources and provide for innovation in the design of
the project including minimizing stormwater runoff impacts. This term includes nonresidential development as well as single-family
residential and multifamily developments. Planned unit developments and mixed use developments are considered as cluster
developments.

Code enforcement officer means a person (city manager) designated by the city charged with enforcing the this chapter.
Common open space means an area of land and/or water, held in common ownership, designed and reserved for the use and
enjoyment of the residents. This does not include streets or offstreet parking areas. Common open space shall be substantially free of
structures but may contain such improvements as are in the plan as finally approved and which are appropriate for the benefit of
residents of the development.

Composting facility means a facility in which only stumps, limbs, leaves, grass and untreated wood collected from land clearing or
landscaping operations is deposited.

Conditional use permit means a permit issued for a use or development that would not be generally appropriate within the zoning
district without added restrictions to safeguard the health, safety, morals, general welfare, appearance or property of the
neighborhood.

Condominium. See "dwelling unit."
Critical area means the area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from
the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as extending either one-half mile from the normal pool elevation of
the reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first); or one-half mile upstream from
the intake located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first). Local
governments may extend the critical area as needed. Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate the
outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of one-half mile.

Customary home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants
thereof which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes; the use does not change the
character thereof. There is no display, nor commodity sold upon the premises except as may be produced by the occupants; provided,
that not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling, including basement, may be devoted to such occupation. No
person, other than a resident of the premises, shall be employed in connection with the home occupation.

161/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Day care facility means any adult or child day care center arrangement that provides day care for six or more adults or children
unrelated to the operator and for which a payment, fee or grant is received. This definition shall not include foster homes, public or
private schools which provide a course of grade school instruction to children of public school age, summer, day or residence camps, or
bible schools.

Discharging landfill means a facility with liners, monitoring equipment and other measures to detect and/or prevent leachate from
entering the environment and in which the leachate is treated on site and discharged to a receiving stream.

Discontinuance of use means when a use is not active.
Dish antenna means any accessory structure capable of receiving, for the sole benefit or the principal use, radio or television
signals from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit.

Dish antenna height means the height of the dish, as measured vertically from its highest point, when positioned at its lowest angle
for operation, to ground level at the bottom of the base which supports the antenna.

Dish antenna setback means the setback of a dish antenna as measured from the center mounting post supporting the antenna.
District (or zoning district) means any section of the city and its zoning jurisdiction within which regulations are uniform.
Dwelling, condominium, means a building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common
areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional and undivided basis. A condominium is considered multifamily.

Dwelling, duplex, means a building arranged or designed to contain two dwelling units.
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building or portion thereof, designed to contain three or more dwelling units (see apartment house
or condominium).

Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building designed to contain one dwelling unit.
Dwelling, townhouse, means a single-family detached unit in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front
and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more fire
resistant walls; each unit occupies one zoning lot.

Dwelling unit means a habitable house, apartment, manufactured home, group of rooms or a single room that is occupied as a
separate living quarters and has direct access from outside the building or through a common hall.

Easement means a grant by a property owner for a specified purpose and use by the public, a corporation or individuals.
Family means any number of persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, and living together in one dwelling unit as a single
housekeeping entity; the term includes domestic servants.

Family care unit means a group of not more than six residents, exclusive of supervisory personnel, who need not be related by
blood, marriage or adoption, living together in a residential home as a single housekeeping unit. The residential home may be provided
by an agency, organization or individual for persons who need sheltered living conditions for rehabilitation or extended care purposes.

Family subdivision means a division of a tract of land (i) to convey the resulting parcels, with the exception of parcels retained by
the grantor, to a relative or relatives as a gift or for nominal consideration, but only if no more than one parcel is conveyed by the
grantor from the tract to any one relative; or (ii) to divide from a common ancestor among tenants in common, all of whom inherited by
intestacy or by will.

Fence means an outdoor structure placed around a parcel of land and constructed of either masonry, metal or wood which
provides either a physical barrier or visual screen between properties.

Flood, 100-year, means a determination from an analysis of floods which are generally representative of those known to have
occurred on a particular stream and other streams in the same general region with an average recurrence interval of 100 years.
162/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Floodplain obstruction means any dam, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, spoil material, bridge, conduit, culvert, wire,
fence, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulated flood hazard area which
may, by itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water.
Obstructions may be artificial or naturally occurring.

Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and/or structures subject to
flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents
of buildings.

Flood protection elevation means the elevation to which structures and uses regulated by this chapter are required to be elevated
or floodproofed.

Floodway means the channel of a stream and adjacent land which is required to carry and discharge the flood waters and flows of
any river or stream of a 100-year flood.

Frontage means the distance between the two side lot lines as measured along the front building line.
Game room means any place of business that operates four or more mechanical games or pay devices for entertainment purposes
for which charge is made, either directly or indirectly.

Gross floor area means the total floor area of a building including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, exclusive of stairways
and elevator shafts, and excluding separate service facilities outside the main building such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops.

Group care facility means a transitional housing facility for 15 or fewer residents, licensed by the state or operated by a nonprofit
corporation chartered pursuant to state law, which provides room and board, personal care and rehabilitative services to persons
receiving therapy or counseling to assist them to adjust to society.

Home business means any use conducted entirely in and around an accessory building, carried on by one of the dwelling occupants
and no more than one additional employee, which substantially supplements the family income or provides the sole income. Such uses
shall be clearly limited to those that will not be or become objectionable to neighbors. No heavy equipment, signs or late hours shall be
permitted.

Hotel (motel) means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised as or held out to the public to be a place where
sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transient or permanent guests or tenants, where rooms are furnished for the
accommodation of such guests and which have dining facilities in the same building.

Industrial development means any nonresidential development that requires an NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or
requires the use or storage of any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning or developing
any product or commodity.

Junk means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling,
processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition.

Junk yard means any area, lot, land, parcel, or structure or part thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale
or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or two or more
unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk.

Landfill means a facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with state law. For the purpose of
this section, this term does not include composting facilities.

Loading area means a completely off-street space or berth on the same lot as a business or industry for the loading or unloading of
freight carriers with ingress and egress to a public street.

Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one principal building and its accessory buildings or group of
structures together with any accessory structures or uses including the open space required under this chapter.
163/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(1)

Lot, corner, means a lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of two street lines which make an angle o
degrees and less than 135 degrees with each other. The street line forming the least frontage shall be deemed the fron
except where the two street lines are equal, in which case the owner shall be required to specify which is the front whe
zoning compliance permit.

(2)

Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot.

(3)

Lot, through, means an interior lot having frontage on two parallel streets.

Lot depth means the mean distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot line means a line dividing one parcel of property from another parcel of property or from a street right-of-way.
(1)

Lot line, front, means the street right-of-way boundary at the front of the lot or the line which separates the lot from
the street right-of-way at the front of the lot.

(2)

Lot line, rear, means that line of a lot which is opposite and farthest, on average, from the front lot line. Where a lot
abuts a street along the rear of the lot, the rear lot line shall be deemed to coincide with the street right-of-way
boundary.

Lot line, side, means any lot line which meets an end of a front lot line. Where a lot abuts a street along the side of a lot, the side lot
line shall be deemed to coincide with the street right-of-way boundary.

Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of
the county, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.

Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line.
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit that: (i) is not constructed in accordance with the standards of the state uniform
residential building code for one- and two-family dwellings; (ii) is composed of one or more components, each of which was
substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home site in its own chassis; and (iii) exceeds
40 feet in length and eight feet in width.

Manufactured home, Class A, means a manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the construction
standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and
that satisfies the following additional criteria:
(1)

The manufactured home has a length not exceeding four times its width, with length measured along the longest
axis and width measured at the narrowest part of the other axis.

(2)

The manufactured home has a minimum of 1,000 square feet of enclosed heated living area.

(3)

The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home has a minimum vertical rise of two and two tenths feet for each 12
feet of horizontal run (2.2 feet and 12 feet) and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in
standard residential construction.

(4)

All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less than six inches, which may include a gutter.

(5)

The exterior siding consists predominantly of vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding (whose reflectivity does not
exceed that of gloss white paint), wood or hardboard comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the
exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction.

(6)

The manufactured home is set up in accordance with the standards set by the state department of insurance.

(7)

Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be
installed or constructed in accordance with the standards set by the state department of insurance and attached
firmly to the primary structure and anchored securely to the ground.

(8)

The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have been removed.

(9)

A continuous, permanent masonry curtain wall or foundation, unpierced except for ventilation and access, is
164/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

installed under the manufactured home.
It is the intent of these criteria to insure that a Class A manufactured home, when installed, shall have substantially the
appearance of an on-site, conventionally built, single-family dwelling.

Manufactured home, Class B, means a manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the construction
standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction, but
which does not meet the definition of a Class A manufactured home. The following criteria must also be satisfied:
(1)

The manufactured home is set up in accordance with the standards set by the state department of insurance.

(2)

A continuous, permanent masonry curtain wall or foundation, unpierced except for ventilation and access, is
installed under the manufactured home.

(3)

Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be
installed or constructed in accordance with the standards set by the state department of insurance and attached
firmly to the primary structure and anchored securely to the ground.

(4)

The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have been removed.

Manufactured home, Class C, means a manufactured home that does not meet the definition of either a Class A or a Class B
manufactured home.

Manufactured home park means land used or intended to be used for occupancy by manufactured homes used as living quarters
designed and operated in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. This definition shall not include manufactured
home sales lots on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for purpose of inspection and sale.

Manufactured home space means any parcel or ground within a manufactured home park designed for the exclusive use of one
manufactured home.

Modular home means a dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the construction standards of state uniform residential
building code for one- and two-family dwellings and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and
transported to the building site for final assembly and placement on a permanent foundation.

Nonconformance means any use, structure, lot or sign which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter either at the
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated
into this chapter.
(1)

Nonconforming lot means a lot which does not conform to the dimensions required by this chapter.

(2)

Nonconforming sign means a sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.

(3)

Nonconforming structure means a structure which does not conform to the height, bulk or setback standards set
forth in this chapter or which does not meet the requirements for the type of structure allowed.

(4)

Nonconforming use means any use of building or land which does not conform to the use regulations of this
chapter for the district in which it is located.

Nursing care institution means a home for persons aged, ill or handicapped in which two or more persons not of the immediate
family of the owner or manager of such home are provided with food, shelter and nursing care. The term nursing care institution
includes convalescent home, home for the aging, sanitarium, home for the blind, rest home or any similar establishment.

Obstruction means any structure, fence, shrub, bush, tree, flower, plant, motor vehicle or any other object that obscures, impairs or
prevents view or sight through, over or across the clear vision area as defined in this section.

Open storage means any unroofed storage area, whether fenced or not.
Overlay zoning means additional zoning restrictions which are superimposed on the underlying zoning district.

165/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Parking space means a space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or private parking area.
Patio home means a single-family dwelling unit designed for greater than average density per acre, retaining privacy through the
use of blank sidewalls.

Planning board means the planning board of the city.
Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided.
Principal use means the primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is intended to serve.
Public service corporation means any privately-owned entity which provides electricity, natural gas, telephone service or cable
television to the general public.

Public sewage disposal system means a single system of sewage collection, treatment and disposal owned and operated by a
sanitary district, a metropolitan sewage district, a water and sewer authority, a county or city or a public assembly.

Public utilities means water and sewer production plants and distribution systems owned by a government agency.
Public water supply means any water system so defined and regulated by G.S. 130-166.
Recreation services, indoor, means establishments engaged in providing indoor amusement or entertainment services. Included
are dance studios, bowling centers, physical fitness facilities and membership sports and recreation clubs.

Recreation services, outdoor, means establishments engaged in providing outdoor amusement or entertainment services. Included
are athletic fields, amusement parks, batting cages and miniature golf courses, but not go-cart raceways.

Restaurant means a commercial establishment where food is prepared and served for public consumption.
Retail business means an establishment selling commodities to consumers.
Retail service means an establishment providing tangible services for immediate use to the consumer.
Screen means a wall, a fence or a planted strip composed of deciduous or evergreen trees, or a mixture of trees and dense shrubs.
Self-contained travel trailer means a travel trailer which may operate independently of connections to electricity, water and sewer
for a limited period of time having its own battery or LP gas system or both, to operate lights, refrigerator, stove and heater, and having
a water tank with a pressure system, and a toilet with a holding tank.

Service station means a building or lot dedicated to the rendering of services such as the sale of gasoline, oil, grease and
accessories and the minor repair of automobiles, excluding body working, overhauling and painting.

Setback means the required distance between any structure and the applicable lot line(s) (front, rear, side) of the lot on which the
structure is located.

Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments which is planned and developed and owned or managed as a unit
with off-street parking provided on the premises.

Signs means any form of publicity visible from any public street directing attention to an individual activity, business, service,
commodity or product and conveyed by means of words, figures, numerals, lettering, emblems, devices, designs, trade marks, or trade
names or other pictorial matter designed to convey such information and displayed by means of bills, panels, posters, paints, or other
devices erected on open framework, or attached or otherwise applied to posts, stakes, poles, trees, buildings, or other structures or
supports.
(1)

Attached sign means any sign physically attached to the principal or accessory structure on a lot.

(2)

Billboard. See "off-premises sign."

(3)

Business sign. See "on-premises sign."
166/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(4)

Construction sign means a sign on the lot of a building to be constructed or under construction, alteration or repair, st
limited to, the purpose for which the building is intended, the names of the architects, engineers, contractors, develop
others involved, the square footage of the structure or other pertinent data.

(5)

Directory sign means a sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given.

(6)

Emergency/warning sign means a sign warning the public of a danger to public health and safety.

(7)

Flashing sign means a sign which displays flashing, blinking or intermittent light of changing intensity.

(8)

Freestanding sign means a sign which is supported from the ground and which is wholly independent of any other
structure for support.

(9)

Home occupation sign means a sign identifying a permitted home occupation conducted on the premises of the
dwelling unit occupied by the operator of such home occupation.

(10)

Illuminated sign means a sign internally or externally illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.

(11)

Industrial direction sign means a sign giving directions to an industrial or commercial site and which contains only
an arrow and the name of the business or industry.

(12)

Institutional sign means a sign denoting the name of and service provided by a public, religious or charitable
institution.

(13)

Integral sign means a memorial sign or tablet indicating the name of a building and/or the date of erection and cut
into masonry or constructed of bronze, brass, iron or other incombustible materials and mounted on the face of a
building.

(14)

Local interest sign means a sign of a temporary nature used to advertise or announce a particular event of normally
local concern.

(15)

Occupant/street number means a sign bearing only the name of the principal occupant of a residence and/or the
street number of a structure.

(16)

Off-premises sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered off the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.

(17)

On-premises sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered on the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.

(18)

Painted wall sign means a sign painted directly on the wall of a structure.

(19)

Permanent sign means a sign set on its own foundation, sunk into the ground or permanently fastened to, or
painted on, a permanent structure.

(20)

Political campaign sign means a sign pertaining to a candidate for public office or to a political party and/or its view
and beliefs.

(21)

Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign
designed to be transported, including, but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising: and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
such vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.

(22)

Professional name plate means a sign on a commercial or professional building or structure bearing only the name
and/or profession of the occupant.

(23)

Projecting sign means a sign attached perpendicular to a building wall.

(24)

Public sign means a sign erected by a government agency.

(25)

Public service sign means a sign directing the public to a public facility, such as a public telephone, restroom,
hospital, school, historic or scenic place.

(26)

Real estate sign means a sign offering for sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is located.

(27)

Signboard means a specific background upon which symbols are affixed or the smallest rectangle which would
completely enclose all parts of the sign.
167/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(28)

Subdivision or tract name sign means a sign located on a subdivision or tract and identifying the name of the subdivisi

(29)

Temporary sign means a sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood or other light
material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.

(30)

Time and temperature sign means an illuminated sign which displays time and/or temperature by means of a light
display.

(31)

Traffic directional sign means a sign directing vehicular traffic movement within the property on which the sign is
located.

(32)

Wall sign means a sign attached parallel to the face of a building wall and confined within the limits of such a wall.

Sign area means the area measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass
the entire advertising copy area, excluding architectural trim and structural members. In computing area, only one side of a double
faced sign shall be considered.

Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access
to abutting properties.

Street, private, means a privately-owned and maintained street which provides the principal means of vehicular access to abutting
properties.

Street right-of-way line means the street right-of-way boundary, or the line which separates the street from the lot.
Structure means any object constructed or erected the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or
which is attached to an object having more or less permanent location on the ground.
(1)

Principal structure means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which such
building is situated.

(2)

Temporary structure means a structure intended for temporary offices, headquarters, residence, classrooms, etc.,
on the same lot or tract of land being used or developed for a directly related permanent use.

Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as defined in
this section.

Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of
sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all division of land involving the dedication of a new street
or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized
by this chapter:
(1)

The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number
of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this chapter;

(2)

The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;

(3)

The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets;

(4)

The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three
lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the
standards of this chapter; and

(5)

The division of a tract into plots or lots used as a cemetery.

Townhouse. See "dwelling unit."
Toxic substance means any substance or combination of substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and
upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion
through foodchains, has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological
168/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organisms or their off
spring or other adverse health effects.

Tract means an area, parcel, site, piece of land or property which is the subject of a development application.
Trailer, camper, (recreational vehicle) means a vehicle with or without its own motor power, equipped or used for recreational
purposes and mounted on wheels or designed to be so mounted and transported.

Use means the purpose or activity for which a piece of land or its structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained.

Use, principal, means the main use of land or structure on a lot, as distinguished from an accessory use.
Variance means a modification of this chapter which is not contrary to the public interest, where strict enforcement of this chapter
would cause undue hardship to the applicant because of circumstances unique to the individual property (not caused by the owner or
applicant) on which the variance is granted.

Variance, major watershed, means a variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection rules that results in the
relaxation, by a factor greater than five percent of any buffer, density or built-upon area requirement under the high density option; any
variation in the design, maintenance or operation requirement of a wet detention pond or other approved stormwater management
system; or relaxation by a factor greater than ten percent, of any management requirement under the low density option.

Variance, minor watershed, means a variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection rules that results in a relaxation,
by a factor of up to five percent of any buffer, density or built upon area requirement under the high density option; or that results in a
relaxation by a factor up to ten percent, of any management requirement under the low density option.

Water dependent structure means any structure for which the use requires access to or proximity to or citing within surface waters
to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for
boat supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.

Watershed means the entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific point. For the purpose of the water supply
protection rules, local governments may use major landmarks such as highways or property lines to delineate the outer boundary of
the drainage area if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the ridgeline.

Watershed administrator means the city manager who is responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter.
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building which is open, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from
ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory structures are expressly permitted under this chapter.
(1)

Yard, front, means a yard extending the full width of the lot, situated between the front lot line and a line parallel
thereto passing through the nearest point of the principal structure.

(2)

Yard, rear, means a yard extending the full width of the lot, situated between the rear lot line and a line parallel
thereto passing through the nearest point of the principal structure.

(3)

Yard, side, means a yard situated between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto passing through the nearest
point to the principal structure and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.

Zoning permit means a statement, signed by the code enforcement officer, stating that the plans for a building, structure or use of
land complies with this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IV, §§ 1, 3)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 38-8. - Zoning a ects every building and use.

169/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

No building or land shall be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the
regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 1)

Sec. 38-9. - Lot of record; date and permitted use.
(a)

In any district in which residences are permitted, where a lot has an area or width less than the required area or width
and was a lot of record on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such lot may
be occupied by a single-family dwelling; provided that the minimum front, rear and side yard requirements for the
district in which it is located are met. This provision shall not apply to any lot to which the provisions of section 38-10
apply.

(b)

In all other districts where a lot has an area or width less than the required area or width and was a lot of record on or
before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such lot may be occupied by a permitted
use, provided that all other requirements of the district are met. This provision shall not apply to any lot to which the
provisions of section 38-10 apply.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V § 2)

Sec. 38-10. - Adjoining and vacant lots.
If two or more adjoining and vacant lots are in single ownership at any time after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived, and such lots individually have less area and/or width than the minimum requirements of the district in which such
lots are located, such lots shall be considered as a single lot which meets the minimum requirements of this chapter for the district in
which such lots are located.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 3)

Sec. 38-11. - Reduction of lot and yard areas prohibited.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set
forth in this chapter, except for street widening. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is
derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter, except under a conditional use permit allowing
residential cluster developments.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 4)

Sec. 38-12. - Relationship of building to lot.
Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one
principal building and its customary accessory buildings on the lot, except in the case of a specially designed complex of institutional,
residential, commercial or industrial buildings in an appropriate zoning district.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 5)

Sec. 38-13. - Required open space not used for another.
No part of any yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for any building, structure or other use shall
be considered to be a part of a required yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space for any other buildings, structures or use
except as provided in subsection 38-191(2).
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 6)

Sec. 38-14. - Nonconforming uses.

170/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, existing structures or the use of land or structures
which would be prohibited under the regulations for the district in which they are located (if they existed on the adoption date of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived) shall be considered as nonconforming. Nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued provided they conform to the following provisions.
(1)

Nonconforming uses.
a.

Uses of land. This category of nonconformance consists of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto
wrecking, junkyards and similar uses where only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open
use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter, under this chapter,
in the district in which it is located.

b.

Extensions of use. Nonconforming uses of land shall not hereafter be enlarged or extended in any way.

c.

Change of use. Any nonconforming use of land may be changed to a conforming use, or, with the approval of
the board of adjustment, to any use more in character with the uses permitted in the district.

d.

Temporary use. Temporary nonconforming uses of land may be permitted at the discretion of the board of
adjustment. Such uses include circuses, carnivals, pageants, revivals and other temporary events with an
overall time limit of 30 days.

(2)

Nonconforming structures.
a.

Nonconformances. This category includes any structure not in conformance with the restrictions of this
chapter after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Such nonconformances
shall include, but not be limited to, height, bulk and setback.

b.

Extensions of use. Nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures shall not hereafter be
enlarged, except upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of aldermen.

c.

Change of use. If no structural alteration or enlargements are made, any nonconforming building or use of
buildings may be changed (with the approval of the board of adjustment) to any use more in character with
uses permitted in the district. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

d.

Abandonment of use. If active operations are abandoned for a continuous period of six months with respect
to a nonconforming use, such building, buildings or land shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a
conforming use.

e.

Cessation of use. If active operations are ceased for a continuous period of nine months with respect to a
nonconforming use, such building, buildings or land shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a
conforming use.

f.

Discontinuance of use. If active operations are discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months with respect
to a nonconforming use, such building, buildings or land shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a
conforming use.

g.

Repair and alteration. Normal maintenance and repair in a building occupied by a nonconforming use is
permitted provided it does not extend the nonconforming use.

h.

Damage or destruction. If a building occupied by a nonconforming use or a nonconforming building is
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its assessed value at time of destruction,
such building may not be restored for any nonconforming use.

(3)

Nonconforming lots.
a.

Vacant lots. This category of nonconformance consists of vacant lots for which plats or deeds have been
recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county, which at the time of adoption of this chapter fail
to comply with the minimum area and/or width requirements of the districts in which they are located. Any
such nonconforming lot may be used for any of the uses permitted in the district in which it is located
provided that:
171/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

1.

Where the lot area is not more than 20 percent below the minimum specified in this chapter, and other dim
otherwise complied with, the code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a zoning compliance permit;

2.

Where the lot area is more than 20 percent below the minimum specified in this chapter or other
dimensional requirements cannot be met, the board of adjustment is authorized to approve as a
variance such dimensions as shall conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions; and

3.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever two or more adjoining vacant lots of record are in single
ownership at any time after the adoption of this chapter and such lots individually have less area or
width than the minimum requirements of the district in which such lots are located, such lots shall be
combined to create a single lot or lots which meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.

b.

Occupied lots. This category of nonconformance consists of lots, occupied by buildings or structures at the
time of the adoption of this chapter, that fail to comply with the minimum requirements for area, width, yard
and setback for the district in which they are located. These lots may continue to be used.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 7)

Sec. 38-15. - Street access.
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not have access to a paved street whether public or privately maintained. All
private streets shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the specifications set forth by the state department of
transportation's Minimum Construction Standards for Subdivision Roads.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 8)

Sec. 38-16. - Obstructions to vision at street intersections.
On a corner lot in any district, there shall be no obstruction to vision which might create a dangerous traffic situation.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 9)

Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 32.
Sec. 38-17. - Applications.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all land and every structure, including bona fide farms within the city's
jurisdiction.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 10)

Sec. 38-18. - New uses or construction.
After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, all new construction and the moving, altering and
enlarging of existing structures shall conform to the use, area and bulk regulations for the district in which it is, or is to be, located.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 11)

Sec. 38-19. - Conforming uses.
After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, existing structures or the use of land or structures
which conform to the regulations for the district in which they are located may be continued, provided that any structural alteration or
change in use shall conform to this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 12)

Sec. 38-20. - Accessory buildings in rear and side yards.
Accessory buildings may occupy up to 20 percent of the required rear and/or side yards.
172/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 13)

Sec. 38-21. - Side yards on corner lots.
In residential districts, the minimum width of the side yard along an intersection of streets shall be at least 40 feet. Accessory
buildings in the rear yard shall also comply with the side yard requirement.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 14)

Sec. 38-22. - Front yard setbacks.
(a)

The front yard requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any lot where the front yard coverage on developed lots,
located wholly or in part within 100 feet to each side of such lot and located within the same block and zoning district
and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required front yard. In such cases, the front yard
on such lot may be less than the required front yard but not less than the average of the existing front yards on the
developed lots; provided, that the front yard on such lot shall not be less than one-half of the required front yard for the
district.

(b)

Measurements for this and all other front yard setbacks shall be made from the pavement edge of the street or the rightof-way. If there is no recorded right-of-way, add 15 feet to the minimum front yard required as shown in Table 2, set out
in section 38-114

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 15)

Sec. 38-23. - Conditions for modi cations of required yards.
Requirements for front, rear and side yards may be modified under the following conditions:
(1)

Cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, bay windows less than ten feet wide, fire escapes, fire balconies, fire towers and
similar features may project not more than 2½ feet into any required yard.

(2)

Necessary retaining walls and fences less than six feet high, when located in the rear and side yard, shall be exempt
from the yard requirements of this chapter. However, on a corner lot, no opaque fence more than four feet in
height shall be located within any yard or building setback required so as to interfere with the clear vision area. The
height of any fence located within a yard abutting on a street line shall be measured from the sidewalk; if there is
no sidewalk or curb, then it shall be measured from the centerline of the street. All other fence heights shall be
measured from natural grade. Terraces, steps and uncovered porches which are not in any part more than four feet
above the ground floor level and not within 2½ feet of any lot line shall be exempt from the yard requirements of
this chapter.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 16)

Sec. 38-24. - Projection into public rights-of-way.
No signs or other structures may project beyond the curb line of any street or other public way.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 17)

Sec. 38-25. - Height of buildings.
In order to preserve for all land users an adequate amount of light and air and to lessen the possibilities of a fire beyond the
capacities of local firefighting units, no structures shall be built to exceed 35 feet in height. Church spires, flagpoles, antennas, chimneys
and similar accessories to buildings are exempt from this height limitation. This shall apply to all districts with the exception of the
industrial districts (I-1, I-2), in which the building heights shall be limited to 50 feet.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 18)

173/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 38-26. - Cluster development (industrial parks, multifamily and shopping centers).
In the case of two or more buildings to be constructed on a tract of at least two acres, the board of aldermen may approve a group
development in those districts where it is a conditional use. However, the following conditions must be met.
(1)

General.
a.

Only uses permitted in the district are allowed.

b.

The overall intensity of land use cannot be more than 30 percent greater than the maximum permitted in the
district in which the development is located and must have at least 30 percent of the development in usable
open space (multifamily only). Where there are conflicting adjacent land uses within the development, a clearly
defined buffer strip at least 20 feet in width shall be established; with evergreen trees and shrubs, this buffer
strip may be reduced in width. All open spaces between structures, including those spaces being used as
public or private recreational areas, shall be protected by adequate covenants running with the land or by
dedication as the city shall specify.

c.

The distance of every structure from the nearest property line must meet the front yard, side yard and rear
yard requirements of the district in which the development is located.

d.

A plan for solid waste storage, collection and disposal shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer and
approved prior to issuance of a conditional use permit.

e.

The building heights shall not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the development is
located.

(2)

Development plan. Before a conditional use can be permitted, a site plan must be approved by the board of
alderman based on a recommendation from the planning board. The site plan shall show the following information:
a.

Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, width of aisles, width of bays and angle
of parking;

b.

Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and unloading spaces and docks;

c.

Location and dimensions of vehicular entrances, exits and drives;

d.

General drainage system;

e.

Location and materials of walls and fences;

f.

Ground cover, topography, slopes, banks and ditches;

g.

The location and general exterior dimensions of main and accessory buildings;

h.

Architectural plans for proposed buildings;

i.

The location, dimensions and arrangements of areas to be devoted to planting lawns, trees and other plants;

j.

The plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines,
natural gas, telephone and electric service (all utilities will be constructed to town standards);

k.

An analysis of anticipated traffic volume;

l.

A sedimentation and erosion control plan;

m.

Evidence that the state department of transportation has been made aware of the proposed development and
that the developer will coordinate planning for the development with this agency;

(3)

n.

Plans for refuse disposal equipment and method of refuse disposal such as compactors and dumpsters;

o.

Delineation of areas to be constructed in phases and sequential order; and

p.

Location within the watershed (if applicable).

Review process.
a.

Within not more than 60 days from the date on which a plan is filed with the planning board, it shall approve
or disapprove such plan in writing. The site plan shall then be submitted to the board of aldermen.

b.

The board of aldermen shall review the site plan in light of the planning board recommendations. The board
174/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

of aldermen shall hold a public hearing on the proposed site plan. The board of aldermen shall approve or
disapprove the site plan in writing stating, in the case of a disapproval, the reasons for such action.
c.

Copies of the approved site plan and required related information shall be kept on file with the city clerk, and
any changes which may be approved shall be noted.

(4)

Site plan changes. After the final site plan and related information have been approved, minor adjustments or
rearrangement of buildings, parking areas, entrances, heights or yards may be approved by the board of
adjustment after receiving a recommendation from the planning board. If, in the opinion of the planning board, the
requested change is sufficiently substantial, the board of aldermen will hold a public hearing. If the board of
aldermen approves the changes, it will notify the code enforcement officer to issue a new zoning permit.

(5)

Schedule requirements. Within one calendar year from the date of approval of the site plan, the developer shall
apply for a building permit. Construction shall begin within one year from the effective date of the building permit.
Application may be made to the planning board for not more than a one-year extension. In the event that
construction is not started within the specified time, the planning board shall review the situation to determine
necessary action.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 19)

Sec. 38-27. - Residential cluster developments.
(a)

Purpose. The purpose of cluster development is to permit a procedure for development which will result in improved
living and working environments; which will promote more economic subdivision layout; which will encourage a variety
of types of residential dwellings; which will encourage ingenuity and originality in total subdivision and individual site
design; and which can preserve open space to serve recreational, scenic and public service purposes, and other purposes
related thereto, within the densities established for the cluster net tract area. For details on permitting, refer to section
38-156
(1)

Variations in lot areas are permitted.

(2)

A greater variety of building types is permitted in residential zone R-1.

(3)

Procedures are established to assure adequate maintenance and restricted use of open space areas for the benefit
of the inhabitants of the subdivisions or for dedication to public use.

(4)

Procedures are established to assure adequate protection of existing and potential developments adjoining the
proposed cluster development.

(b)

Dwelling types and acreage.
(1)

Only those types of single-family residential dwellings that are allowed in the R-1 district may be permitted in cluster
developments, under a conditional use permit.

(2)

Cluster developments shall consist of at least five acre tracts, except that cluster developments that are found by
the board of aldermen to be a logical extension of an existing or approved cluster development, may contain a
smaller acreage.

(3)

Under no circumstances shall the lot size be less than 75 percent of that normally allowed for a particular
residential structure.

(c)

Maximum number of lots. To determine the maximum number of lots, subtract 20 percent (the approximate area
needed for roadways) from the gross area of land to be developed; divide by the minimum lot size within the R-1 district.

(d)

Subdivision approval required. No cluster development may be constructed except in accordance with a preliminary and
then final subdivision plat approved by the board of aldermen, after review and comment by the planning board.

(e)

Modification of yard and lot requirements. Such modifications or reductions (in the same proportion as the lot size
reduction) are permitted so long as they are indicated in the preliminary subdivision plat; however, the particular yard
(normally the back or side) abutting the boundary of the entire cluster development site shall not be less than the
minimum requirements for the district.
175/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(f)

Common space.
(1)

Open space standards. At the discretion of the developer, a cluster development may utilize a range of lot sizes not
in conflict with subsection (b) of this section, and provided further that the common area shall be designated as a
park or open space. Such parks or open space shall be held in nonprofit corporate ownership by the owners of the
lots within the development. Under certain circumstances, the city may consider accepting the deed to such open
spaces.
In consideration of the purposes served by a cluster development, the title to such areas as provided shall be
preserved to the perpetual benefit of the private properties in the development and shall be restricted against
private ownership for any other purposes. Improvements clearly incidental to the purposes of these provisions may
be made within the open space provided that the maximum coverage of such improvements shall not exceed 25
percent of the open space.

(2)

Access of open space. All lots created within the development shall have direct access to all parks or open space as
provided by means of public streets, dedicated walkways, facts of physical contiguity, other public lands or lands in
common ownership by all residents.

(3)

Open space provisions. Where the open space is to be deeded to a homeowners' association or other such
nonprofit ownership, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the open
space and the association of nonprofit organizations. This declaration shall be submitted with preliminary plat
approval and shall include but not be limited to the following.
a.

The homeowners' association or the nonprofit organization shall be established before any lots are sold.

b.

Membership shall be mandatory for each lot buyer and any successive buyer.

c.

The association shall provide for liability insurance, any taxes and maintenance of all grounds and facilities.

d.

Any sums levied by the association that remain unpaid shall become a lien upon the lot owner's property.

e.

If all or any portion of the property held by the association is to be disposed of or if the association is
dissolved, the city may consider accepting such property in fee simple title at no cost.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 20)

Sec. 38-28. - Interpretation of district boundaries.
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries or districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(1)

Delineation. District boundary lines indicated as approximately following property lines, lot lines, centerline of
streets, alleys, railroads, easements, other rights-of-way, creeks, streams or other water channels shall be
constructed to follow such lines.

(2)

Scale. In the absence of specified distances on the map, dimensions or distances shall be determined by scaling the
distance on the zoning map.

(3)

Interpretation by the board of adjustment. When the street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance
with that shown on the zoning map, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries of this chapter.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 21)

Sec. 38-29. - Interpretation of district regulations.
Uses not designated as permitted uses shall be prohibited. Additional uses in character with the district may be added to this
chapter by amendment.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 22)

Sec. 38-30. - Con ict with other laws.

176/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Wherever the regulations made under authority of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards or courts, or require a lower
height of building or less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lots to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher
standards than that required in any other local ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this
chapter shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other statute or local ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of
yard or courts or require a lower height of building, or a lesser number of stories or require a greater percentage of lot to be left
unoccupied, or impose other standards than are required by the regulations made under authority of this chapter, the provisions of
such statute or local ordinance or regulation shall govern.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 23)

Sec. 38-31. - Signs.
(a)

Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit signs of a commercial, industrial and residential nature in appropriate
sites throughout the city. Although signs are a necessary part of the community, the size and placement of signs should
be controlled in order to:

(b)

(1)

Protect property values, both residential and commercial;

(2)

Protect the physical appearance of the community; and

(3)

Reduce distractions or obstructions that may contribute to traffic hazards.

General provisions.
(1)

Permit Required. With the exception of those signs specifically authorized in subsection (c) of this section, no sign
shall be erected without a permit from the code enforcement officer.

(2)

Permit application. Application for permits shall be submitted on forms obtained from the code enforcement
officer. Each application shall be accompanied by plans which:
a.

Indicate the proposed site by identifying the property by ownership, location and use;

b.

Show the location of the sign on the lot in relation to property lines and buildings, zoning district boundaries,
right-of-way lines and existing signs; and

c.

Show size, character, complete structural specifications, and methods of anchoring and support.

If conditions warrant, the code enforcement officer may require such additional information as will enable him to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(3)

Structural requirements. Structural requirements for signs shall be those required in the state building code.

(4)

Sign area computation for multiple signs. The square footage for multiple signs on a single pole shall be the sum of
the individual signs plus that of the area between them; the total square footage shall not exceed that permitted
any one separate sign.

(5)

Maintenance. All signs, together with all their supports and braces, shall be kept in good repair and in a neat and
clean condition. No sign shall be continued which becomes, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer,
structurally unsafe and endangers the safety of the public or property. The code enforcement officer may order the
removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such removal shall be
at the expense of the owner or lessee and shall occur within ten days after written notification has been issued. If
such order is not obeyed within 30 days, the code enforcement officer shall remove the sign at the expense of the
owner or lessee.

(6)

Civic clubs. Local signs advertising civic clubs are allowed in all districts.

(7)

Prohibitions. No signs shall be posted on utility poles.

(8)

Location. No advertising sign shall be located in the street right-of-way nor within 15 feet of the cessation of the
road or highway surface unless the bottom portion of such sign is at least 7½ feet above ground level.

(9)

Traffic safety. No sign shall be erected or continued that:
a.

Obstructs by its location or confuses by its color or nature, the view of traffic signs or signals, or tends to be
177/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle; and
b.

Uses admonitions such as "Stop," "Go," "Slow," "Danger," etc., which might be confused with traffic directional
signals.

(10)

Illumination. Except for time or temperature units, no flashing or intermittent illumination shall be permitted on any
permanent sign or structure. Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights shall be so placed
and so shielded as to prevent the rays of illumination being cast upon neighboring buildings and/or vehicles
approaching from either direction.

(11)

Sign maintenance. It shall be the owner's or lessor's responsibility to maintain the sign in a visibly acceptable
manner.

(12)

Nonconforming signs. No nonconforming sign erected before the adoption of this chapter shall be moved or
replaced without complying with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, under the following conditions,
nonconforming permanent signs shall comply with the regulations of this chapter.
a.

Any alteration of a nonconforming sign shall make that sign conform to the regulations of this chapter.

b.

Any nonconforming sign on a building which is vacant for a period of 90 days shall be altered to conform to
the regulations of this chapter.

c.

Any nonconforming sign damaged over 60 percent by any means, either shall be removed or repaired in a
manner to conform with the regulations of this chapter. This does not include signs that have deteriorated
over an extended period of time, and although the cost of repairing these signs may exceed 60 percent of
their original value, they may be repaired without conforming to the requirements of this chapter.

d.

Nonconforming signs, when removed for other than normal maintenance, may not be erected again, nor may
such signs be replaced with another nonconforming sign.

e.

Any nonconforming sign shall be brought into compliance within five years of the effective date of this
chapter.

(13)

Temporary signs. All temporary signs existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived which do not conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter shall be removed or brought into
compliance within 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.

(c)

Signs not requiring a permit. The signs listed in this subsection shall not require a permit from the code enforcement
officer. However, all signs using electrical wiring and connections shall require an electrical permit. The restrictions on
one or more signs on a particular lot not only refers to the type of sign but also to the total signage area available for
display.
(1)

Occupant and house number. Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers,
post office box numbers, names of occupants or other identification not having commercial connotations.

(2)

Directional and information. Signs (permanent and off premises) erected and maintained by individuals, public
agencies and government which direct the public to specific sites or provide general information about a structure.
Each such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, when it alone occupies the tract. On vacant tracts where
there is more than one sign, the total square footage available for display shall not exceed 32; no one entity shall be
allowed more than one sign when computing square footage limitations. Nonconforming signs shall be brought into
compliance within five years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.

(3)

Industrial direction. One such off-premises sign shall be allowed on a vacant tract. One such on-premises sign shall
be allowed on the occupied lot. The area of such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Nonconforming signs shall be
brought into compliance within five years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.

(4)

Professional and home occupation. One professional or home occupation sign per dwelling not to exceed three
square feet in area, which must be mounted flat against a wall or door or hung from a structure so as not to exceed
three feet in height. No such sign may be illuminated.

(5)

Temporary lease, rent or sale. One temporary real estate sign not exceeding four square feet in area within a
residential district or 32 square feet in area in a nonresidential district, may be placed on a property that is for sale,
178/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

lease, rent, or barter. When the property fronts on more than one street, one sign shall be allowed on each street
frontage.
(6)

Construction. During the construction, repair or alteration of a structure, temporary signs which denote the builder
or other participants in the project, or its occupants to be, may be placed within the required yard setbacks as
ground, wall or roof signs. The total area of such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet.

(7)

Local interest signs. While no permit or fee is required, the person placing the sign shall be responsible for ensuring
the sign is taken down within three days after the scheduled event.

(d)

Signs requiring a permit.
(1)

Residential district.
a.

Identification signs. One identification sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area or two such signs not to
exceed nine square feet in area each on matching entrance pillars may be erected at each entrance to a
subdivision, neighborhood, school, club, golf course or other similar use. Without entrance pillars, the above
sign shall be set back at least ten feet from the front property line. Illumination (if any) is restricted to white
indirect lighting.

b.

Church bulletin boards, public bulletin boards, nursing home and rest homes signs. Such signs shall be limited
to one per lot and 40 square feet in area.

c.

Political campaign sign. For political signs, the county party chairman or his designee shall be responsible for
securing the permit for all his party's candidates and removing the signs within five days after the election.

(2)

Business and industrial districts.
a.

Shopping center identification signs. One freestanding sign is permitted per shopping center. The maximum
area per sign is 200 square feet for centers having up to 15 businesses and 300 square feet for centers having
more than 15 businesses.
Businesses within the shopping center offering direct access to the public from the street or parking lot are
permitted their own signs mounted flush to the front wall of the center. Each business shall be allowed one
such sign and it shall be proportional with its frontage.
A freestanding building located within a designated shopping center parking lot and containing 800 square
feet or more of surface area shall (in addition to an identification sign flush against the wall) be permitted one
freestanding sign not to exceed 1½ percent of the building floor area. Sign height shall not exceed 25 feet.

b.

Individually sited business signs. Within 30 days after passage of this chapter, the property owner of any
vacant or unused building that has an advertising sign located on the property and/or on the building shall be
responsible for removing that sign.
Businesses vacating buildings after passage of this chapter shall have not more than 30 days after cessation of
business to remove all off-site and on-site signs.
Signs (placed perpendicular to the building wall) may not project more than 36 inches from that wall.
If a sign is suspended from a canopy or brace, the bottom of the sign must be at least 7½ feet above the
sidewalk level.

c.

Illuminated freestanding on-premises signs shall have a total surface area in square feet per establishment the
lesser of 1½ times the lot frontage in feet (applies in all four business and industrial districts) or 100 square
feet in B-1 or B-2 districts or 160 square feet in I-1 or I-2 districts. No intermittent lighting effects may be
utilized. Sign heights shall not exceed 50 feet in business districts or 100 feet in industrial districts.

d.

Nonilluminated freestanding on-premises signs shall have a total surface area in square feet per
establishment the lesser of two times the street frontage of the lot in feet (applies in all four business and
industrial districts) or 150 square feet in B-1 or B-2 districts or 180 feet in I-1 or I-2 districts. Sign heights shall
not exceed 50 feet.
179/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

e.

Self-contained illuminated freestanding off-premises signs shall have a total surface area in square feet per estab
exceed the lesser of 1¾ times the street frontage of the lot in feet (applies in all four business and industrial distr
feet in B-1 or B-2 districts or 170 square feet in I-1 or I-2 districts. Sign heights shall not exceed 50 feet in business
in industrial districts.

f.

Illuminated and nonilluminated on-premises freestanding signs shall be located not less than 12 feet from the
street curb line. No freestanding sign shall be located in a required side yard.

g.

No company or business shall be permitted to site more than one sign on any specific piece of property, with
the exception of corner or through lots where a maximum of two signs may be allowed, provided each sign is
on a separate street.

(3)

Manufactured home district. One manufactured home park sign is permitted per major entrance to a mobile home
park. The area of each sign shall not exceed one-half square foot per manufactured home space or 50 square feet,
whichever is less. Signs shall be set back at least ten feet from the front property line. Illumination is restricted to
indirect white lighting.

(4)

Outdoor advertising signs (billboards). Outdoor advertising (commercial) billboards, with the exception of those
subject to state or federal regulation, are prohibited. Nonconforming (commercial) billboards must be removed
within seven years of the effective date of this chapter.

(e)

Prohibited signs. No sign shall be erected, maintained or operated which:
(1)

Is not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled
ways of a street or highway and which is of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of
the driver of any vehicle;

(2)

Flashes, rotates, visually moves or is physically agitated, except that time and temperature signs shall be permitted;

(3)

Advertises any activities which are illegal under state and federal law or regulations in effect at the location of such
activities;

(4)

Is fastened, placed, painted, pasted or attached in any way to, in or upon any tree, fence, public utility pole, rock,
curbstone, sidewalk, lamppost, hydrant, bridge, highway, marker or another sign except such as may be (i) required
by law, (ii) so placed by a duly authorized governmental agency, or (iii) so placed not as an advertisement, but as a
warning against hunting, fishing or trespassing; and

(5)

Obstructs or substantially interferes with any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder or opening intended to
provide light, air, ingress or egress from any building.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 24)

Sec. 38-32. - Dish antennas.
(a)

General requirements.
(1)

A permit is required when installing, moving, or substantially constructing or reconstructing a dish antenna over
four feet in diameter.

(2)

A dish antenna must be installed, at a minimum, to comply with the manufacturers' specifications.

(3)

In all residential districts, dish antennas must be permanently installed on the ground and shall not exceed 12 feet
in diameter.

(4)

In commercial and industrial districts, dish antennas may either be installed on the ground or on the roof of the
building. If installed on the roof, the dish shall not be larger than 12 feet in diameter, shall not project higher than
ten feet above the maximum building height of the zoning district or more than one-third the actual building height
above the roof (whichever is less), shall be set back from the front and sides of the building at least 18 feet and shall
not be used for any advertising purposes. A dish antenna may be installed on the top of another part of the building
which is lower than the roof, such as a balcony or parking deck, only if such location is at the rear or side of the
building and all other requirements are met.

(5)

A dish antenna may be attached to an accessory building which is permanently secured to the ground, but may not
180/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

be attached to the principal building except as provided for in subsection (a)(4) of this section.
(6)

If a dish antenna is repainted, the only permissible colors are the original color used by the manufacturer, off-white,
pastel beige, grey or pastel grey-green. The paint must have a dull (non-glossy) finish and no patterns, lettering or
numerals shall be permitted on either side of the dish surface.

(7)
(b)

No dish antenna shall be installed in any public right-of-way or in any drainage or utility easement.

Location in yards.
(1)

A dish antenna (and any other type of electromagnetic transmission tower and its associated appurtenances) shall
be installed in the rear yard only, in all districts except as provided for in subsection (a)(4) of this section and in
subsection (b)(2) of this section. Should circumstances require otherwise, the board of adjustment may consider the
granting of a variance so long as the provisions of subsection 38-63(d) are met.

(2)

In commercial and industrial districts only, a dealer selling dish antennas may have a maximum of one such
antenna installed in the front or side yard for display purposes, providing all other requirements are met. If a dealer
displays a dish antenna in the front or side yard, his permissible sign area shall be reduced by one-half.

(c)

Setback requirements.
(1)

The minimum required setback for dish antennas, from the side lot line, shall be the same as for the principal
building except on corner lots; on the side abutting the street, the minimum required setback shall be the same as
the required front yard setback along that street.

(2)

The minimum required setback for dish antennas from the rear lot line shall be six feet or the same as an accessory
building, whichever is greater, but in no case shall any part of the antenna come closer than one foot to the
property line.

(3)

In districts where there are no side or rear yard requirements, a minimum setback of six feet from the side and rear
lot lines shall be required of dish antennas, but in no case shall any part of the antenna come closer than one foot
to the property line.

(4)
(d)

In all cases, no dish antenna shall be located within 15 feet of any street right-of-way.

Buffering requirements.
(1)

There are no buffering requirements in residential districts.

(2)

In commercial and industrial districts, dish antennas must be screened from view from abutting residential property
and residential streets. Antennas shall be surrounded on all sides with any one or a combination of evergreen
vegetation, topography, landscaped earth berm or architectural features such as fences or buildings so that view of
the lower two-thirds of the dish area is restricted from all public streets. If abutting residential property, the first six
feet above ground level shall be screened. If evergreen vegetation is used, a species and size shall be planted which
can be expected to screen the required area within two years of normal growth. Any screening vegetation which
dies must be replaced.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 25)

Sec. 38-33. - Bu eryard requirements.
(a)

General purpose. The bufferyard is a precisely defined yard together with the planting required thereon. Both the
amount of land and the type and amount of planting specified for each bufferyard requirement of this chapter are
designed to lessen incompatibilities between adjacent land uses or screen a use from a public road. It is intended that
bufferyards will separate different land uses from each other in order to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such
as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce
adverse impacts of noise, odor or danger from fires or explosions. The planting units required have been calculated to
insure that they do, in fact, function as buffers.

(b)

General provisions.
(1)

Initial determination. An initial determination of the proposed use and adjacent uses shall be made using the
following:
181/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

Single-family residential (SFR) is equivalent to R-1, R-2 and R-4 districts.

b.

Multifamily residential (MFR) is equivalent to R-3 and MH districts.

c.

High intensity commercial (HIC) is equivalent to the B-1 district.

d.

Light intensity commercial (LIC) is equivalent to the B-2 district.

e.

Industrial (IND) is equivalent to I-1 and I-2 districts*.
*These specific uses shall be classified as industrial zoning types for bufferyard purposes only:

(2)

1.

Banking and financial services, with drive-through facilities.

2.

Car wash.

3.

Convenience store with gasoline sales.

4.

Implement sales and services.

5.

Kennels.

6.

Outdoor display retail.

7.

Motor vehicle repair and maintenance.

8.

Motor vehicle storage yard.

9.

Outdoor display retail.

10.

Recreational vehicle park.

11.

Recreation services, outdoor.

12.

Restaurants (with drive-through service).

13.

Storage and salvage yard.

Determine the bufferyard (type I, II, III, or IV). Determine the required bufferyard for each adjacent zoning type of
project (impending use) from the following:
a.

Type I bufferyard. A type I bufferyard is a low density screen designed to partially block visual contact and
create spatial separation between adjacent uses.

b.

Type II bufferyard. A type II bufferyard is a medium density screen designed to partially block visual contact
and create spatial separation between adjacent uses.

c.

Type III bufferyard. A type III bufferyard is a high density screen designed to eliminate visual contact and
create spatial separation between adjacent uses.

d.

Type IV bufferyard. A type IV bufferyard is a higher density screen designed to eliminate visual contact and
create spatial separation between adjacent uses.
BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS

Zoning Type of Project

Zoning Type of Adjacent Property
SFR

MFR

LIC

HIC

IND

SFR

*

*

*

*

*

MFR

II

*

*

I+

I+

LIC

II

I

*

*

*

HIC

III

II

*

*

*

IND

IV

IV

I

*

*
182/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

* = No bufferyard requirement.
+ = Type I bufferyard required if no bufferyard is provided on developed adjacent property designated as high intensity commercial
(HIC) or industrial (IND) zoning types.
(3)

Bufferyard selection. Select the desired bufferyard option for the required bufferyard type from those described in
this subsection.
a.

Type I bufferyard. There are four design options that may be used to satisfy this requirement.
TYPE I BUFFERYARD DESIGN OPTIONS

Minimum Bu eryard Width

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet

(feet)
10

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants; 10 supplemental evergreen
shrubs

20

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants

30

2 deciduous trees; 5 primary evergreen plants

50

2 deciduous trees; 3 primary evergreen plants

b.

Type II bufferyard. There are four design options that may be used to satisfy this requirement.
TYPE II BUFFERYARD DESIGN OPTIONS

Minimum Bu eryard Width

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet

(feet)
15

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants; 20 supplemental evergreen
shrubs

20

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants; 10 supplemental evergreen
shrubs

30

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants

100

2 deciduous trees; 4 primary evergreen plants

c.

Type III bufferyard. There are five design options that may be used to satisfy this requirement.
TYPE III BUFFERYARD DESIGN OPTIONS

183/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Minimum Bu eryard Width

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet

(feet)
15

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants; 20 supplemental evergreen
shrubs

20

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants

30

3 deciduous trees; 13 primary evergreen plants

40

3 deciduous trees; 10 primary evergreen plants

50

3 deciduous trees; 5 primary evergreen plants

d.

Type IV bufferyard. There are six design options that may be used to satisfy this requirement.
TYPE IV BUFFERYARD DESIGN OPTIONS

Minimum Bu eryard Width

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet

(feet)
15

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants; 20 supplemental evergreen
shrubs

30

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants; 10 supplemental evergreen
shrubs

40

3 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants

50

3 deciduous trees; 14 primary evergreen plants

100

3 deciduous trees; 10 primary evergreen plants

200

3 deciduous trees; 5 primary evergreen plants

(c)

Additional requirements.
(1)

Fractional calculations. Fractional planting requirement calculations shall be rounded to the next higher whole
number.

(2)

Existing plant material. Existing plant material within the required bufferyard may be included in the computation of
the required plantings with approval of the code enforcement officer.

(3)

Fence or wall option. An opaque fence or wall may be used in lieu of not more than 50 percent of the required
evergreen bufferyard planting with the approval of the code enforcement officer and providing the following
conditions are met, where applicable.
184/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

Fence height for industrial zoning. The minimum required fence height shall be eight feet above ground level whe
project zoning type is classified as an industrial zoning type.

b.

Fence height for zoning types except industrial. The minimum required fence height shall be six feet above
ground level when the proposed project zoning type is classified as any zoning type except those classified as
industrial.

c.

Vegetation planted on exterior sides. Where a fence or wall is used as part of the required screening, all
required vegetation shall be planted on the exterior side of the fence or wall.

d.

Screening multifamily residential zoning type. Where the fence option is used to screen multifamily residential
zoning types from more intense zoning types, the required vegetation may be planted on the interior side of
the fence or wall.

e.

Remaining vegetation distribution. Where a fence is used in lieu of not more than 50 percent of the required
vegetation, the remaining percentage of vegetation to be used in conjunction with the fence or wall shall be
evenly distributed in the bufferyard.

(4)

Bufferyard locations. Bufferyards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or
parcel boundary line, with the following exceptions.
a.

On adjacent property. All or part of the bufferyard may be located on adjacent property within a permanent
easement dedicated for such purpose with approval of the code enforcement officer.

b.

Portion of site proposed for development. If only a portion of a site is proposed for development, the required
bufferyard may be located at the limit of the construction perimeter with approval of the code enforcement
officer.

c.

Topographic irregularities. Where topographic irregularities require a different location to meet the intent of
this section, the location of the bufferyard may be varied with approval of the code enforcement officer.

d.

Rights-of-way and streets. Bufferyards shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated or
proposed right-of-way or a private street.

(5)

Size of plant material.
a.

Deciduous trees in bufferyards 30 feet in width or less may be either medium or large varieties as described in
the tables following subsection (3) of this section, provided, however, at least one-half of the required trees
shall be large variety. Deciduous trees in bufferyards of greater than 30 feet in width shall be large variety
trees. Suggested plant materials are listed in the office of the code enforcement officer.

b.

All deciduous trees used for bufferyard screening must be a minimum of eight feet in height at installation and
shall be at least two inches in diameter measured six inches above ground level.

c.

All primary evergreen plants shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of installation unless combined
with an approved earthen berm, and shall be not less than ten feet in height at maturity.

d.

All supplemental evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height at installation, and shall attain a
minimum height of 36 inches three years after installation.

(6)

Spacing of plant material.
a.

All deciduous trees shall be installed with tree trunks spaced a minimum distance of 30 feet apart and a
maximum distance of 60 feet apart.

b.

All primary evergreen plants shall be distributed evenly along the length of the bufferyard and shall be
staggered where quantities permit. Primary evergreen plants shall be installed with tree trunks spaced a
minimum of seven feet apart and a maximum of 15 feet from other primary evergreen plants and from any
required deciduous tree.

c.

All supplemental evergreen shrubs shall be distributed evenly along the length of the bufferyard and shall be
staggered where quantities permit.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. V, § 26)

185/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 38-34. - Remedies.
In case any structure is illegally erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any structure or
land is used in violation of this chapter, the building inspector or any appropriate authority of the city, or any adjacent, nearby or
neighboring property owner who would be affected by such violation, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate legal
action to prevent the occupancy or use of such structure or land.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. X, § 1)

Sec. 38-35. - Penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate violation and be considered a separate offense for the purpose of the penalties specified in this section. A notice of violation
shall be sufficient if directed to the owner, the agent of the owner, or the contractor and left at his known place of residence or place of
business. A violation of this chapter subjects the offender to a $100.00 civil penalty to be recovered in the nature of a debt.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. X, § 2)

Secs. 38-36—38-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION

FOOTNOTE(S):
(30)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 38-61. - Board of aldermen.
(a)

The board of aldermen, as the governing body of the city, acts in its legislative capacity when considering proposed
amendments to the text of this chapter or to the zoning map and shall observe the procedural requirements set forth in
this chapter.

(b)

When considering amendments to this chapter or the zoning map, the board of aldermen shall follow the regular voting
procedure and other requirements as set forth in other provisions of this Code, the Charter or general law.

(c)

It is the intention of this chapter that the duties of the board of alderman in connection with this chapter shall not
include the hearing and passing upon of disputed questions that may arise in connection with the enforcement thereof,
but that the procedure for determining such questions shall be as set out in this chapter. Furthermore, the duties of the
board of aldermen in connection with this chapter shall be only the duty of considering and passing upon any proposed
amendment, certain conditional uses or repeal of this chapter as provided by law.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 1)

Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq.
Sec. 38-62. - Planning board.
The planning board shall review and make recommendations to the board of aldermen on all matters relating to zoning within the
corporate limits and zoning jurisdiction of the city whenever such matters require the attention of the board of aldermen.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 2)

Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq.
Sec. 38-63. - Board of adjustment; creation; membership; procedures.
186/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(a)

Creation. The city planning board is hereby appointed to function as the board of adjustment as provided for in G.S. 160A-3
members shall have equal rights and privileges in all matters. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Member
removed for cause by the board of aldermen upon written charges after a public hearing.

(b)

Rules of procedures. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules of procedure separate from this chapter which shall, at a
minimum, provide for:
(1)

General rules;

(2)

Officers and duties;

(3)

Alternate members;

(4)

Rules of conduct for members;

(5)

Meetings;

(6)

Zoning appeals and applications; and

(7)

Amendments.

Such rules of procedure shall accompany but shall not be a part of this chapter. Such rules shall be consistent with this
chapter and state law. All meetings of the board of adjustment shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept of all
meetings.
(c)

Powers and duties of the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall have the powers listed as follows:
(1)

To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the code enforcement officer;

(2)

To hear and decide applications for decisions on some conditional and all temporary use permits; and

(3)

To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest.

The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the code enforcement officer or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variance authorized.
The board of adjustment shall not grant a variance, issue a conditional use permit or a temporary use permit until a public
hearing is held. Notice of such public hearing shall be posted on the property for which the petition is sought and shall
appear in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
(d)

Consideration of proposed variances. In considering all proposed variances to this chapter, the board of adjustment
shall, before making any finding in a specified case, first determine that the proposed variances will not constitute any
change in the district boundaries shown on the zoning map and will not impair the adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, substantially diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any
other respect impair the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In granting a variance, the board of
adjustment may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed
structure or use as it deems advisable in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. The board of adjustment shall not
grant a variance until a public hearing is held. Before a variance is granted, it shall be known that:
(1)

There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question
because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district;

(2)

Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other
residents in the district in which the property is located;

(3)

A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other residents of the district in which the property is located;

(4)

The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to
the neighborhood or to the general welfare;

(5)

The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant;
187/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(6)

The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure

(7)

The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structure which is not permitted by right or by
condition in the district involved.

(e)

Conditions governing application of conditional use permits. The board of adjustment and the board of aldermen have
the power and duty to grant, in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, permits for
conditional uses as authorized by this chapter and set forth as conditional uses under the various use districts. Neither
board shall grant a conditional use permit until a public hearing is held and unless and until:
(1)

A written application for a conditional use permit is submitted;

(2)

Notice of the public hearing is posted on the property for which the conditional use permit is sought and appears in
a local newspaper at least 15 days prior to the public hearing; and

(3)

No conditional use permit shall be approved by the board of adjustment or the board of aldermen unless the
following findings are made concerning the proposed conditional use:
a.

The use or development is located, designed and proposed to be operated so as to maintain or promote the
public health, safety and general welfare;

(f)

b.

The use or development complies with all regulations and standards of this chapter;

c.

The use or development will not adversely impact surrounding property; and

d.

The granting of such permit would not violate the spirit or intent of this chapter.

Temporary use permits.
(1)

Provisions of this section are intended to provide relief in cases of hardship on a short-term basis only.

(2)

A Class A or B manufactured home (excluding the requirement for a permanent masonry foundation) may be
permitted in residential districts in a rear yard as an accessory use on a temporary basis, following the board of
adjustment's finding, after review and recommendation of the planning board, that a personal hardship exists
(reconstruction of a site-built house because of damage, terminal illness of an immediate family member, or a
contagious disease of an immediate family member). A temporary permit may also be issued for occupancy of a
Class A or B manufactured home (excluding the requirement for a permanent masonry foundation) when
construction of a site-built house has been undertaken by the owners of the lot.

(3)

Temporary use permits may be issued by the board of adjustment for a period of 12 months, and may be renewed
for additional 12-month periods provided that the above hardship continues to exist. Application for renewal of a
temporary use permit shall be made 30 days prior to the expiration date of such permit. All applications shall be
made to the code enforcement officer and in turn shall be reviewed by the board of adjustment to determine
relative need. The two-year restriction does not apply to manufactured homes used as classrooms within a school
system.

(4)

All manufactured homes shall be connected to water and sewer systems approved by the county health
department. Manufactured home structures used as classrooms or temporary offices which do not contain
restrooms or sinks and are not used as housing are not required to have water and sewer.

(5)

Additionally, temporary use permits can be issued by the board of adjustment for Class A or B manufactured homes
(excluding the requirement for a permanent masonry foundation) in nonresidential districts, excluding floodplain
districts, where they may be used for temporary office purposes during the construction of any permanent building.

(6)

Any manufactured home permitted as an accessory use on a temporary basis shall be removed by 12:00 midnight
on the day of the expiration of the temporary use permit.

(7)

A temporary zoning permit may be issued by the code enforcement officer for a period not exceeding six months
during alterations or construction for partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, or for bazaars,
carnivals and revivals, provided that such a temporary permit shall require conditions and safeguards as will protect
the safety of the occupants and the public.

(g)

Appeals from and to the board of adjustment.
188/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(1)

Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of adjustment may, within 30 days from the filing of the decision of th
thereafter, present to a court of competent jurisdiction a petition for a writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Thereupon such decision of the board of adjustment sha
review as provided by law.

(2)

An appeal from the decision of the code enforcement officer may be taken to the board of adjustment by any
person aggrieved by such decision. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the board of adjustment and to the code
enforcement officer specifying the grounds therefor. The code enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the
board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

(3)

An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is
taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of
adjustment or by a court of record on application of notice of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and upon
due cause shown. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give notice
thereof to the parties and shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in
person, by agent or by attorney.

(4)

The board of adjustment shall hold hearings at which specific appeals shall be heard, notice of such hearings being
made public in at least two of the following ways:
a.

Publishing a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days before the hearing;

b.

Posting signs concerning the hearing in the neighborhood which is affected; or

c.

Sending written notices to all the adjoining property owners.

With any of the three methods of notice, the wording should contain the time, date, place, general nature of the
question involved and the property which will be affected
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 3)

Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-101 et seq.
Sec. 38-64. - Code enforcement o cer.
The code enforcement officer, to be appointed by the board of aldermen, is hereby authorized and it shall be his duty to enforce
and administer the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the code enforcement officer to deny or issue the initial
request for a zoning permit.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 4)

Sec. 38-65. - Zoning permit.
(a)

It shall be unlawful to use or to permit the use of any building or premises, or any part thereof which may be hereafter
created, erected, changed or converted, until a zoning permit has been issued by the code enforcement officer stating
that the proposed use conforms to the requirements of this chapter.

(b)

A temporary zoning permit may be issued by the code enforcement officer for a period not exceeding six months for the
following uses: (i) during alterations or construction for partial occupancy of a building pending its completion; or (ii)
bazaars, carnivals and revivals. The temporary zoning permit shall require conditions and safeguards as will protect the
safety of the occupants and the public.

(c)

The code enforcement officer shall maintain a record of all zoning permits, and copies shall be furnished upon request to
any interested person.

(d)

If the zoning permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the action of the code enforcement officer to the board of
adjustment.

(e)

Any person who fails to obtain a required zoning permit shall be subject to the procedures as set forth in section 38-35
189/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 5)

Sec. 38-66. - Building permits.
(a)

Generally. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a building
permit issued by the county building inspector. No building permit shall be issued without a zoning permit signed by the
code enforcement officer.

(b)

Issuance. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the
actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already
existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such
other information as lawfully may be required by the building inspector including description of all existing or proposed
buildings or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the buildings and land; the number of families, housekeeping units
or rental units the buildings are designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may
be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.

(c)

Expiration.
(1)

If the work described in any building permit is not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, such
permit shall expire. It shall be canceled by the county building inspector. Written notice of cancellation shall be
given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not
proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained.

(2)

If, after commencement, the work described in any building permit is discontinued for a period of 12 months, such
permit shall expire and be canceled by the county building inspector and written notice thereof shall be given to the
persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed
unless and until a new building permit has been obtained.

(3)

All zoning permits and building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications and approved by the county
building inspector authorize only the use, arrangement and construction of structures set forth in such approved
plans and applications. Any use, arrangement or construction of structures at variance with this chapter shall be
deemed a violation, and shall be punishable as provided for in section 38-35

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 6)

Sec. 38-67. - Certi cate of occupancy required.
(a)

A certificate of occupancy issued by the county building inspector is required in advance of the occupancy or use of a
building hereafter erected, altered or moved; or a change of use of any building or land.

(b)

In addition, a certificate of occupancy shall be required for each nonconforming use or structure created by the passage
and subsequent amendments to this chapter. The owner of such nonconforming use or structure shall be required to
obtain a certificate of occupancy within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived
or subsequent amendments.

(c)

A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or part of a building, shall be applied for concurrent with the application
for a zoning permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alteration of the building or part
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter. If the certificate of
occupancy is denied, the building inspector shall state in writing the reasons for refusal, and the applicant shall be
notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies
shall be furnished on request to any interested person.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 7)

Sec. 38-68. - Fee.

190/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration and enforcement may be charged to applicants. The amount of such
fees shall be fixed by the board of aldermen. Public agencies, such as county government, state government and the federal
government shall be exempt from all fees.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 8)

Sec. 38-69. - Vested rights.
Zoning "vested rights" as established under G.S. 160A-385.1 ensures that a properly issued zoning permit will protect the applicant
against zoning changes that will affect the allowable type and intensity of use. Such rights shall run for a period of two years from the
date of approval of a zoning permit. In addition to this vested right, other vested rights may be established either by issuance of a
building permit (G.S. 160A-385(b)) or upon making substantial expenditures in good faith reliance on a governmental approval.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 9)

Sec. 38-70. - City attorney may prevent violation.
If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter, or any
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the code enforcement officer shall inform the city attorney. The city attorney may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. See section 38-35.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 10)

Sec. 38-71. - Liability.
The owner, tenant or occupant of any land or structure, or part thereof and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent or
other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this chapter
may be held responsible for the violation and be subject to the penalties and remedies provided in this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. III, § 11)

Secs. 38-72—38-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS

Sec. 38-101. - R-1 Residential district—Low density.
The R-1 residential district is established for low density single-family residential and agricultural uses with some limited public,
semi-public and recreational uses permitted when they are compatible to low density residential development. These regulations of the
R-1 residential district are intended to ensure that development not having access to public water supplies and dependent upon septic
tanks will occur at sufficiently low densities to maintain a healthful environment.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 1)

Sec. 38-102. - R-2 Residential district—Single-family.
The R-2 residential district is established for low density single-family residential uses. These regulations of the R-2 residential
district are intended to discourage any use which, because of its character, would substantially interfere with the development of singlefamily residences and which would be detrimental to the desired quiet and peaceful nature of these areas.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 2)

Sec. 38-103. - R-3 Residential district—Single, duplex and multifamily.

191/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

The R-3 residential district is established for high density single-family, two-family and multifamily residential uses. These
regulations of the R-3 residential district are intended to discourage any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the
residential nature desired.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 3)

Sec. 38-104. - R-4 Residential district—Medium density.
The R-4 residential district is established for medium density single-family residential uses and manufactured housing on individual
lots. These regulations are intended to prohibit any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of
the district. It is expected that city water and sewerage facilities will be available to each lot in such district.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 4)

Sec. 38-105. - B-1 Central business district.
The B-1 central business district is established to accommodate a concentrated development of permitted facilities within the
central portion of the city.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 5)

Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10.
Sec. 38-106. - B-2 Commercial district.
The B-2 commercial district is established along some of the major thoroughfares and collector streets of the city. The B-2
commercial district is intended to provide offices, personal services and retailing of durable and convenience goods for the community.
Because these commercial uses are subject to public view, they should have an appropriate appearance, ample parking, controlled
traffic movement and suitable landscaping.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 6)

Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10.
Sec. 38-107. - I-1 Light industrial district.
The I-1 light industrial district is established for light industrial and related uses which can be operated in a relatively clean and
quiet manner and which are not obnoxious to adjacent residential or business districts and service establishments.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 7)

Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10.
Sec. 38-108. - I-2 Heavy industrial district.
The I-2 heavy industrial district is established for heavy industries that by their nature may create some nuisance and which are not
properly associated nor compatible with residential, commercial and service establishments.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 8)

Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10.
Sec. 38-109. - M-H Manufactured home district.
The M-H manufactured home district is established to provide fair standards and beneficial requirements for the siting, operation
and maintenance of manufactured homes. It is the intention that such facilities, and the parks in which they are placed, shall be so
located as to permit safe and sanitary living, convenience to centers of employment and commerce, schools and community facilities,
192/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

and at the same time protect and enhance area-wide property values and general livability.
(1)

Manufactured home park specifications.
a.

The lot area for a manufactured home park shall be at least ten acres. All areas to be included in the park shall
be clearly shown on site plans as required by this chapter.

b.

Each manufactured home in a home park shall occupy at minimum an 8,000 square foot space with an overall
density not to exceed three manufactured homes per acre.

c.

All manufactured home park streets shall be paved to a width of at least 18 feet. These requirements are
applicable only to new and/or expanding parks after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived.

d.

An identification sign (see subsection 38-31(d)) shall be required.

e.

Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space. Required parking spaces
may be included within the minimum square footage required for each manufactured home space. The
driveway and parking spaces shall be paved.

f.

Each manufactured home shall be properly tied down in accordance with the provisions of the State of North
Carolina Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 1989.

g.

At least ten percent of the total park area shall be reserved within each manufactured home park as a
common, passive, recreation space for the residents of the park. Such area shall, along with driveways and
walkways, be adequately lighted for safety.

h.

No manufactured home shall be closer than 40 feet to another manufactured home or its ancillary structures
or to a public road.

i.

Each park shall be supplied with public or community water and sewer.

j.

No manufactured home or its ancillary structures shall be located closer than 20 feet to a manufactured home
park street.

k.

All manufactured homes shall be set back at least 20 feet from side and rear lots lines and at least 40 feet
from the front lot line of the park.

l.

An administrative fee, used to cover administrative costs, shall be paid to the code enforcement officer prior to
site plans being reviewed by the planning board. A survey plat of the park shall be prepared by a registered
surveyor and shall be drawn to scale on a map no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. Such plans must show
the area to be used for the proposed manufactured home park; the ownership and use of neighboring
properties; all proposed entrances, exits, driveways, walkways and off-street parking spaces; the location of
manufactured home spaces, recreation areas and service buildings; the location of sanitary conveniences
including laundries and refuse receptacles; and the proposed plan of water supply, sewage disposal and
electric lighting.

m.

All garbage and refuse shall be stored in suitable trash bins and covered with tight fitting covers. It shall be the
park owner's responsibility to ensure service is made available to centrally located trash bins for the park.

n.

For Emergency 911 purposes, each unit or space shall be appropriately numbered for ease of identification.

o.

Proper animal control shall be the responsibility of each pet owner.

p.

It shall be the park owner's responsibility to ensure that abandoned automobiles (defined as those having an
expired license plate or no plate at all) shall not be permitted to remain within the confines of the individual
manufactured home space or that of any common area of the manufactured home park.

q.

All manufactured homes abutting a state or city maintained road shall be oriented to ensure that the longest
side is parallel, or as close as possible, to the front lot line.

r.

Any expansion of manufactured home parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which
this chapter is derived shall obligate such an area to comply with all the provisions of this section. The physical
expansion shall be accomplished in such a manner that the existing acreage plus the additional acreage shall
193/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

at minimum equal ten acres.
(2)

Within 60 days after moving to a manufactured home park, vinyl skirting shall be required on all manufactured
homes. Should circumstances warrant, a 30-day extension may be obtained from the code enforcement officer.
Within 180 days after passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, all units existing prior to
adoption of such ordinance shall meet the vinyl skirting requirements.

(3)

It shall be the duty of each manufactured home park operator to keep a register containing a record of all mobile
home owners and occupants located within the park as follows:
a.

The names of each manufactured home occupant;

b.

The names and addresses of the owner of each manufactured home;

c.

The make, model, year and license number of each manufactured home and motor vehicle;

d.

The state, territory or county issuing the manufactured home licenses; and

e.

The date of arrival and of departure of each manufactured home.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 9)

Sec. 38-110. - FP(O) Floodplain district (overlay).
The intention of the floodplain district (overlay) is to limit otherwise normally permitted development to those uses which would
tend to minimize economic loss and property damage due to periodic flooding.
(1)

Additional permitted uses. The following additional uses (beyond those listed in Table 1) shall be permitted in the
floodway to the extent that they are otherwise permitted by this chapter and provided that they do not employ
structures or fill except as specified in this chapter:
a.

Any use not employing a structure; and

b.

Any use employing a structure with vertical supports located below flood protection elevation, subject to the
following conditions:
1.

All portions of any structure, except certain vertical supports described below, shall be located outside
the floodway or at or above the flood protection elevation.

2.

Vertical supports may be located within the floodway below flood protection elevation provided that all
parts of such supports are located no closer to the centerline of the stream than a distance equal to 80
percent of the width of the floodway located on any one side of the stream measured from the centerline
of the stream. Horizontal distances between such supports shall not be less than 25 feet apart, centerline
of support to centerline of support, when measured at right angles to the course of the floodway and the
horizontal width of any one such support shall not exceed five feet when measured at right angles to the
course of the floodway. Such vertical supports may be of any length when measured parallel to the
course of the floodway and any crossbraces located below flood protection elevation shall be aligned
parallel to the course of the floodway.

3.

Open storage of any material or equipment provided that such shall be firmly anchored or readily
removable in time of flood.

4.

Underground storage of fuel or flammable liquids provided it is stored in such a manner as to prevent
floating of either the containers or contents. All vents and openings shall be so arranged as to prevent
either the flowing out of fuels or flowing in of water in time of flood. Storage tanks shall have sufficient
cover or anchor to prevent such tanks from floating out of the ground.

(2)

Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited: Above ground storage or processing of materials that are
flammable or explosive or which could otherwise be injurious to human, animal or plant life in time of flood is
prohibited.

(3)

Permitted uses in the floodway fringe (the remaining part of the floodplain outside the floodway). The following are
permitted uses in the floodway fringe (the remaining part of the floodplain outside the floodway):
194/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

a.

Uses permitted below flood protection elevation: Any use as permitted and regulated in the floodway.
Residential accessory structures are permitted provided such are firmly anchored to prevent flotation.

b.

Fill material graded to drain provided such is protected against erosion. Any fill material on which a structure
is to be located shall be extended at grade ten feet beyond the limits of the structure foundation and shall
have a side slope no steeper than 1½ feet horizontal to one foot vertical.

(4)

Prohibited uses below flood protection elevation. Prohibited uses below flood protection elevation shall be as
follows: Above ground storage or processing of materials that are flammable or explosive or which could otherwise
be injurious to human, animal or plant life in time of flood is prohibited.

(5)

Permitted uses above flood protection elevation. Permitted uses above flood protection elevation shall be as
follows: Any use permitted by this section provided that the finished flood elevation of any structure is located at or
above the flood protection elevation. Heating and electrical equipment installed below flood protection elevation
shall be floodproofed.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 10)

Cross reference— Floods, ch. 18.
Sec. 38-111. - SE(O) Special entertainment district (overlay).
(a)

Intent. The intent of establishing the provisions of the SE(O) special entertainment district is to ensure that sexually
oriented businesses will be appropriately located within the city's jurisdiction to prevent unwanted and unacceptable
adverse impacts upon surrounding properties. This new zoning designation shall only be applied to portions of the light
industrial (I-1) district after obtaining a rezoning from the board of aldermen.

(b)

District requirements.
(1)

No special entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other special entertainment
establishment. All measurements shall be made by drawing a straight line from the nearest point of the lot line
where the proposed special entertainment establishment will be located to the nearest point of the lot line or
boundary of the closest similar establishment.

(2)

No establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any portion of a residentially zoned lot. All measurements
shall be made by drawing a straight line from the nearest point of the lot line where the proposed special
entertainment establishment will be located to the nearest lot line or boundary of a residentially zoned lot.

(3)

No establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any lot upon which a school, child day care center or church
is located. All measurements shall be made by drawing a straight line from the nearest point of the lot line where
the proposed special entertainment establishment will be located to the nearest lot line or boundary of a lot upon
which a school or church is located.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VI, § 11)

Sec. 38-112. - Reserved.
Sec. 38-113. - Table 1: Uses by district.
The uses by districts are as listd in the following table:
TABLE 1—USES BY DISTRICT

Accessory

R-1

R-2

R-3

R-4

X

X

X

X

B-1

B-2

I-1

I-2

M-H

FP

buildings

195/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Adult

X**

entertainment
Adult day care

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

center
Adult day care
home
Agriculture
Agriculture

X
X

X

X

X

equipment.
sales
Agriculture
supplies
(excludes
equip.)
Animal

CD

X

X

X

X

hospitals
Antique shops

X

X

Appliances,

X

X

Art galleries

X

X

Arts and crafts

X

X

sale or repair

shops
Auto parking

X

lots and
related
structures
Auto parts and
accessories
manuf.
Auto parts and

X

X

supply stores

196/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Auto repair,

CD

including
painting,
upholstry, and
body work
Auto wrecking

CD

yards and
similar types of
used materials
Industries
Auto sales

X

X

Auto wash

X

X

Bakeries, retail

X

X

Bakery plants

X

Barber shops

X

X

CD

CD

X

X

and beauty
shops
Bed and

CD

breakfast
establishments
Bicycle sales
and repairs
Boat and

X

X

trailer
manufacturers
Boat and

X

trailer sales
Bona de

X

X

X

X

X

farms and
appurtenances

197/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Book and

X

X

magazine
stores
Bottling works

X

Bowling alleys

X

X

Building

X

X

material and
specialties
manufacture
Building

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

materials,
storage, and
sales yards
Business
machines and
business
machine parts,
manufacture
Business

X

X

o ces
Cabinet
making
Camera supply

X

X

stores
Carnivals,
circuses, fairs,
sideshows
Cemeteries

C

C

198/228

7/12/2019

Churches or

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

X

X

X

X

other religious
institutions
including child
care on
premises
Clothing and

X

X

fabric stores
Cluster

CD

subdivisions
Cold storage

X

plants
Contractor's

X

X

o ces
Customary

X

X

X

X

home
occupations
Child care

X

X

X

X

Drug stores

X

X

Dry cleaning

X

X

X

center
Child day care

X

X

X

X

A
Child day care

C

B
Department
stores

and laundry
pick-up
stations

199/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Dry cleaning

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

and laundry
plants
Dwelling,

X

duplex
Dwelling,

CD

multifamily
Dwelling,

X

X

X

X

single-family
(excludes
manufactured
homes)
Electrical
appliance and
electronic
equipment
sales
Family care

X

X

X

X

unit
Farm

X

X

machinery,
assembly,
repair, sale
Fast food driveins
Fertilizer sales
Financial

X
X

X

Floral shops

X

X

Funeral homes

X

X

institutions

Furniture

X

X

manufacture

200/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Furniture sales

X

Game rooms

X

X

X

including bingo
Golf course,

X

X

X

public
Gift shops

X

Greenhouses

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

and nurseries
Grocery stores

X

X

Group care
facility
Hardware
manufacture
Hardware

X

X

stores
Hatcheries
Heating and air

X

X

X

X

conditioning
shops
Hobby shops
Home

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

X

C

C

businesses
Horticultural

X

nurseries
Hospitals
Housewares

X

manufacture
Indoor

X

theatres

201/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Ind. equipment

X

X

C

C

repair and
servicing but
excluding
railroad
equipment
Industrial park
Industrial

X

supplies and
equipment
sales and
service
Jewelry

X

manufacturing
Jewelry, sales

X

X

Laundromats

X

X

Leather goods

X

X

and repair

Libraries

C

Lumber mills

C
X

X

X

X

and yards
Machine and
welding shops
Manufactured

CD

home parks
Manufactured

X

homes (A or B)
as additional
classrooms at
public or
private schools

202/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Manufactured

X

homes on
individual lots*
(Class A)
Manufactured

X

homes in sited
parks, Class A
or B
Medical/dental

X

clinics
Medical/dental

X

X

o ces
Metal

X

fabricating
Monument

X

works and
sales
Motels/hotels

X

Motorcycle

X

X

X

X

X

X

sales and
repair
Museums
Music and

X

dance studios
Music stores
Musical

X

instrument,
manufacturing
Nursery stock

X

X

X

and supplies
Nursing care

CD

institution
203/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

O ce

X

X

X

X

equipment
sales and
service
O ce supply
stores
Optical and

X

scienti c
instruments,
jewelry and
clocks—
manufacturing
Optical goods
Outdoor sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

of plants,
fruits, and
vegetables by
homeowner
Paint sales
Pallet

X

X

manufacture
Petroleum

CD

products,
storage
Pet shops

X

X

Pharmaceutical

X

X

products,
manufacturing
Photographic

X

X

studios
Plastic

X

products
manufacture
204/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Plumbing and

X

X

heating supply
Pottery,

X

porcelain,
vitreous china
manufacture
Precision

X

instruments
manufacture
Print,

X

X

X

X

X

reproduction,
publishing
shops
Professional

X

o ces
Public

C

C

C

C

X

X

buildings and
facilities
Public works,
public utility
service and
storage yards
Radio and TV

X

repair shops
Radio and TV

X

X

sales and
supplies
Radio stations
Recreation

X
X

X

services,
indoor

205/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Recreation

C

X

services,
outdoor
Restaurants

X

X

Roo ng

X

materials,
storage and
sales
Room rentals—

CD

CD

no more than
one room
Rubber and

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

glass products
manufacture
Schools,

C

C

C

C

private
Schools, public
Service

CD

X

X

X

stations
Sewing,
needlework,
and piece
goods
Sheet metal
shops
Shoe sales

X

X

and/or repair
Shopping

C

centers
Sign painting
and fabricating

206/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sporting goods

X

manufacture
Sporting goods

X

X

stores
Stonecutter,

X

monument
manufacturing
and sales
Tailor shops

X

X

Taxi stands

X

Telephone

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

switching
buildings
Textile and
cordage
manufacture
Tire sales,

X

recapping, or
retreading
Toy stores
Travel trailers

X
X

X

X

X

X

(stored on
residential lots
in the rear
Trucking
terminals
Upholstery

X

X

shops

207/228

7/12/2019

Utility

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

CD

CD

CD

substations,
transformers,
pump and lift
stations,
telephone
exchanges
Venetian blinds

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

manufacturing
contracting,
and cleaning
Wallpaper

X

X

sales
Warehousing
and
distribution
Washerettes

X

Warehouse,

X

mini
Welding shops

X

Woodworking

X

X

shops

X = Permitted by right.
C = Conditional use permit approved by board of adjustment as specified in article II of this chapter.
CD = Conditional use but shall comply with certain developmental standards as per article IV of this chapter.
* It should be oriented so that the longest side is parallel—or as close as possible—to the front lot line.
** This use is only applicable after applying for a rezoning to the SE(O) district.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, Table 1)

Sec. 38-114. - Table 2: Residential dimensional requirements.
Residential dimensional requirements are as listed in the following table:
TABLE 2—RESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
208/228

7/12/2019

Districts

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Minimum

Minimum Yard Requirements (Feet)

Minimum

Maximum

Lot Area (a)

Corner

Height (b)

Square Feet

Side Yard
Width
Lot Width

Front

Side

Rear

R-1

20,000

100

30

15

25

18

35

R-2

15,000

80

30

10

25

18

35

R-3

8,000 (c)

60

30

10

20

18

35

100

30

15

25

18

35

Plus 3,000
for each
additional
unit
R-4

20,000

(a) The county health department may impose a higher lot size on a case by case situation for individual septic tank systems.
(b) Unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards are increased by one foot for each two feet or fraction thereof for
height exceeding 35 feet.
(c) Computations begin anew for each building.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, Table 2)

Sec. 38-115. - Table 3: Nonresidential dimensional requirements.
Nonresidential dimensional requirements are as listed in the following table:

Districts

Minimum

Minimum Yard Requirements

Minimum

Maximum

Lot Area(a)

Corner

Height

Square Feet

Side Yard
Width
(feet)
Lot Width

Front

Side(d)

Rear (d)

B-1

N.A.(a)

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

35(b)

B-2

6,000

50

40 (g)

N.A.

N.A.

10

35(c)

I-1

N.A.

N.A.

100

(f)

(f)

N.A.

50(e)

209/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

I-2

N.A.

(f)

100

(f)

(f)

N.A.

N.A.

(a) There are no yard requirements except that where a lot abuts any residential district there shall be a side or rear yard clearance of
at least ten feet. Furthermore, upon any side or rear lot line which abuts a residential district, there shall be a densely planted and
maintained buffer strip. No such buffer shall, however, extend nearer to a street right-of-way line that the established building line of
the adjoining residential lots, and no buffer shall be required upon any yard which abuts a public street.
(b) Every building erected or structurally altered to exceed 35 feet in height shall be set back from the front lot line on the ratio of one
foot for each two foot rise above said 35 feet, but in no case shall the required setback exceed ten feet.
(c) The depth of the front and total width of the side yards must be increased by one foot for each two feet or fraction thereof for
height exceeding 35 feet.
(d) Upon any side or rear lot line which abuts a residential district, there shall be a densely planted and maintained buffer strip. No
buffer shall be required upon any yard which abuts a public street.
(e) The depth of the front and total width of the side yards herein shall be increased by one foot for each two feet or fraction thereof of
building height in excess of 50 feet.
(f) No building shall be less than 40 feet from the right-of-way line of a street or highway. No other yards are required except that
where the rear of a lot abuts a residential district, there shall be a 40-foot rear yard clearance and where a lot abuts a side yard of a
residentially zoned lot, there shall be a side yard of not less than twice the minimum required in the residential district.
(g) The front yard shall be the yard adjoining the major street. The first five feet from the property line shall be developed for sidewalk,
grass and plants and shall not be used for any other purpose except for the necessary drives and walks, and shall not include off-street
parking.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, Table 3)

Secs. 38-116—38-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFIC USES

Sec. 38-151. - Accessory buildings.
(a)

Uses. Accessory buildings shall not be used for residential purposes.

(b)

Where sited. Accessory buildings shall be located in a rear yard not less than ten feet from any property line except that
in the case of corner lots, such buildings shall be set back at least 18 feet from the side lot line adjacent to the street.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 1)

Sec. 38-152. - Animal hospitals.
(a)

Minimum lot size. A minimum one acre tract is required for animal hospitals along with a street frontage of not less than
300 feet.

(b)

Proximity to residential lot. No animal storage portion of the hospital shall be closer than 100 feet as measured from any
point on any property line.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 2)

Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6.
Sec. 38-153. - Auto repair, storage and associated work.
(a)

Work site. All auto repair, storage and associated work shall be performed inside a building.

(b)

Storage aspects. In connection with auto repair, storage and associated work, all parking or storage of vehicles or
210/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

implements shall be provided off the public right-of-way and at least 15 feet to the rear of the front property line.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 3)

Sec. 38-154. - Auto wrecking yards, etc.
(a)

Work site. All auto wrecking yards shall be conducted within a building or on a lot enclosed by a solid fence at least six
feet in height.

(b)

Fencing. The fence for auto wrecking yards shall not be less than 50 feet from any street right-of-way line.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 4)

Sec. 38-155. - Bed and breakfast inns.
(a)

Residential operators. The bed and breakfast inn facility must be operated by someone who resides full time in the
residence.

(b)

Structure. The bed and breakfast inn use shall be located in a structure which was originally constructed as a dwelling. A
maximum of six guest rooms is allowed.

(c)

Food. In regard to bed and breakfast inns, meals served on the premise shall only be for guests. Meals shall be limited to
breakfasts and afternoon teas.

(d)

Public health rules. All bed and breakfast inn facilities shall comply with the rules governing the sanitation of bed and
breakfasts as specified in 15A NCAC 18A.2200.

(e)

Signs. Signage for bed and breakfast inns shall be limited to one home occupation sign not to exceed three square feet in
area, which shall be mounted or freestanding.

(f)

Guests. All guests of a bed and breakfast inn shall be limited to a maximum stay of 14 days.

(g)

Parking. Parking for guests of a bed and breakfast inn shall be provided in the rear.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 5)

Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10.
Sec. 38-156. - Residential cluster development.
Before a conditional use for a residential cluster development can be permitted, a site plan must be approved by the board of
alderman based on a recommendation from the planning board. The site plan shall show the following information:
(1)

Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, width of aisles, number of spaces and angle
of parking;

(2)

Location and dimensions of vehicular entrances, exits and drives;

(3)

General drainage system;

(4)

Location and materials of walls and fences;

(5)

Ground cover, topography, slopes, banks and ditches;

(6)

The location and general exterior dimensions of the various residences;

(7)

The location, dimensions and arrangements of areas to be devoted to planting lawns, trees and other plants;

(8)

The plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas,
telephone and electric service (all utilities will be constructed to city standards);

(9)

An analysis of anticipated traffic volume;

(10)

Sedimentation and erosion control plan;

(11)

Evidence that the state department of transportation has been made aware of the proposed development and that
the developer, if required, will coordinate planning for the development with this agency;

(12)

Plans for refuse disposal equipment and method of refuse disposal such as compactors and dumpsters, if
pertinent;
211/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(13)

Delineation of areas to be constructed in phases and sequential order; and

(14)

Any other reasonable conditions felt necessary by the planning board or the board of aldermen.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 6)

Sec. 38-157. - Multifamily dwellings.
(a)

Density. For multifamily dwellings, an 8,000 square foot lot shall be provided for the first dwelling unit; an additional
3,000 square feet of land shall be provided for the second and all subsequent dwelling units in the same building. The
overall density of development shall not exceed 12 units per acre where public water and sewer is available. When public
sewer is not available, the county health department may require a lower density.

(b)

Mean lot width. For multifamily dwellings, an 80-foot minimum mean lot width is required for the first dwelling unit with
an additional ten feet required for each unit in excess of one.

(c)

Building setback lines. For multifamily dwellings, all principal buildings shall have a minimum front yard setback of 40
feet; side and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 30 feet.

(d)

Control of potential nuisance uses. For multifamily dwellings, mechanical equipment rooms, air conditioning units or
cooling towers, swimming pools, water filtration systems, children's play areas and sporting facilities shall not be placed
within 50 feet of adjacent land used or anticipated to be used as single-family residential areas.

(e)

Internal relationships. For multifamily dwellings, structures, uses and facilities shall be grouped in a safe, efficient,
convenient and harmonious relationship in order to preserve desirable natural features and minimize disturbances of
the natural topography.

(f)

Interior circulation system. Streets, drives, parking and service areas for multifamily dwellings shall provide safe and
convenient access to dwelling units. Specifically, streets should be laid out in a manner which does not encourage
outside traffic to traverse the development on minor streets.

(g)

Vehicular access to public roads. When possible, vehicular access to a public road from off-street parking or service areas
for multifamily dwellings shall be so combined, limited, located, designed and controlled as to channel traffic from and to
such areas in a manner which minimizes the number of access points and promotes the free flow of traffic on streets
without excessive interruption.

(h)
(i)

Signs. Signage for multifamily dwellings shall comply with the requirements specified in section 38-31
Recreation facilities. Family-oriented multifamily projects shall provide an open space suitable for recreation based on
the number of bedrooms as established in the following table:

Number of Bedrooms

Minimum Space/Bedroom

Per Apartment

Square Feet)

1-bedroom apartment

0

2-bedroom apartment

25

3-bedroom apartment

50

4-bedroom apartment

100

These recreational areas shall be reasonably located to assure safe and convenient access. These areas shall not be less
than 30 feet by 30 feet in area. Projects which would provide less than 900 square feet based on the formula in this
subsection shall be exempt from this requirement.
212/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(j)

Parking. Automobile parking spaces and drives for multifamily dwellings shall not be located closer than ten feet to the fron
rear of any building.

(k)

Building relationships. For multifamily dwellings, one building wall that has both window and door openings shall be
located no closer than 50 feet to another building. One building wall that has only window openings or only door
openings shall be located no closer than 25 feet to another building.

(l)

Courtyard. Any group of buildings forming a courtyard shall have at least 25 percent of the perimeter of such courtyard
open for access by emergency vehicles.

(m)

Streets (interior). Streets for multifamily dwellings shall either be public or private. However, all streets shall be paved
and built to the minimum construction standards of the state department of transportation, division of highways.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 7)

Sec. 38-158. - Nursing care institution.
(a)

Lighting. For nursing care institutions, no direct light shall be cast upon adjacent property.

(b)

Operation.
(1)

A nursing care institution shall provide centrally located shared food preparation, service and major dining areas.

(2)

Common recreation, social and service facilities shall be provided. Nursing care institutions shall be solely for the
use of residents and their guests.

(3)

Facilities for resident managers or custodians providing administrative services and traditional medical services for
the exclusive use of the residents shall be located on the site.

(c)

Minimum size. No nursing care institution shall be located on a tract less than one acre in size.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 8)

Sec. 38-159. - Petroleum products and storage.
The storage of gasoline for wholesale distribution or the siting of bulk terminal plants for any flammable gases or liquids shall be no
closer than 25 feet to any lot line. The storage thereof must comply with the fire prevention code.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 9)

Sec. 38-160. - Room rentals.
The renting of more than one room shall be permitted provided no external evidence of such is created.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 10)

Sec. 38-161. - Service stations.
Each service station shall have a minimum lot area of 7,000 square feet with a frontage of not less than 100 feet. No portion of a
service station building or equipment shall be nearer than 25 feet to the front property line. All automobile or other mechanical repair
or storage shall be performed or accomplished inside a structure.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 11)

Sec. 38-162. - Utility substations, transformer stations, telephone exchanges, and pump and lift stations.
(a)

Setbacks. The structures of all utility substations, transformer stations, telephone exchanges, and pump and lift stations
shall meet the setback requirements for the district in which they are located.

(b)

Lighting. Lighting for utility substations, transformer stations, telephone exchanges, and pump and lift stations shall be
located so as not to cast direct lighting on adjacent properties.

(c)

Dust. All nonpaved storage areas of utility substations, transformer stations, telephone exchanges, and pump and lift
stations shall be maintained in a manner to limit the amount of dust leaving the storage area.
213/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(d)

Fencing. Security fencing for utility substations, transformer stations, telephone exchanges, and pump and lift stations shall
provided around any outside storage area.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VII, § 12)

Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 34.
Secs. 38-163—38-190. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PARKING AND LOADING

Sec. 38-191. - O -street parking requirements.
There shall be provided at the time of the construction or enlargement, permanent off-street parking in the amount specified by
this section. Such parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space. A parking space shall consist of an
area at least eight feet wide and at least 20 feet deep. This requirement shall not apply in the central business district.
(1)

Certification of minimum parking requirements. Each application for a building permit or zoning permit submitted
to the building inspector as provided for in this chapter shall include information as to the location and dimension
of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall
be in sufficient detail to enable the building inspector to determine whether or not the requirements of this article
are met. In determining parking space requirements, all fractional requirements shall be rounded to the next higher
whole number.

(2)

Combination of required parking space. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be
combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use, except that
one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at
night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays. Evidence of a signed
agreement specifying the days and times when facilities are available for sharing shall be presented to the code
enforcement officer.

(3)

Remote parking space. With the exception of subsection (2) of this section, if the off-street parking space required
by this chapter cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space
may be provided on any land within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. However, such land must
be in the same ownership as the principal use and a conditional use permit must be approved by the board of
adjustment.

(4)

Minimum parking requirements.
a.

Residential and related uses. The minimum parking requirements for residential and related uses shall be as
follows:
1.

For any duplex, there shall be provided two parking spaces per residence; for multifamily units there
shall be provided 1½ parking spaces per residence on the same lot.

2.

For convalescent homes, there shall be provided four parking spaces per ten occupants.

3.

For a doctor's or dentist's office in a residence, there shall be provided three parking spaces; in his own
residence, three parking in addition to residence requirements.

4.

For a professional office (other than doctor or dentist) or for customary home occupation in operator's
residence, there shall be provided one parking space in addition to residence requirements.

5.
b.

For any single-family residence, there shall be provided two parking spaces per residence.

Public and semi-public uses. The minimum parking requirements for public and semi-public uses shall be as
follows:
1.

For hospitals, there shall be provided one parking space for each two beds intended for patient use,
214/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

exclusive of bassinets.
2.

For clinics, there shall be provided three parking spaces for each doctor plus one parking space for each
employee.

3.

For nursing homes, there shall be provided one parking space for each five beds intended for patient use
plus one parking space for each employee on the largest shift.

4.

For churches, there shall be provided one-third of a parking space times the seating capacity.

5.

For elementary schools and junior high schools, there shall be provided one parking space for each
classroom and administrative office.

6.

For senior high schools, there shall be provided five parking spaces for each instruction room, or one
parking space for each four assembly seats, whichever is greater.

7.

For stadiums, there shall be provided one-third of a parking space times the seating capacity.

8.

For auditoriums or theaters, there shall be provided one-third of a parking space times the seating
capacity.

9.

For public or private clubs, there shall be provided one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor space.

10.
c.

For public utility buildings, there shall be provided one parking space for each employee.

Business uses. The minimum parking requirements for business uses shall be as follows:
1.

For bed and breakfast inns, motels or motor courts, there shall be provided one parking space for each
room to be rented plus one additional parking space for each employee on the largest shift.

2.

For doctor or dentist offices, there shall be provided one parking space for each 50 square feet of waiting
room space plus one space for each examining room plus one space for each employee or doctor.

3.

For banks, there shall be provided one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor space plus
one for each two employees.

4.

For service stations, there shall be provided five parking spaces for each grease rack and five spaces for
each wash rack.

5.

For theaters, there shall be provided one parking space for each four seats in the auditorium.

6.

For funeral homes, there shall be provided one parking space for each four seats in the chapel or parlor.

7.

For retail uses not otherwise indicated, there shall be provided one parking space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor space.

8.

For general or professional offices, there shall be provided one parking space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor space.

9.

For restaurants (including drive-throughs), there shall be provided one space per three seats plus one
space for each employee (applied to largest shift) plus a waiting lane equal to five spaces for each drive
through window.

10.
d.

For shopping centers, there shall be one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor space.

Industrial and wholesale. The minimum parking requirements for industrial and wholesale shall be as follows:
1.

For wholesale uses, there shall be provided two parking spaces for each three employees on the largest
shift.

2.

For industrial use, there shall be provided one parking space for each employee (applied to the largest
shift).

3.

The number of parking spaces to be required in special situations in which none of the above conditions
are applicable shall be as determined by the board of adjustment.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VIII, § 1)

Cross reference— Parking, stopping and standing, § 32-51 et seq.
215/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

Sec. 38-192. - O -street loading; commercial and industrial districts.
(a)

Generally. The number of off-street loading berths required by this section shall be considered as the absolute minimum
and the developer shall evaluate his own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified by this
section. For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading berth shall have minimum plan dimensions of 12 feet by
25 feet with 14 feet overhead clearance and adequate means for ingress and egress. A loading space requirement may
be modified or waived by the board of adjustment on application in the case of a bank, theater, assembly hall or other
building of similar limited loading space requirements.

(b)

Number of required off-street loading berths. The number of required off-street loading berths for commercial and
industrial districts shall be as follows:
(1)

For structures containing not more than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, one berth shall be required.

(2)

For structures containing 25,000 or more square feet of gross floor area, the number of berths specified in the table
below shall be provided:

Square Feet of Gross Floor Area

Required Number of Berths

25,000—40,000

2

40,000—100,000

3

100,000—160,000

4

160,000—240,000

5

240,000—320,000

6

320,000—400,000

7

Plus one berth for each 90,000 square feet above 400,000 square feet.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. VIII, § 2)

Secs. 38-193—38-220. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS

Sec. 38-221. - Generally.
The board of aldermen may amend, supplement, or change the text of this chapter and the zoning map according to the following
procedures.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX)

Sec. 38-222. - Initiation of amendments.
Proposed changes or amendments may be initiated by the board of aldermen, the planning board, the board of adjustment or by
one or more interested parties.
216/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX, § 1)

Sec. 38-223. - Application.
(a)

Written petitions from the public at large to amend this chapter shall be directed to the planning board at least 30 days
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning board. A copy of the petition shall also be filed with the
clerk to the board of aldermen. The petition shall state the nature of the proposed amendment, and, if applicable, a
description of the property involved, names and addresses of the owners of the property, and a statement why the
proposed amendment is necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. It shall be the responsibility
of the code enforcement officer to inform the applicant that in the case of a general rezoning amendment, the planning
board will not evaluate the petition based on any specific proposal or development of the property. Each petition for an
amendment submitted by one or more owners, optioners, or lessors, etc., of property within the city's jurisdiction shall
be accompanied by a fee established by the board of aldermen intended to defray the cost of advertising and other
administrative costs involved.

(b)

No proposed change in this chapter or zoning map, if denied by action of the board of aldermen may be resubmitted
within a period of one year from the date of such denial, unless the board unanimously finds that changing conditions in
the area or new information concerning the property requested for rezoning warrant a resubmission for a change in this
chapter or zoning map.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX, § 2)

Sec. 38-224. - Action by the planning board.
The planning board shall review each petition for amendment. It shall make a written statement regarding the approval or
disapproval to the board of aldermen within 45 days after receiving the petition. Failure of the planning board to submit its
recommendations within this time period shall constitute a favorable opinion. The planning board may hold a separate public hearing
or may sit concurrently at the public hearing held by the board of aldermen.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX, § 3)

Sec. 38-225. - Public hearing.
(a)

Should the board of aldermen decide to accept the petition for a text amendment to this chapter, a public hearing shall
be held by the board of aldermen; the planning board may sit jointly with the board of aldermen at this hearing. A notice
of such public hearing shall be given once a week for two consecutive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county. Such notice shall be published the first time not less than ten days nor more than 25 before the
date fixed for the hearing. In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included, but the day of the
hearing shall be included.

(b)

When considering a petition for rezoning to a general zoning classification, the board of aldermen will not evaluate a
petition based on any specific proposal for the use or development of the property. The petitioner will refrain from using
any graphic materials or descriptions of the proposed development except for those which would apply to any use
permitted by the requested classification.

(c)

Whenever there is a zoning map amendment, the owner of that parcel of land and the owners of all parcels of land
abutting that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, shall be mailed a notice of the public hearing on the
proposed amendment by first class mail. The notice shall be posted at least ten but not more than 25 days prior to the
date of the public hearing. The person mailing such notices shall specify such.

(d)

The first class mail notice shall not be required if the zoning map amendment directly affects more than 50 properties,
owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners and the city elects to use the expanded published notice. In this
instance, the city may elect to either make the mailed notice provided for above or may as an alternative, elect to publish
once a week for four successive calendar weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. An advertisement

217/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

of the public hearing that shows the boundaries of the area affected by the proposed zoning map amendment and
explains the nature of the proposed change. The final two advertisements shall comply with and be deemed to satisfy
the provisions of G.S. 160A-364.
(e)

The advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective
for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation. Property owners who reside outside the newspaper
circulation area, according to the address listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be
notified by first class mail pursuant to this section. The person mailing the notice shall certify such to the board of
aldermen. In addition to published notice, the city shall post one or more prominent signs on or immediately adjacent to
the subject area reasonably calculated give public notice of the proposed rezoning.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX, § 4)

Sec. 38-226. - Determination of the board of aldermen.
Having both received the recommendation of the planning board and heard comments by the public, the board of aldermen shall
not be required to make a determination within a fixed period of time but shall, nevertheless, bear in mind that the public is not served
by needless delay. A simple majority of the board of aldermen shall be required to amend this chapter irrespective of the
recommendation by the planning board.
(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX, § 5)

Sec. 38-227. - Protest petitions.
(a)

In case of a protest against a zoning change, a duly signed petition by the owners of 20 percent or more either of (i) the
area of the lots included in such proposed change, or (ii) of those immediately adjacent thereto, either in the rear thereof
or on either side thereof, extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the
street frontage of such opposite lots, may be presented to the board of aldermen. The amendment shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the board of aldermen.

(b)

No protest petition shall be valid unless it:
(1)

Is written;

(2)

Bears the actual signatures of the requisite number of property owners and states that they protest the proposed
amendment; and

(3)

Is received by the city clerk in time to allow at least two normal working days (excluding weekends and legal
holidays) prior to the public hearing on the amendment so as to allow time for municipal personnel to check the
accuracy and sufficiency of the petition.

(Ord. of 1-30-1996, art. IX, § 6)

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1975 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through March of 1989, which are included
herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a
general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this
table.

1975 Code

Section

Section

this Code

1-1, 1-2

1-1, 1-2

1-4—1-7

1-3—1-6
218/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

2-6, 2-7

2-31, 2-32

2-9, 2-10

2-33, 2-34

2-12

2-35

2-13, 2-14

2-61, 2-62

2-19

2-66

2-22—2-24

2-101—2-103

3-1—3-3

4-1—4-3

4-1—4-3

6-2—6-4

4-4

6-1

4-5, 4-6

6-32, 6-33

4-13, 4-14

6-34, 6-35

5.1-1—5.1-44

30-31—30-74

8-17

16-1

8.1-1—8.1-14

18-31—18-44

8.1-15, 8.1-16

18-61, 18-62

9-1

14-1
24-1

9-2, 9-3

14-2, 14-3

9-6

14-62

9-9.1(1)—

14-91—14-105

9-9.1(15)
9-12.1

24-31

9-13

24-32

9-14

14-63

219/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

10-1—10-4

20-1—20-4

11-1—11-8

10-1—10-8

11-9—11-13

10-31—10-35

12-2

32-1

12-4

32-2

12-7, 12-8

32-3, 32-4

12-9

32-51

12-10—12-14

32-5—32-9

12-15—12-23

32-52—32-60

12-23.1

32-61

12-24, 12-25

32-10, 32-11

12-27, 12-28

32-12, 32-13

12-29, 12-30

32-101, 32-102

12-31—12-35

32-14—32-18

12-36, 12-37

32-65, 32-66

12-40—12-44

32-67—32-71

12-45—12-48

32-19—32-22

13-1

22-31

13-4

22-61

13-7

14-31

13-9.1

22-32

13-10.1

22-33

13-11

10-91

220/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

16.1-1—

10-92—10-104

16.1-13
17-1—17-4

26-31—26-34

17-5, 17-6

26-2, 26-3

17-7

10-131

17-8—17-12

26-4—26-8

17-14

26-9

17-16

26-35

19-1

36-31

19-3—19-21

36-32—36-50

20-1—20-9

34-2—34-10

20-12

34-11

20-13—20-16

34-32—34-35

20-17—20-25

34-52—34-60

20-26—20-33

34-77—34-84

20-34—20-37

34-102—34-105

20-39, 20-40

34-122, 34-123

20-41

34-142

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through March of 1989,
which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1975 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances
adopted since March of 1989, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent
nature.

Ordinance
Number

Date

Section

Section
this Code

221/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

1- 9-1990(Ord.)

26-10

9- 3-1991(Ord.)

8-22—8-28

26-61—26-67

4- 7-1992(Ord.)

12-23.2,

32-62, 32-63

12-23.3

93-01

O-4-5-94

O-8-95-1

5- 1-1992(Ord.)

6-36

6- 2-1992(Ord.)

6-37

5- 4-1993(Ord.)

14-32, 14-33

10- 5-1993

1—3

22-34

3- 9-1994(Ord.)

4-15

6-38

4- 5-1994

12-23.4

32-64

5- 3-1994(Ord.)

5-1—5-15

8-31—8-45

9- 1-1995

1—4

10-61—10-64

1-30-1996(Ord.)

art. I, § 1—

38-1—38-5

art. I, § 5
art. II, § 1

38-6

art. III, § 1—

38-61—38-71

art. III, § 11
art. IV, §§ 1, 3

38-7

art. V, § 1—

38-8—38-33

art. V, § 26
art. VI, § 1—

38-101—38-111

art. VI, § 11
art. VII, § 1—

38-151—38-162

art. VII, § 12

222/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

art. VIII, § 1,

38-191, 38-192

art. VIII, § 2
art. IX

38-221

art. IX, § 1—

38-222—38-227

art. IX, § 6
art. X, § 1,

38-34, 38-35

art. X, § 2
Table 1—

38-113—38-115

Table 3
O-11-98

11- 3-1998

1

34-162—34-165

12- 7-1999(Ord.)

101—106

14-133—14-138

201

14-241

203

14-242

301—303

14-281—14-283

304a, 304b

14-284, 285

305a, 305b

14-301, 14-302

306a, 306b

14-321, 14-322

307—312

14-261—14-266

401, 402

14-341, 14-342

501

14-181

502

14-182
14-221

503, 504

14-222, 14-223

505—507

14-201—14-203

223/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

601, 602

14-131, 14-132

6- 6-2000(Ord.)

1—4

2-131—2-134

5- 8-2001(Ord.)

8-1—8-3

16-36—16-38

8-12—8-21

16-61—16-70

8-22

16-3

8-23—8-27

16-71—16-75

8-28

16-1

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE POLICIES
This table gives the location within this Code of those policies which are included herein.

Date

Section

Section
this Code

1- 4-2000

I—IX

12-2—12-10

Annex A, § I—Annex A, § IX

12-31—12-39

Annex B, § I—Annex B, § IX

12-61—12-69

Annex C, § I—Annex C, § IX

12-91—12-99

Annex D, § I—Annex D, § IX

12-121—12-129

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the General Statutes.

G.S.

Section
this Code

1-593

1-2

7A-227, 7A-228

8-40

224/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

12-3(6)

6-40

ch. 14, art. 37

10-32

14-4

1-6
10-35
14-137
22-34

14-288.1 et seq.

Ch. 12

14-288.12

Ch. 12
12-3

ch. 18

Ch. 4

18B-101

4-1
4-3

20-97

32-2

20-140.2

32-16
32-101

20-146.1

32-101

20-153

32-4

20-158

32-8

20-162

16-1

20-169

32-1
32-8

20-222

14-99

42-29, 42-30

8-40

67-1 et seq.

Ch. 6, Art. II

225/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

105-33 et seq.

Ch. 10

105-277(1)—(3)

38-7

105-277.3

38-7

106-184 et seq.

Ch. 6, Art. II

130-166

38-7

ch. 130A, art. 9

14-131

136-143

14-104

143-145(7)

8-33

143-214.5

14-134

143-215.6(a)

14-138

143-215.51 et seq.

18-31

143-215.57

18-43

153A-261 et seq.

20-1

153A-344.1

14-131

ch. 160A

32-2
34-33

ch. 160A, art. 19

14-134

160A-1

1-2

160A-61

2-66

160A-64

2-61, 2-62

160A-67

2-61

160A-69

2-33
2-61

160A-70

2-63

226/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

160A-71

2-31

160A-71(b)

2-32

160A-74

2-34

160A-79

1-1

160A-171

2-64

160A-173

2-65

160A-174

8-31
16-3

160A-175

1-6

160A-184

Ch. 14, Art. II

160A-186

Ch. 6

160A-189

22-61

160A-193

12-3

160A-194

Ch. 10

160A-211

Ch. 10

160A-214

Ch. 30, Art. II

160A-266(c)

Ch. 2, Art. V

160A-296

Ch. 26

160A-300

32-1

160A-301

Ch. 32, Art. II

160A-303

14-92

160A-303.2

14-92

160A-304

Ch. 36

160A-311 et seq.

Ch. 34

227/228

7/12/2019

Randleman, NC Code of Ordinances

160A-319

Ch. 30, Art. II

160A-360 et seq.

2-101

160A-361

2-101
2-104

160A-364

38-225

160A-371 et seq.

Ch. 28

160A-381 et seq.

Ch. 38

160A-385(b)

38-69

160A-385.1

14-131
38-69

160A-388

38-63

160A-400.14(a)

8-39

160A-422

38-5

160A-433.1

8-37

160A-441

8-31

160A-444

8-31

164-7

1-9

ch. 166A

12-3

166A-8

12-3

228/228

